Fire Safety and Safety of Places
       of Sport Act 1987
                               CHAPTER 27


              ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
                                      P   art   I
                                 F   ir e   S afety


             Exemption from requirement to have fire certificate
Section
 1. Power to exempt from requirement to have fire certificate.
 2. Exemption from requirement to have fire certificate:
    supplementary.

                      Charges fo r fire certification work
 3.    Charges for fire certification work.

                    Means o f escape and fo r fighting fire
 4.    Means of escape: scope of regulation.
 5.    General duty as to means of escape and for fighting fire.
 6.    Codes of practice.
 7.    Improvement notices.

                   Interim duties as to safety o f premises
. 8.   Duties as regards safety pending determination of applications for
       fire certificates.

                  Premises involving serious risk to persons
 9.    Special procedure in case of serious risk: prohibition notices.

                           Inspections o f premises
10.    Inspections of premises.
11.    Disclosure of information obtained in premises.
c. 27         Fire Safety and Safety o f Places of Sport Act 1987


                             Civil and other liability
Section
12.     Civil and other liability.

                                     Miscellaneous
13.     Removal of exemption for premises used for public religious
        worship.
14.     Breaches of fire certificate requirements: restriction of defence.
15.     Automatic means for fighting fire.
16.     Special provision for certain premises.
17.     Extension of power to apply Act.
18.     Application to Crown etc.


                                       P a rt   II
                          S a fe ty o f S p o rts G ro u n d s

 Application o f Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975 to all sports grounds
19.     Application of Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 to all sports
        grounds.

                        Designation: spectator capacity
20.     Designation of grounds: variation in qualifying spectator capacity.

                                 Safety certificates
21.     Safety certificates: police presence.
22.     Safety certificates: appeals.

                   Grounds involving serious risk to persons
23.     Special procedure in case of serious risk: prohibition notices.
24.     Prohibition notices: appeals.

                   Enforcement: inspections and obstruction
25.     Enforcement: inspections and offence of obstruction.


                                       P a rt   III
                   Safety   of   Stands    at   Sports G   rounds

26. Safety certificates for stands at sports grounds.
27. Contents of safety certificates for stands.
28. Issue of certificates.
29. Amendment, cancellation etc. of certificates.
30. Appeals.
31. Regulations.
32. Alterations and extensions.
33. Exclusion of other statutory requirements.
34. Enforcement.
35. Powers of entry and inspection.
36. Offences.
37. Civil and other liability.
38. Service of documents.
39. Power to modify Part for classes of stand.
40. Application to Crown.
41. Interpretation.
            Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987
                                          PGA 1987 c.27
                                    ISBN 0 10 542787 X

                                        CO RRECTIO N
  On page 37, in paragraph 3(3), the references to 5A(6) and 5A(8)
should be to 5A(7) and 5A(9).



                                 P R IN T E D IN E N G L A N D BY J. A. D O LE
                  Controller an d Chief Executive o f Her Majesty's Stationery Office and
                                   Queen's Printer o f Acts o f Parliament
                L O N D O N : P U B L ISH E D BY H E R M A JEST Y 'S S T A T IO N E R Y O F F IC E


July 1987                                                                                            ( 570389)
             Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987      c. 27


                                        P a rt    IV
                           I n d o o r S p o r ts L ic e n c e s

                       Licensing in England and Wales
S ectio n
42.     Licensing of indoor sports premises in London.
43.     Licensing of indoor sports premises outside London.

                              Licensing in Scotland
44.     Licensing of indoor sports premises in Scotland.


                                         P a rt   V
                       M   is c e l l a n e o u s a n d   G   eneral


                                    Miscellaneous
45.     Entertainment licences: removal of exemption.
46.     Entertainment licences: fees for variation.
47.     Luminous tube signs: England and Wales.
48.     Luminous tube signs: Scotland.

                                         General
49.     Repeals and transitional and saving provisions.
50.     Short title, commencement and extent.

        Schedules:
            Schedule 1—Fire precautions: special provision for certain
                        premises.
            Schedule 2— Extension of application of Safety of Sports
                        Grounds Act 1975 to sports grounds.
            Schedule 3— Indoor sports licences: consequential
                        amendments.
            Schedule 4— Repeals.
            Schedule 5—Transitional and saving provisions.
                            ELIZABETH II                              c. 27




Fire Safety and Safety of Places
       of Sport Act 1987
                          1987 CHAPTER 27




A n A ct to am en d th e F ire P recau tio n s A ct 1971 an d o th e r
   en actm ents relating to fire precautions; to am end the Safety o f
   S ports G ro u n d s A ct 1975 an d m ak e like provision as respects
   stands a t sp orts grounds; to extend as respects in d o o r sports
   prem ises, a n d am end, the s ta tu to ry provisions regulating
   en tertain m en t licences; a n d fo r connected purposes.
                                                         [15th M ay 1987]

                    by the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty, by and with
      e it e n a c te d


B     the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
      Commons, in this present Parliament assembled, and by the
      authority of the same, as follows:—


                                  P a rt   I

                               F ire S a fe ty


            Exemption from requirement to have fire certificate

   1.—(1) The Fire Precautions Act 1971 (in this Part referred to as “ the     P o w e r to e x e m p t
principal Act”) shall have effect with the following amendments.               fro m re q u ire m e n t
                                                                               to h a v e fire
  (2) In section 1 (designated uses requiring cover by fire certificates)—     certificate.
                                                                               1971 c.40.
     (a)   after subsection (3) there shall be inserted the following
           subsection—
                “(3A) An order under this section may, as respects any
             designated use, specify descriptions of premises which qualify
             for exemption by a fire authority under section 5A o f this Act
             from the requirement for a fire certificate in respect of
             premises which are put to that use.” ; and
2               c. 27            Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987


    P art   I           (b) in subsection (4) (methods of description), after the words
                            “ subsection (3)” there shall be inserted the words “or (3A)” ,
                            after the words “ use for any purpose” there shall be inserted the
                            words “ or their situation, construction or arrangement” , and
                            for the words “ that subsection” there shall be substituted the
                            words “ subsection (3) or (3A) above” .
                  (3) In section 5(3) (duty of fire authority to inspect premises on
                application for fire certificate) after the words “ duty of the fire authority”
                there shall be inserted the words “ to consider whether or not, in the case
                of premises which qualify for exemption under section 5A o f this Act, to
                grant exemption and, if they do not grant it, it shall be their duty” .
                   (4) After section 5 there shall be inserted the following sections—

                "Powers for        5A.— (1) A fire authority may, if they think fit as regards
                fire authority
                to grant
                                 any premises which appear to them to be premises qualifying
                exemption in     for exemption under this section as respects any particular
                particular       use, grant exemption from the requirement to have a fire
                cases.           certificate covering that use.
                                   (2) Exemption under this section for any premises as
                                 respects any use of them may be granted by the fire authority,
                                 with or without the making of an application for the
                                 purpose,—
                                      (a) on the making of an application for a fire certificate
                                          with respect to the premises covering that use; or
                                      (b) at any time during the currency of a fire certificate
                                          with respect to the premises which covers that use.
                                    (3) In deciding whether or not to grant exemption under
                                 this section for any premises the fire authority shall have
                                 regard to all the circumstances of the case and in particular to
                                 the degree of seriousness o f the risk in case of fire to persons
                                 in the premises.
                                   (4) For the purpose of making that decision the fire
                                 authority may—
                                      (a) require the applicant or, as the case may be, the
                                          occupier of the premises to give such information as
                                          they require about the premises and any matter
                                          connected with them; and
                                      (b) cause to be carried out an inspection of the relevant
                                           building.
                                   (5) The fire authority shall not grant exemption under this
                                 section for any premises without causing an inspection to be
                                 carried out under subsection (4) above unless they have
                                 caused the premises to be inspected (under that or any other
                                 power) within the preceding twelve months.
                                   (6) The effect of the grant of exemption under this section
                                 as respects any particular use of premises is that, during the
                                 currency of the exemption, no fire certificate in respect of the
                                 premises is required to cover that use and accordingly—
                                       (a) where the grant is made on an application for a fire
                                           certificate, the grant disposes o f the application or
                                           of so much o f it as relates to that use; and
                      Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987          c. 27               3


                           (b) where the grant is made during the currency of a fire        P art   I
                               certificate, the certificate shall wholly or as respects
                               that use cease to have effect.
                         (7) On granting an exemption under this section, the fire
                      authority shall, by notice to the applicant for the fire
                      certificate or the occupier of the premises, as the case may be,
                      inform him that they have granted exemption as respects the
                      particular use or uses of the premises specified in the notice
                      and of the effect of the grant.
                         (8) A notice of the grant of exemption for any premises as
                       respects a particular use of them may include a statement
                       specifying the greatest number of persons of a description
                       specified in the statement for the purposes of that use who, in
    a.                the opinion of the fire authority, can safely be in the premises
«   y                 at any one time.

                         (9) Where a notice of the grant of exemption for any
                      premises includes a statement under subsection (8) above, the
                      fire authority may, by notice served on the occupier of the
                      premises, direct that, as from a date specified in the notice, the
                      statement—
                           (a) is cancelled; or
                           (b) is to have effect as varied by the notice;

                      and, on such a variation the statement shall be treated, so long
                      as the variation remains in force, as if the variation were
                      specified in it.

         Withdrawal      5B.— (1) A fire authority who have granted an exemption
         underT.5A°nS under section 5A o f this Act from the requirement to have a
                      fire certificate covering any particular use of premises may, if
                      they think fit, at any time, withdraw the exemption in
^                     accordance with subsections (2) to (4) below.
                         (2) In deciding whether or not to withdraw an exemption
                      they have granted the fire authority shall have regard to all the
                      circumstances of the case and in particular to the degree of
                      seriousness of the risk in case of fire to persons in the premises.
                        (3) The fire authority may withdraw an exemption they
                      have granted as respects any particular use of premises
                      without exercising any of the powers of inspection or inquiry
                      conferred by section 19 of this Act but they shall not withdraw
                      the exemption without first giving notice to the occupier of the
                      premises that they propose to withdraw it and the reasons for
                      the proposal, and giving him an opportunity of making
                      representations on the matter.
                         (4) An exemption shall be withdrawn by serving a notice on
                      the occupier of the premises to which the exemption relates
                      stating that the exemption will cease to have effect as respects
                      the particular use or uses of the premises specified in the
                      notice on such date as is so specified, being a date not earlier
                      than the end of the period of fourteen days beginning with the
                      date on which service of the notice is effected.
4                         c. 27      Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987


            Part I                         (5)    If premises cease to qualify for exemption under section
                                        5A of this Act a fire authority who have granted an exemption
                                        under that section shall notify the occupier of the premises of
                                        the fact and date of the cessation of the exemption.”
E x e m p tio n fro m        2.—(1) After section 8 of the principal Act there shall be inserted the
re q u ire m e n t to     following section—
h a v e fire
                          “Change o f      8 A.— (1) If, during the currency of an exemption granted
certificate:
su p p le m e n ta ry .   affectin°nS under section 5A of this Act for any premises, it is intended.to
                          premises for carry out in relation to those premises any proposals to which
                          which        this section applies, the occupier shall, before the carrying out
                          exemption    0 f the proposals is begun, give notice of the proposals to the
                          granted"     fife authority; and if the carrying out of the proposals is begun
                                        without such notice having been given, the occupier shall be
                                        guilty o f an offence.
                                        (2) This section applies to the following proposals, namely,
                                      any proposal—
                                           (a) to make—
                                                (i)   an extension of, or structural alteration to, the
                                                      premises which would affect the means of
                                                      escape from the premises; or
                                                (ii) an alteration in the internal arrangement of the
                                                     premises, or in the furniture or equipment with
                                                     which the premises are provided, which would
                                                     affect the means o f escape from the premises;
                                                     or
                                           (b) on the part of the occupier, to begin to keep
                                               explosive or highly flammable materials of any
                                               prescribed kind anywhere under, in or on the
                                               building which constitutes or comprises the
                                               premises in a quantity or aggregate quantity greater
                                               than the quantity prescribed for the purposes of this
                                               paragraph as the maximum in relation to materials
                                               of that kind; or
                                            (c) in a case where the notice of exemption under
                                                section 5A of this Act includes a statement under
                                                subsection (8) of that section, to make such a use of
                                                the premises as will involve there being in the
                                                premises at any one time a greater number of
                                                persons in relation to whom the statement applies
                                                than is specified or treated as specified in the
                                                statement.
                                         (3) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (1) above
                                       shall be liable—
                                            (a) on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding the
                                                statutory maximum;
                                            (b) on conviction on indictment, to a fine or to
                                                imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years,
                                                or both.”
                                                                                                 i

                             (2)    In section 19(2) of the principal Act (premises within powers of
                           inspection etc. of inspectors), after paragraph (a), there shall be inserted
                           the following paragraph—
             Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987                 c. 27                           5



     “(aa) any premises in respect of which there is in force an exemption                    Part I
          under section 5A of this Act from the requirement for a fire
         certificate with respect to them;” .

                       Charges fo r fire certification work
     3.      After the section 8A of the principal Act inserted by section 2 aboveC h a rg e s f o r fire
there shall be inserted the following section—                                     c ertific atio n w o rk .
"Charges for       8B.—(1) Where a fire authority—
issue or
amendment             (a) issue a fire certificate under section 5 of this Act, or
o f fire
certificates.         (b) except in a case falling within subsection (2) below,
                           amend a fire certificate or, as an alternative to
                           amendment, issue a new fire certificate, under
                           section 8 of this Act,
                the applicant for the certificate or, as the case may be, the
                occupier of the premises to which the amended or new
                certificate relates shall pay to the authority such fee as the
                authority determine.
               (2) N o fee shall be chargeable for the amendment of a fire
             certificate, or issue of a new fire certificate embodying
             amendments, under section 8(6) of this Act in a case where the
             amendment or amendments is or are made in consequence of
             the coming into force of regulations under section 12 o f this
             Act.
                (3) A fee charged by a fire authority under this section in
             connection with th& issue of a fire certificate or the
             amendment of a, or issue o f a new, fire certificate shall not
             exceed an amount which represents the cost to the authority
             of the work reasonably done by them for the purposes of the
             issue o f the certificate or, as the case may be, the amendment
             of the certificate or issue o f the new certificate, other than the
             cost of any inspection o f the premises.”

                     Means o f escape and fo r fighting fire
 4.—(1) The following amendments o f the principal Act with regard to                     M e a n s o f escape:
means of escape from premises in case of fire shall have effect.                          sc o p e o f
                                                                                          reg u la tio n .
  (2) In section 5 (applications for and issue of fire certificates), the
following subsection shall be added at the end—
               “(5) In this Act, “ escape” , in relation to premises, means
             escape from them to some place of safety beyond the building
             which constitutes or comprises the premises and any area
             enclosed by it or enclosed with it; and accordingly, for the
             purposes of any provision o f this Act relating to means of
             escape, consideration may be given to, and conditions or
             requirements imposed as respects, any place or thing by
             means of which a person escapes from premises to a place of
             safety.”
  (3) In section 43(1) (interpretation), after the definition of “ designated
use” , there shall be inserted the following—
     “ ‘escape’ has the meaning assigned to it by section 5(5) o f this Act
           and ‘means of escape’ is to be construed in accordance with that
           subsection;” .
6                            c. 27            Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987


            Part I             5.    For section 9A o f the principal Act (duty to provide certain premises
G e n e ra l d u ty a s to   with means of escape in case o f fire) there shall be substituted the
m e a n s o f e scap e       following section—
a n d f o r fighting
fire.                        "D u ty as to        9A.—(1) All premises to which this section applies shall be
                             means o f         provided with—
                             escape and       ^         ^     ,        />       •        ca        j
                             for fighting            (a),: such means of escape in case of fire, and
                             fire.                   (b) such means for fighting fire,
                                                as may reasonably be required in the circumstances of the
                                               case.
                                                (2) The premises to which this section applies are premises
                                              which are exempt from the requirement for a fire certificate by
                                              virtue of—
                                                    (a) a provision made in an order under section 1 of this
                                                        Act by virtue o f subsection (3) of that section, or

                                                    (b) the grant of exemption by a fire authority under
                                                        section 5A o f this Act.

                                                 (3) In the event of a contravention of the duty imposed by
                                               subsection (1) above the occupier of the premises shall, except
                                               as provided in subsection (4) below, be guilty of an offence
                                               and liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level
                                               5 on the standard scale.
                                                 (4) A person is not guilty of an offence under this section in
                                               respect of any contravention of the duty imposed by
                                               subsection (1) above which is the subject of an improvement
                                               notice under section 9D of this Act.”


C o d e s o f p ractice.       6.    After the section 9A of the principal Act substituted by section 5
                             above there shall be inserted the following sections—
                             "Codes o f           9B.—(1) The Secretary of State may from time to time,
                             practice as to           consultation with such persons or bodies of persons as
                             means o f                     . .      . .       r    .
                             escape and        appear to him requisite—
                             for fighting            (a) prepare and issue codes of practice for the purpose
                              fire-                       of providing practical guidance on how to comply
                                                          with the duty imposed by section 9A of this Act; and
                                                     (b) revise any such code by revoking, varying,
                                                          amending or adding to the provisions of the code.
                                                 . (2) A code prepared in pursuance of this section and any
                                               alterations proposed to be made on a revision of such a code
                                               shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament, and the
                                               Secretary o f State shall not issue the code or revised code, as
                                               the case may be, until after the end of the period of 40 days
                                               beginning with the day on which the code or the proposed
                                               alterations were so laid.
                                                  (3) If, within the period mentioned in subsection (2) above,
                                               either House resolves that the code be not issued or the
                                               proposed alterations be not made, as the case may be, the
                                               Secretary of State shall not issue the code or revised code (but
                                               without prejudice to his power under that subsection to lay
                                               further codes or proposed alterations before Parliament).
              Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987          c. 27                          7


                (4) For the purposes of subsection (2) above—                           P art I

                   (a) where the code or proposed alterations are not laid
                       before both Houses of Parliament on the same day,
                       the later day shall be taken to be the day on which
                       the code or the proposed alterations, as the case
                       may be, were laid before both Houses, and
                   (b) in reckoning any period of 40 days, no account shall
                       be taken of any time during which Parliament is
                       dissolved or prorogued or during which both
                       Houses are adjourned for more than four days.
                (5) In this Act references to a code of practice under this
              section are references to such a code as it has effect for the time
              being, with any revisions, under this section.
ofcodesof       9C. — (1) A failure on the part o f a person to observe any
practice. °   provision of a code of practice under section 9B of this Act
              shall not o f itself render him liable to any criminal or civil
              proceedings.
                 (2)   If, in any proceedings whether civil or criminal under
              this Act, it is alleged that there has been a contravention on
              the part of any person o f the duty imposed by section 9A of
              this Act—

                   (a) a failure to observe a provision of a code of practice
                       under section 9B of this Act may be relied on as
                       tending to establish liability, and
                   (b) compliance with such a code may be relied on as
                       tending to negative liability.”

  7.— (1) After the section 9C of the principal Act inserted by section 6           I m p ro v e m e n t
above there shall be inserted the following sections—                               no tices.

m1™Prove'
ment
                 9D.— (1) Where a fire authority are of the opinion that the
notices       duty imposed by section 9A of this Act has been contravened
              in respect of any premises to which that section applies, they
              may serve on the occupier of those premises a notice (in this
              Act referred to as “ an improvement notice” ) which—
                   (a) states they are of that opinion;
                   (b) specifies, by reference to a code o f practice under
                       section 9B o f this Act if they think fit, what steps
                       they consider are necessary to remedy that
                       contravention; and
                   (c)   requires the occupier to take steps to remedy that
                         contravention within such period (ending not
                         earlier than the period within which an appeal
                         against the improvement notice can be brought
                         under section 9E of this Act) as may be specified in
                         the notice.
                (2) Where an improvement notice has been served under
              subsection (1) above—
8            c. 27   Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987


    Part I                (a) the fire authority may withdraw that notice at any
                              time before the end o f the period specified in the
                              notice; and

                          (b) if an appeal against the improvement notice is not
                              pending, the fire authority may extend or further
                              extend the period specified in the notice.

                         (3)   Where any premises are premises to which section 9A of
                      this Act applies and—:

                           (a) the building which constitutes or comprises the
                               premises is a building to which at the tinie of its
                               erection     building     regulations    imposing
                               requirements as to means o f escape in case o f fire
                               applied; and

                           (b) in connection with the erection of that building
                               plans were, in accordance with building regulations,
                               deposited with a local authority,

                      the fire authority shall not in pursuance of subsection (1)
                      above serve an improvement notice requiring structural or
                      other alterations relating to the means of escape from the
                      premises unless the requirements of subsection (4) below are
                      satisfied in relation to those premises.

                         (4)    The requirements o f this subsection are satisfied in
                       relation to such premises as are mentioned in subsection (3)
                       above if—
                            (a) regulations are in force under section 12 of this Act
                                applying to the premises in relation to any use of
                                them as respects which exemption under section 5A
                                of this Act has been granted, being regulations
                                which impose requirements as to means of escape in
                                case of fire, and the fire authority are satisfied that
                                alterations to the building which constitutes or
                                comprises the premises are necessary to bring the
                                premises into compliance with the regulations in
                                 respect of those requirements; or

                             (b) the fire authority are satisfied that the means of
                                 escape in case of fire with which the premises are
                                 provided are inadequate in relation to any such use
                                 of the premises by reason of matters or
                                 circumstances of which particulars were not
                                  required by or under the building regulations to be
                                  supplied to the local authority in connection with
                                  the deposit of plans.

                           (5) In this section “ structural or other alterations relating
                        to means of escape from the premises” , in relation to any such
                        premises as are mentioned in this section, means structural or
                        other alterations directly connected with the provision of the
                        premises with adequate means of escape in case of fire.
               Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987          c. 27               9


                (6)    Subsections (3) to (5) above extend to England and             Part I
               Wales only.
Rights of
appeal
                  9E.— (1) A person on whom an improvement notice is
against        served may, within twenty-one days from the date on which
improvement    the improvement notice is served, appeal to the court.
notices.
                  (2) On an appeal under this section, the court may either
               cancel or affirm the notice, and, if it affirms it, may do so either
               in its original form or with such modifications as the court
               may in the circumstances think fit.
                  (3) Where an appeal is brought under this section against
               an improvement notice, the bringing o f the appeal shall have
               the effect o f suspending the operation of the notice until the
               appeal is finally disposed of or, if the appeal is withdrawn,
               until the withdrawal of the appeal.
Provision as
                 9F.— (1) It is an offence for a person to contravene any
to offences.
               requirement imposed by an improvement notice.
                 (2)   Any person guilty of an offence under subsection (1)
               above shall be liable—

                    (a) on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding the
                        statutory maximum;

                    (b) on conviction on indictment, to a fine, or
                        imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years,
                        or both.”

   (2)    In section 14(1) of the principal Act (exercise o f certain powers of
fire authority in Scotland where building standards regulations as to
means of escape apply), for the words “or 8” there shall be substituted the
words ", 8 or (in relation to premises to which section 9A applies) 9D(1)
and (2)” .


   (3)   In section 17(1) of the principal Act (duty of fire authorities to
consult other authorities before requiring alterations to buildings), in
paragraph (b), after the words “ section 8(4) or (5)” there shall be inserted
the words “ , section 9D ” and after the words “ would have to be taken”
there shall be inserted the words “ or, in the case of a notice under section
9D, which must be taken” .


   (4)     In section 48(4) o f the Building Act 1984, (which modifies the effect1984 c.   55.
of initial notices under that Act for the purposes of the exercise of powers
of a fire authority to require structural alterations where building
regulations apply)—

     (a) after the words “ For the purposes o f ’ there shall be inserted the
         words “ section 9D and” ; and

     (b) in paragraph (b), after the words “the references in" there shall
         be inserted the words “subsection (4)(b) of section 9D and” and
         for the words “ that section” there shall be substituted the words
         “section 13” .
10
                                 c. 27      Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987


            Part      I                            Interim duties as to safety o f premises

D u tie s as re g a rd s
                                   g. ( 1 ) The following amendments shall be made in section 5
safety p e n d in g              (applications for fire certificates) and section 7 (offences) o f the principal
d e te r m in a tio n o f        Act.
a p p lic a tio n s fo r
fire certificates.                  (2) In section 5—
                                       (a) in subsection (2), after the words “fire authority” , there shall be
                                           inserted the words “ shall notify the applicant of his duties under
                                           subsection (2A) below and’ ; and
                                       (b) after subsection (2) there shall be inserted the following
                                           subsection—
                                                 “ (2A) Where an application is made for a fire certificate
                                              with respect to any premises it is the duty of the occupier to
                                              secure that, when the application is made and pending its
                                              disposal—
                                                    (a) the means of escape in case of fire with which the
                                                         premises are provided can be safely and effectively
                                                         used at all material times;
                                                     (b) the means for fighting fire with which the premises
                                                         are provided are maintained in efficient working
                                                         order; and
                                                     (c) any persons employed to work in the premises
                                                         receive instruction or training in what to do in case
                                                         of fire.”
                                     (3) In section 7, after subsection (3), there shall be inserted the
                                   following subsection—
                                                 “ (3A) If, pending the disposal of an application for a fire
                                               certificate with respect to any premises, the premises are put
                                               to a designated use, then, if any requirement imposed by
                                               section 5(2A) o f this Act is contravened by reason of anything
                                               done or not done to or in relation to any part o f the relevant
                                               building, the occupier shall be guilty of an offence.
                                     (4) In section 7, after subsection (5), there shall be inserted the
                                   following subsection—
                                                 “ (5A) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (3A)
                                               above shall be liable, on summary conviction, to a fine not
                                               exceeding level 5 on the standard scale.

                                                     Premises involving serious risk to persons

     Special p r o c e d u r e
                                       9 .— (1) For section 10 of the principal Act (court’s power to prohibit
     in case o f seriou s           or restrict use of certain premises until excessive risk to persons in case ot
     risk; p r o h ib itio n        fire is reduced) there shall be substituted the following section—
     notices.                       "Special        10— (1) This section applies to—
                                    procedure in       (a) any premises which are being or are proposed to be
                                    case of                 put to a use (whether designated or not) which falls
                                    serious risk:
                                    prohibition             within at least one of the classes of use mentioned in
                                    notices.                section 1(2) o f this Act, other than premises of the
                                                            description given in section 2 of this Act: and
                                                       (b) any premises to which section 3 of this Act for the
                                                            time being applies.
                 Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987           c. 27             11



                   (2) If as regards any premises to which this section applies         P art I
                 the fire authority are of the opinion that use of the premises
                 involves or will involve a risk to persons on the premises in
                 case of fire so serious that use of the premises ought to be
                 prohibited or restricted, the authority may serve on the
                 occupier of the premises a notice (in this Act referred to as “a
                 prohibition notice”).
                   (3) The matters relevant to the assessment by the fire
                 authority, for the purposes of subsection (2) above, o f the risk
                 to persons in case of fire include anything affecting their
                 escape from the premises in that event.
                    (4) A prohibition notice shall—
                       (a) state that the fire authority are of the opinion
                           referred to in subsection (2) above;
                       (b) specify the matters which in their opinion give or, as
                           the case may be, will give rise to that risk; and
                       (c) direct that the use to which the prohibition notice
                           relates is prohibited or restricted to such extent as
                           may be specified in the notice until the specified
                           matters have been remedied.
                    (5) A prohibition notice may include directions as to the
                 steps which will have to be taken to remedy the matters
                 specified in the notice.
                    (6) A prohibition or restriction contained in a prohibition
                 notice in pursuance o f subsection (4)(c) above shall take effect
                 immediately it is served if the authority are of the opinion, and
                 so state in the notice, that the risk of serious personal injury is
                 or, as the case may be, will be imminent, and in any other case
                 shall take effect at the end o f a period specified in the
                 prohibition notice.
                   (7) Where a prohibition notice has been served under
                 subsection (2) above the fire authority may withdraw the
                 notice at any time.”
   (2) After the section 10 of the principal Act substituted by subsection
(1) above there shall be inserted the following sections—

aR'eaitS°f                   ^ ^ person on whom a prohibition notice is
against          served may, within twenty-one days from the date on which
prohibition      the prohibition notice is served, appeal to the court,
notices.             (2) On an appeal under this section, the court may either
                 cancel or affirm the notice, and, if it affirms it, may do so either
                  in its original form or with such modifications as the court
                  may in the circumstances think fit.
                    (3)    Where an appeal is brought under this section against
                 a prohibition notice, the bringing of the appeal shall not have
                 the effect o f suspending the operation of the notice, unless, on
                 the application of the appellant, the court so directs (and then
                 only from the giving of the direction).

to offences"15         — ( 0 ^ shall be an offence for any person to
 o o ences.      contravene any prohibition or restriction imposed by a
                 prohibition notice.
                            c. 27       Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987


           P a rt    I                     (2) In any proceedings for an offence under subsection (1)
                                        above where the person charged is a person other than the
                                        person on whom the prohibition notice was served it shall e
                                         a defence for that person to prove that he did not know and
                                         had no reason to believe the notice had been served.
                                            (3) Any person guilty of an offence under subsection (1)
                                         above shall be liable—
                                               (a) on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding the
                                                   statutory maximum;
                                               (b) on conviction on indictment, to a fine, or
                                                   imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years,
                                                   or both.”
                               (3)     In section 43(1) of the principal Act (interpretation) after the
                             definition o f “ prescribed” there shall be inserted the following

                             defin!‘“ prohibition notice” has the meaning assigned by section 10(2) of
                                        this Act;” .

                                                        Inspections o f premises

I n sp e c tio n s o f
                                10. Section 18 of the principal Act (enforcement) shall be amended—
prem ises.                        (a) by the insertion in subsection ( 1 ), after the word “ inspectors ,
                                       of the words “and cause premises to be inspected ; and
                                   (b) by the insertion, after subsection (2), of the following
                                       subsection—
                                            “ (3) In performing the duty imposed by subsection (1)
                                          above so far as it requires premises in their areas to be
                                          inspected, fire authorities shall act in accordance with such
                                          guidance as the Secretary of State may give them.

                                 11.   Section 21 of the principal Act (restriction on disclosure of
 D isc lo su re o f
 i n f o r m a tio n          information obtained in premises) shall be amended
 o b ta in e d in                  (a) by the insertion, at the beginning, of the words “ (1) Subject to
 prem ises.
                                       subsection (2) below,” ; and
                                   (b) by the insertion, at the end, of the following subsections—
                                             “ (2) Nothing in subsection (1) above prohibits the
                                          disclosure of information to an enforcing authority within the
                                          meaning o f the Health and Safety at W ork etc. Act 1974 in
  1974 c.37.
                                          order to enable that authority to discharge any function
                                          falling within its field of responsibility.
                                              (3)    Section 18(7) of the Health and Safety at W ork etc. Act
                                           1974 (meaning in Part I of that Act of ‘enforcing authority
                                          and of such an authority’s ‘field of responsibility ) shall apply
                                          for the purposes of this section as it applies for the purposes
                                           o f that Part.”

                                                          Civil and other liability

                                    12 —(1) After section 27 of the principal Act there shall be inserted the
    C ivil a n d o th e r
    liability.                  following section—                                                           ,
                                 •Civil and       21A . Except in so far as this Act otherwise expressly
                                other liability. Drovides, and subject to section 18 of the Interpretation Ac
     1978 c.30.
                                                 1978 (offences under two or more laws), the provisions of this
                                                 Act shall not be construed as—
              Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987         c. 27                           13


                    (a) conferring a right of action in any civil proceedings          Part I
                        (other than proceedings for the recovery of a fine) in
                        respect o f any contravention o f a provision o f this
                        Act, o f any regulations thereunder or of any fire
                        certificate or notice issued or served thereunder by
                        the fire authority; or
                   (b) affecting any requirement or restriction imposed by
                       or under any other enactment whether contained in
                       a public general Act or in a local or private Act; or
                   (c) derogating from any right o f action or other remedy
                       (whether civil or criminal) in proceedings instituted
                       otherwise than under this Act.”
   (2)   In consequence o f subsection (1) above, section 43(2) of the
principal Act shall be omitted.

                                Miscellaneous

   13. Premises appropriated to, and used solely or mainly for, public             R em oval o f
religious worship shall cease to be exempt from the requirement for a fire         e x e m p tio n fo r
certificate if put to a designated use and accordingly—                            p rem ises used fo r
                                                                                   p u b lic religious
       (a) in section 2 of the principal Act (exemptions), there shall be          w o rsh ip .
           omitted the words from “ o f any o f the following” to “premises”
           where last occurring; and
       (b) in section 12(1) (fire regulations), for the words “any description
           falling within any paragraph o f ’ there shall be substituted the
           words “the description given in” and the words “ other than
           paragraph (d)” shall be omitted.

   14. In section 7(4) of the principal Act (offence of contravening fire          B reach es o f fire
certificate requirements except where person charged does not know of              c ertificate
his responsibility), after the words “ Provided that a person” there shall be      re q u ire m en ts:
inserted the words “ other than the occupier of the premises” .                    re stric tio n o f
                                                                                   defence.

   15. In section 5(3)(c) (fire authority to be satisfied regarding means          A u to m a tic m e a n s
for fighting fire before issuing a fire certificate with respect to any            fo r fighting fire.
premises) and section 6(1 )(d) (contents of a fire certificate regarding
means for fighting fire) of the principal Act the words from “ for use” to
“ the building” shall be omitted.

   16.—(1) After section 28 o f the principal Act there shall be inserted the      Special p ro v isio n
following section—                                                                 fo r c e rta in
                                                                                   prem ises.
 special         28A.— (1) This Act shall have effect in relation to premises
factory0" °r o f the descriptions specified in Part I of Schedule 2 to this Act
office,      subject to the modifications specified in Part II of that
railway an d Schedule.
premises.      (2)    The Secretary of State may by order vary the provisions
             of that Schedule by amending, omitting or adding to the
             descriptions o f premises or the modifications for the time
             being specified in it if it appears to him to be necessary or
             expedient in connection with any provision made by health
             and safety regulations under section 15 of the Health and 1974 c.               37.
             Safety at Work etc. Act 1974.
14                          c. 27         Fire Safety and Safety o f Places of Sport Act 1987


            P art       I                    (3)    The power to make an order under this section is
                                           exercisable by statutory instrument which shall be subject to
                                           annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of
                                           Parliament.”
                              (2) After the Schedule to the principal Act, which shall become
                            Schedule 1 to that Act, there shall be inserted as Schedule 2 to that Act the
                            Schedule set out in Schedule 1 to this Act.
                              (3) In the principal Act—
                                 (a) in section 34 (modification of certain enactments relating to
                                      Scotland) for the words “ the Schedule” there shall be
                                      substituted the words “Schedule 1” ; and
                                    (b) in section 43( 1) (definitions) in the definition of “ the court” the
                                        words “and the Schedule thereto” shall cease to have effect.

E x te n sio n o f             17. Section 35 of the principal Act (power for Secretary of State to
p o w e r to a p p ly       apply Act to vessels and movable structures) shall be amended by the
A ct.                       insertion, at the end of paragraph (b), of the words and
                                    (c) places of work in the open air of any prescribed description.”

A p p lic a tio n to           18.— (1) Section 40 of the principal Act (application of Act to Crown
C r o w n etc.              etc.) shall have effect with the following amendments.
                               (2) In subsection (l)(a) (provisions applying to premises occupied by
                            the Crown) after “4” there shall be inserted “ 5(2A), 5A, 5B,” and for the
                            words “ 9A (except subsection (4))” there shall be substituted the words
                            “ 9A (except subsections (3) and (4)), 9B and 9C” .
                               (3) In subsection (l)(b) (provisions applying to premises owned but not
                            occupied by the Crown), after “ 8” there shall be inserted “ 8A, 8B,” , after
                            “ 9A” there shall be inserted “ 9B, 9C, 9D, 9F,” and after “ 10,” there shall
                            be inserted “ 10B,” .
                              (4) After subsection (10A), there shall be inserted the following
                            subsection—
                                 “ (10B) This Act shall apply to premises occupied by the National
                              Radiological Protection Board as if they were premises occupied by the
                              Crown.”



                                                                     P a r t II


                                                       Safety   of   S ports G    rounds



                              Application o f Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975 to all sports grounds

A p p lic a tio n o f        ! 19.—(1) For the purpose of extending the provisions of the Safety of
S afety o f S p o rts       Sports Grounds Act 1975 (in this Part referred to as “the principal Act” )
G r o u n d s A c t 197f    'which apply to sports stadia to other sports grounds and making a minor
to all sp o rts              correction the amendments to the principal Act specified in Schedule 2 to
g ro u n d s.
1975 c.52.
                             this Act shall have effect.
                              (2) In consequence of those amendments the following other
                            amendments of the principal Act shall be made, that is to say—
                    Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987         c. 27                           15


         (a) for section 2(2) (obligatory terms o f safety certificates) there                P a r t II
             shall be substituted the following subsection—
                       “ (2) In so far as an order under section 15A below so
                    requires as respects any class of sports ground, a safety
                    certificate shall include such terms and conditions as may be
                    provided for in the order.” ;
        (b) section 15 (power of Secretary of State to extend the principal
            Act to other classes of sports grounds) shall cease to have effect;
        (c) there shall be inserted as section 15A the following section—
 "P o w e r to
 m odify Act
                      15A.- (i) The Secretary of State may, as respects any
 for classes o f   specified class of sports ground, by order modify the
 grounds.          provisions o f this Act (except section 1(1) above) in their
                   application to sports grounds of that class.
                     (2) An order under this section may—
                         (a) make different modifications in relation to different
                             activities at the same class o f ground; and
                         (b) include such supplementary and transitional
                             provision as the Secretary of State thinks
                             expedient.” ; and
        (d) in section 18 (orders and regulations), after subsection (1), there
            shall be inserted the following subsection—
                     “ (1A) Regulations under any provision o f this Act may
                   make different provision for different classes of sports
                   ground.”
                            Designation: spectator capacity
   20. After section 1(1) of the principal Act (designation o f sports                   D e sig n a tio n o f
grounds with spectator capacity of more than 10,000) there shall be                      g ro u n d s:
inserted the following subsections—                                                      v a ria tio n in
                                                                                         q u alify in g
                      “ (1A) The Secretary of State may by order substitute, for         s p e c ta to r capacity.
                   the number for the time being specified in subsection (1)
                   above, such other number as he considers appropriate; but no
                   order made under this subsection shall affect the validity of
                   any designation previously made.
                      (IB) An order under subsection (1A) above may make
                   different substitutions for different classes of sports ground.”

                                    Safety certificates
   21. In section 2 o f the principal Act (contents of safety certificates),             S afety certificates:
after subsection (2), there shall be inserted the following subsection—                  po lice presence.

                      “(2A) No condition of a safety certificate shall require the
                   provision of the services at the ground o f any members of a
                   police force unless the extent o f the provision of their services
                   is reserved for the determination of the chief officer o f police
                   of the force.”

  22.     (1) Section 5 of the principal Act (appeals to Secretary of StateS afety certificates:
against determinations etc. o f local authority) shall have effect with the ap p ea ls.
amendments specified in subsections (2) to (6) below.
  (2)   In subsections (1), (2) and (3) for the words “Secretary of State”
wherever occurring, there shall be substituted the word “court” .
        16                  c. 27       Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987


               P a r t II     (3)    After subsection (3) there shall be inserted the following
                            subsections—
                                          “ (3A) An appeal to the court under this section in England
                                       and Wales shall be by way of complaint for an order, the
                                       making of the complaint shall be deemed to be the bringing
    I

        1980 c.43.
                                       o f the appeal and the Magistrates’ Courts Act 1980 shall
                                       apply to the proceedings.
                                          (3B) An appeal to the court under this section in Scotland
                                        shall be by summary application.
                                           (3C) In England and Wales any of the following persons
                                         may appeal to the Crown Court against an order under this
                                         section, namely—
                                              (a) the local authority; and
                                               (b) any interested party.
                                            (3D) In Scotland any of the following persons may appeal
                                          against an order made in an appeal under this section,
                                          namely—
                                               (a) the local authority; and
                                               (b) any interested party,
                                          notwithstanding that that person was not party to the
                                          proceedings on the application.”

                                (4) Subsection (4) shall be omitted.
                               (5) In subsection (5), for the words “ subsections (3) and (4) above” ,
i                            there shall be substituted the words this section .
i

                                (6) Subsections (6), (7) and (8) shall be omitted.
                               (7) In section 6(1) of the principal Act (power to make regulations) for
                             paragraph (c) (appeals), there shall be substituted the following
                             paragraph—
                                               “ (c) prescribe the time within which appeals under
                                                     section 5 above are to be brought.

                                 (8) In section 7 of the principal Act (supplementary provisions relating
                              to determinations and appeals)—
                                    (a) in subsection (1), for the words from “ person” to the end of
                                        paragraph (b) there shall be substituted the words “ applicant
                                        for a safety certificate, he shall be deemed to have withdrawn his
                                        application” and for the words after “ section 6 above” , there
                                        shall be substituted the words “an appeal against the authority s
                                        determination may be brought.” ;
                                    .(b) for subsection (2), there shall be substituted the following
                                         subsection—
                                               “ (2) Subsection (1) above shall not have effect if an appeal
                                            is brought before the expiry of the period there mentioned,
                                            but if the appeal is withdrawn or the court upholds the
                                            authority’s determination, the appellant shall be deemed to
                                            have withdrawn his application on the date of the withdrawal
                                            o f his appeal or of the court’s determination.” ;
            Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987         c. 27                          17


     (c) in subsection (3), for the words “notice is given of an appeal”             P a r t II
         there shall be substituted the words “ an appeal is brought” , the
         words “ , subject to subsection (4) below,” shall be omitted and
         for the words “ Secretary of State” there shall be substituted the
         word “court” ; and
     (d) subsections (4) and (5) shall be omitted.

                Grounds involving serious risk to spectators

    23.—(1) For section 10 of the principal Act (emergency procedure by          Special p r o c e d u r e
magistrates’ court order), there shall be substituted the following              in case o f serio u s
section—                                                                         risk: p r o h ib itio n
“ Spccial                                                                        n o tices.
p rocedure in
                 10— (1) If the local authority are of the opinion that the
ease o f      admission of spectators to a sports ground or any part of a
serious risk: sports ground involves or will involve a risk to them so serious
prohibition   that, until steps have been taken to reduce it to a reasonable
notices.
              level, admission of spectators to the ground or that part of the
              ground ought to be prohibited or restricted, the authority
              may serve a notice (in this Act referred to as a “ prohibition
              notice” ) on such persons as are specified in subsection (6)
              below.
              (2) A prohibition notice shall—
                 (a) state that the local authority are of that opinion;
                 (b) specify the matters which in their opinion give or, as
                     the case may be, will give rise to that risk; and
                 (c) direct that no, or no more than a specified number
                     of, spectators shall be admitted to, or to a specified
                     part of, the sports ground until the specified matters
                     have been remedied.
              (3) A prohibition notice may prohibit or restrict the
            admission of spectators generally or on a specified occasion.
              (4) A prohibition notice may include directions as to the
           steps which will have to be taken to reduce the risk to a
           reasonable level and these may require alterations or
           additions to the ground or things to be done or omitted which
           would contravene the terms or conditions of a safety
           certificate for the ground or for any stand at the ground.
              (5) No prohibition notice shall include directions
           compliance with which would require the provision o f the
           services at the sports ground of any members of a police force
           unless the chief officer of police of the force has consented to
           their inclusion and the extent of the provision of their services
           is reserved for his determination.
             (6) A prohibition notice shall be served on the persons
           specified in the following paragraphs in the circumstances
           specified in those paragraphs, that is to say—
                 (a) if a general safety certificate is in operation for the
                     ground, on the holder of it;
                 (b) if the prohibition or restriction applies to an
                     occasion in respect of which a special safety
                     certificate for the ground is in operation, on the
                     holder of it;
. 27      Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987


                (c) if no safety certificate is in operation for the ground,
                    on the person who appears to the local authority to
                    be responsible for the management of the ground;
                 (d) if the prohibition or restriction applies to an
                      occasion and no safety certificate is in operation for
                      the ground, on each person who appears to the local
                      authority to be responsible for organising an
                      activity at the ground on that occasion,
                 (e) if a general safety certificate is in operation for a
                      stand at the ground, on the holder of it;
                  (f) if the prohibition or restriction applies to an
                       occasion in respect of which a special safety
                       certificate for a stand at the ground is in operation,
                       on the holder of it;
            but the validity of a prohibition notice served on any person
            under any of the foregoing provisions shall not be affected by
            a failure to serve another person required to be served with
            such a notice under those provisions.
               (7) A prohibition or restriction contained in a prohibition
            notice shall take effect immediately it is served if the authority
            are of the opinion, and so state in the notice, that the risk to
            spectators is or, as the case may be, will be imminent, and in
            any other case shall take effect at the end of a period specified
             in the notice.
                 (8) A copy of any prohibition notice shall be sent by the
             local authority to each of the following, namely
                      (a) the chief officer of police; and
                      (b) where the local authority is in Greater London or a
                             metropolitan county, the fire authority, or, in any
                             other case, the building authority.
                  (9) The local authority who have served a prohibition
              notice may, in any case where it appears appropriate to them
              to do so, amend the prohibition notice by notice served on the
              p e r s o n s specified in subsection (6) above (subject to the saving
              in that subsection), and copies shall be sent to the officer and
              authorities specified in subsection (8) above.
                   (10) A notice under subsection (9) above amending a
               prohibition notice shall specify the date on which the
               amendment is to come into operation.
                   (11) Where a notice has been served under subsection (1) or
               (9) above the local authority may withdraw the notice at any
               time.”
    (2)    In consequence of those amendments section 12 of the principal Act
  (offences) shall be amended as follows—
       (a) in subsection (l)(d) (contravention of certificate terms), after
            the word “ contravened” there shall be inserted the words
            “otherwise than in pursuance of a prohibition notice ;
        (b) in subsection (1 )(e) (admission of spectators in contravention of
            section 10 order), for the words “ an order” there shall be
             substituted the words “a prohibition notice” ; and
        (c) in subsection (4) (due diligence defence), for the word “ order
             there shall be substituted the words “ prohibition notice .
                  Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987       c. 27                   19


     (3) In section 17(1) (definitions)—                                                P a r t II
        (a) after the definition of “ qualified person” there shall be inserted
             the following—
           “ “prohibition notice” has the meaning assigned to it by section
             10(1);” , and
       (b) in the definition of “ safety certificate” , after the word
             “certificate” there shall be inserted the words “ , except with
             reference to a stand at a sports ground,” and at the end there
             shall be inserted the words “ and, where it refers to a stand,
             means a safety certificate (whether general or special) under
             Part III of the Fire Safety and Safety o f Places of Sport Act
             1987” .

   24.   After section 10 of the principal Act there shall be inserted theP ro h ib itio n
following section—                                                        n otices: ap p ea ls.

ag a in s T '5       10A.— (1) Any person aggrieved by a prohibition notice
prohibition       may aPPeal to the court against the notice if he does so within
notices.          such period as the Secretary of State may by regulations
                  prescribe.
                    (2) Subsection (1) above applies to any amendment of a
                 prohibition notice as it applies to the prohibition notice in its
                 original form.
                    (3) An appeal to the court under this section in England and
                 Wales shall be by way of complaint for'an order, the making
                 of the complaint shall be deemed to be the bringing of the
                 appeal and the Magistrates’ Courts Act 1980 shall apply to          1980 c.43.
                 the proceedings.
                   (4) An appeal to the court under this section in Scotland
                 shall be by summary application.
                   . (5) On an appeal under subsection (1) above, the court may
                 either cancel or affirm the notice or, in the case of an appeal
                 against an amendment, annul or affirm the amendment and,
                 if it affirms the notice or the notice as amended, as the case
                 may be, may do so either in its original form or as amended,
                 as the case may be, or with such modifications of the notice as
                 the court may in the circumstances think fit.
                    (6) Where an appeal is brought under this section against a
                 prohibition notice or an amendment o f it, the bringing of the
                 appeal shall not have the effect of suspending the operation of
                 the notice or the notice as amended, as the case may be.
                   (7) In England and Wales any of the following persons may
                 appeal to the Crown Court against an order under this
                 section, namely—
                      (a)  any person aggrieved by the notice;
                      (b)  the local authority;
                      (c)  the chief officer of police; and
                      (d)  where the local authority is in Greater London or a
                          metropolitan county, the fire authority, or, in any
                          other case, the building authority.
                   (8) In Scotland any of the following persons may appeal
                 against an order made in an appeal under this section,
                 namely—
                             C.   27       Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987


           pART ii                              (a) any person aggrieved by the notice;
                                                (b) the local authority;
                                                 (c) the chief officer of police; and
                                                 (d) the building authority;
                                           notwithstanding that that person was not party to the
                                           proceedings on the application.
                                              (9)    The persons who are, for the purposes of this section,
                                           “ aggrieved” by a prohibition notice are the persons on whom,
                                           in accordance with section 10(6) o f this Act, the notice is
                                           required to be served.”

                                                Enforcement: inspections and obstruction

E n fo rc e m e n t:            2 5 — (1) After the section 10A of the principal Act inserted by section
insp e ctio n s a n d         24 above there shall be inserted the following section—
offence o f                                                                         .
o b s tr u c tio n .          “ Enforce-      10B.—(1) It shall be the duty of every local authority to
                              ment-       enforce within their area the provisions of this Act and of
                                           regulations made under it and for that purpose to arrange for
                                           the periodical inspection of designated sports grounds, but
                                           nothing in this subsection shall be taken to authorise a local
                                           authority in Scotland to institute proceedings for an offence.
                                              (2) In performing the duty imposed by subsection (1) above
                                           so far as it requires designated sports grounds in their areas to
                                            be inspected, local authorities shall act in accordance with
                                            such guidance as the Secretary o f State may give them.
                                              (3) For the purposes of subsection (1) above, “ periodical”
                                            means at least once in every twelve months.”
                                  (2)    In section 12(6)(d) of the principal Act (obstruction of person
                               exercising powers of entry and inspection under that Act to constitute an
                               offence), for the word “wilfully” there shall be substituted the word
                               “ intentionally” .

                                                                   P a rt     III
                                                  Safety   of   Stands   at    S ports G   rounds



  S afety certificates
                                 26. (1) This Part applies in relation to a sports ground which
  fo r s ta n d s a t                (a) provides covered accommodation in stands for spectators, and
  s p o r ts g ro u n d s.
                                     (b) is not a designated sports ground.
                                 (2) A certificate under this Part (referred to as a “ safety certificate ) is
                              required in respect of the use, at a sports ground in relation to which this
                           n P a r t applies, o f each stand which provides covered accommodation lor
                         1/ / 500 or m oreseectators to view activities at the ground; but one certificate
                         Jf m aT ^ei^u ed in T esp ect o f several such stands.
                                  (3) The Secretary o f State may by order amend subsection (2) above by
                               substituting a smaller number for the number for the time being speci e
                               in it.
                                  (4) The power to make an order under subsection (3) above is
                               exercisable by statutory instrument which shall be subject to annulment
                               in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.
                                   (5) A stand in respect of the use of which a safety certificate under this
                               Part is required is referred to in this Part as a “ regulated stand .
            Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987            c. 27                 21



  (6 ) It shall be the function of the local authority to determine whether         P art   III
any, and if so, which of the stands at a sports ground in their area is a
regulated stand, and to issue safety certificates.
   (7) In determining whether any stand at a sports ground in their area
is a regulated stand the local authority may apply any criteria which are
appropriate for that purpose.
   (8 ) In discharging their function o f determination as respects the stands
at sports grounds in their areas, local authorities shall act in accordance
with such guidance as the Secretary o f State may give them.,
  (9) A final determination of a local authority that a stand at a sports
ground is a regulated stand shall be conclusive of the question subject
only to an appeal under section 30 below.
   (10) A safety certificate in respect of the use o f a regulated stand at a
sports ground may be either—
      (a) a certificate in respect o f the use of the stand for viewing an
            activity or a number of activities specified in the certificate
            during an indefinite period commencing with a date so specified;
            or
      (b) a certificate in respect of the use of the stand for viewing an
            activity or a number of activities specified in the certificate on an
            occasion or series of occasions so specified;
and any reference in this Part to a safety certificate’s being “ for” a stand
is a reference to its covering the use of the stand for viewing an activity or
activities during an indefinite period or, as the case may be, on an
occasion or occasions.
   (11) In this Part—
      “ final” , in relation to a determination, is to be construed in
            accordance with section 28 below;
      “ general safety certificate” means such a safety certificate for a stand
            as is mentioned in subsection ( 1 0 )(a) above;
      “ special safety certificate” means such a safety certificate for a stand
            as is mentioned in subsection ( 1 0 )(b) above; and
      “ stand” , in relation to a sports ground, means an artificial structure
            (not merely temporary) which provides accommodation for
            spectators and is wholly or partly covered by a roof, and, in
            relation to the number of spectators in a stand provided with
            cpvered accommodation, “ covered” means covered by the roof
            or other part o f the structure which constitutes the stand.

   27. —(1) A safety certificate for a regulated stand shall contain suchl Contents of safety
terms and conditions as the local authority consider necessary or I certificates for
expedient to secure ">a<jr>nghlf‘ safrty, jn the stand when it is in use for I stands,
viewing the specified activity or activities at the ground, and the terms and I
conditions may be such as to involve alterations or additions to the stand J
or any installations in or serving the stand.
   (2) In so far as an order under section 39 below so requires as respects
any class o f stand at sports grounds, a safety certificate shall include such
terms and conditions as may be provided lor in the order.
   (3) No condition of a safety certificate shall require the provision of the
services in or in the vicinity of the stand of any members of a police force
unless the extent of the provision o f their services is reserved for the
determination of the chief officer of police of the force.
22                   c.   27       Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987


       P a r t III      (4) Without prejudice to subsection (1) above, a safety certificate for a
                      regulated stand may include a condition that the following records shall
                      be kept—
                           (a) records o f the number of spectators accommodated in covered
                                accommodation in the stand; and
                           (b) records relating to the maintenance o f safety in the stand.
                         (5) A general safety certificate shall contain or have attached to it a plan
                      o f the stand to which it applies a n d t h e j y s ^ i ^ ^                  of
                      it and the terms and conditions intKecertificate or in any special safety
                     ""certificate issued for the stand shall be framed, where appropriate, by
                       reference to that plan.
                        (6 ) A safety certificate for a regulated stand at a sports ground may
                      include different terms and conditions in relation to different activities
                      taking place at the ground.
                         (7) Nothing in a safety certificate for a regulated stand at a sports
                       ground shall derogate from any requirements imposed by regulations
 1975 c.52.
                       under section 6(2) o f the Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975.

                         28.—(1) For the purposes of this Part, the following persons qualify for
 Issue o f
 certificates.         the issue of a safety certificate for a regulated stand at a sports ground,
                       that is to say—
                            (a) the person who qualifies for the issue o f a general safety
                                  certificate is the person who is responsible for the management
                                  of the ground;and
                             (b) the person who qualifies for the issue of a special safety
                                  certificate for viewing an activity from the stand on any
                                  occasion is the person who is responsible for organising that
                                  activity.
                            (2) The local authority for an area shall, in respect o f any stand at a
                          sports ground in their area which appears to them to be a regulated stand,
                          make a preliminary determination whether or not that stand is a
                          regulated stand an d , if they determine that it is, they shall serve a notice
                          on the person who appears to them to qualify for the issue o f a genera
                          safety certificate stating their determination and the effects ot it.
                             (3) Subject to subsection (4) below, a preliminary determination that a
                          stand at a sports ground is a regulated stand shall become final at the end
                          of the period of two months beginning with the date o f the notice ol it.
                             (4) A local authority may revoke a determination of theirs that a stand
                          at a sports ground is a regulated stand
                                (a) at any time before it becomes final, or
                                (b) on considering an application for a general safety certificate for
                                     the stand, whether the determination has or has not become
                                     final.
                             (5) A local authority may, at any time before a determination of theirs
                           that a stand at a sports ground is a regulated stand becomes final,
                           withdraw the notice of it and serve a further notice under subsection (z)
                           above on another person, but if they do so the period of two m o n t h s a
                           the end of which the determination becomes final shall be treated a.
                           beginning with the date of the further notice.
            Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987          c. 27                              23


  ( 6 ) If a local authority receive an application for a general safety              P a rt III
certificate for a regulated stand at a sports ground in their area, it shall be
their duty—
      (a) if they have not already done so, to determine whether the stand
           is a regulated stand and, if they determine that it is, to determine
           whether the applicant is the person who qualifies for the issue of
           the general safety certificate for it;
      (b) if they have made a determination that the stand is a regulated
           stand and do not decide to revoke it, to determine whether the
           applicant is the person who qualifies for the issue o f the general
           safety certificate for it;
and a determination made under paragraph (a) above that a stand is a
regulated stand is, when made, a final determination.
  (7) If the local authority, on an application made under subsection ( 6 )
above in relation to a stand which they have determined or determine is a
regulated stand, determine that the applicant is the person who qualifies
for the issue o f the general safety certificate they shall (if rio such
certificate is in operation) issue to him such a certificate.
   (8 ) If a local authority receive an application for a special safety
certificate for a regulated stand at a sports ground in their area as respects
which stand a general safety certificate is in operation, it shall be their
duty to determine whether the applicant qualifies for the issue of a special
safety certificate for it and, if they determine that he does, they may issue
to him a special safety certificate.
  (9) The local authority shall, if they determine that an applicant for a
safety certificate does not qualify for the issue of the certificate, serve on
him a notice stating their determination.
  (10) The local authority shall send a copy of an application for a safety
certificate for a regulated stand at a sports ground to the chief officer of
police and where the local authority is in Greater London or a
metropolitan county, the fire authority or, in any other case, the building
authority for the area in which it is situated, and shall consult them about
the terms and conditions to be included in the certificate.
   (11) The local authority may, by notice, require an applicant for a
safety certificate to furnish them within such reasonable time as they may
specify in the notice with such information and such plans o f the ground
as they consider necessary for the purpose of discharging their functions
in respect of the issue o f safety certificates for the regulated stands at the
ground.
  (12) If an applicant for a safety certificate fails to comply with a
requirement under subsection ( 1 1 ) above within the time specified by the
local authority, or within such further time as they may allow, he shall be
deemed to have withdrawn his application.

  29.—(1) The local authority who have issued a safety certificate for a          A m e n d m e n t,
regulated stand at a sports ground—                                               c a n c e lla tio n etc.
                                                                                  o f certificates.
    (a) shall, if at any time it appears to them that the stand in respect
         o f which it was issued is not or has ceased to be a regulated
         stand, revoke their previous determination and, by notice to its
         holder, cancel the certificate;
    (b) may, in any case where it appears appropriate to them to do so,
         amend the certificate by notice to its holder; or
24                  c. 27         Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987


      P a r t III           (c) may replace the certificate.
                      (2) A safety certificate may be cancelled, amended or replaced under
                    subsection ( 1 ) above either on the application o f the holder or without
                    such an application.
                      (3) Section 27 above shall apply on the amendment or replacement of a
                    safety certificate.
                       (4) A notice under subsection (l)(b) above amending a general safety
                    certificate shall specify the date on which the amendment to which it
                    relates is to come into operation, and the date so specified may be a date
                    later than the date o f issue of the notice.
                       (5) If the local authority receive an application for the transfer of a
                    safety certificate for a regulated stand at a sports ground from the holder
                    to some other person it shall be their duty to determine whether that              |
                    person would, if he made an application for the purpose, qualify for the
                    issue of the certificate; and if they determine that he would, they may
                    transfer the certificate to him and shall in any case notify him of their
                    determination.
                      (6 ) An application under subsection (5) above may be made either by
                    the holder of the safety certificate or by the person to whom it is proposed
                    that it should be transferred.
                        (7) The local authority shall send a copy of an application for the
                     transfer of a safety certificate for a regulated stand at a sports ground to
                     the chief officer o f police and where the local authority is in Greater
                     London or a metropolitan county the fire authority or, in any other case,
                     the building authority for the area in which it is situated.
                        (8 ) The local authority shall consult the chief officer of police and where
                     the local authority is in Greater London or a metropolitan county, the fire
                     authority or, in any other case, the building authority about any proposal
                     to amend, replace or transfer a safety certificate.
                       (9) The holder of a safety certificate may surrender it to the local            (
                     authority, and it shall thereupon cease to have effect.
                       (10) The local authority may cancel a safety certificate if the holder dies
                     or (if a body corporate) is dissolved.

 A p peals.            30.—(1) A person who has been served with a notice of a
                     determination, which is or has become a final determination, of a local
                     authority that any stand at a sports ground is a regulated stand may
                     appeal against the determination to the court.
                       (2) Any person who, on an application for the issue or transfer to him
                     of a safety certificate for a regulated stand at a sports ground, has been
                     served with a notice of the determination of a local authority that he does
                     not or, in the case of an application for a transfer, would not qualify for
                     the issue of the certificate may appeal against the determination to the
                     court.
                        (3) An applicant for a special safety certificate for a regulated stand at
                      a sports ground may also appeal to the court against a refusal of his
                      application on grounds other than a determination that he does not
                      qualify for the issue of the certificate.
            Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987            c. 27                  25



  (4) An interested party may appeal to the court against—                            P a rt III

     (a) the inclusion of anything in, or the omission of anything from,
         a safety certificate for a regulated stand at a sports ground; or
     (b) the refusal o f the local authority to amend or replace a safety
         certificate for a regulated stand at a sports ground.
  (5) Any appeal under this section shall be brought within the period
prescribed under section 31 below.
  (6 ) An appeal to the court under this section in England and Wales shall
be by way of complaint for an order, the making of the complaint shall be
deemed to be the bringing o f the appeal and the Magistrates’ Courts Act            1980 c.43.
1980 shall apply to the proceedings. .
  (7) An appeal to the court under this section in Scotland shall be by
summary application.
  (8 ) In this section “ interested party” , in relation to a safety certificate,
includes—
      (a) the holder of the certificate;
     (b) any other person who is or may be concerned in ensuring
         compliance with the terms and conditions of the certificate;
     (c) the chief officer o f police; and
     (d) where the local authority is in Greater London or a
         metropolitan county, the fire authority .or, in any other case, the
         building authority.
  (9) Subject to subsection (10) below, if a local authority serve on any
applicant for a safety certificate a notice o f a determination o f theirs that
he does not qualify for the issue o f the certificate, he shall be deemed to
have withdrawn his application on the expiry o f the period within which
an appeal must, by virtue o f subsection (5) above, be brought.
  (10) Subsection (9) above shall not have effect if an appeal is brought
before the expiry of the period referred to in that subsection, but if the
appeal is withdrawn or the court upholds the authority’s determination,
the appellant shall be deemed to have withdrawn his application on the
date of the withdrawal of his appeal or of the court’s order on the appeal.
   (11) Where an appeal is brought against the inclusion o f any term or
condition in a safety certificate (whether it was included in the certificate
originally or only on its amendment or replacement), the operation of
that term or condition shall be suspended until the court has determined
the appeal.
  (12) In England and Wales any of the following persons may appeal to
the Crown Court against an order under this section, namely—
     (a) the local authority; and
     (b) any interested party.
  (13) In Scotland any of the following persons may appeal against an
order under this section, namely—
     (a) the local authority; and
     (b) any interested party,
notwithstanding that that person was not party to the proceedings on the
application.
26                             c. 27       Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987


          P a r t III            31.—(1) The Secretary o f State may by regulations—
R e g u la tio n s .               (a) prescribe the procedure (subject to the provisions o f this Part)
                                        for the issue, cancellation, amendment, replacement and
                                        transfer o f safety certificates for regulated stands at sports
                                        grounds and the particulars to be given in applications for their
                                        issue, amendment, replacement or transfer;
                                   (b) authorise local authorities to determine, subject to such limits
                                        or in accordance with such provisions as may be prescribed by
                                        the regulations, the fees (if any) to be charged in respect of
                                        applications for the issue, amendment, replacement or transfer
                                        of safety certificates or in respect of applications for the
                                        cancellation of safety certificates for stands which have ceased
                                        to be regulated stands; and
                                    (c) prescribe the time within which appeals under section 30 above
                                         are to be brought.
                                 (2) Regulations under this section may contain such incidental and
                               supplementary provisions as the Secretary of State thinks expedient.
                                  (3) The power to make regulations under this section is exercisable by
                               statutory instrument which shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of
                               a resolution of either House of Parliament.
                                 (4) It shall be the duty of the Secretary of State, before making
                               regulations under this section, to consult with such persons or bodies of
                               persons as appear to him requisite.

 A lte r a tio n s a n d           32.—(1) If while a general safety certificate for a regulated stand at a
 ex te n sio n s.               sports ground is in operation it is proposed to alter or extend the stand or
                                its installations, and the alteration or extension is likely to affect the safety
                                of persons in the stand, the holder of the certificate shall, before the
                                carrying out of the proposals is begun, give notice of the proposals to the
                                local authority.
                                  (2) Subsection (1) above in particular requires notice when it is
                                proposed to alter the entrances to or exits from a regulated stand at a
                                sports ground (including any means of escape in case of fire or other
                                emergency) or the means of access to any such entrances or exits.

  E x clu sio n o f o th e r      3 3 ( 1 ) While a general safety certificate is in force under this Part for
  s ta tu to r y                a regulated stand at a sports ground, the following provisions shall not
  re q u ire m en ts.           apply to the stand, that is to say—
  53 & 54 Viet. c.59.                (a) section 37(1) of the Public Health Acts Amendment Act 1890
                                          (platforms for public occasions);
   1971 c.40.                        (b) any provision of the Fire Precautions Act 1971 or of a fire
                                          certificate issued under that Act in so far as it relates to any
                                          matter in relation to which requirements are imposed by the
                                          terms and conditions of the safety certificate;
     1982 c.45.                      (c) section 89 o f the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 (which
                                          makes provision as to the safety of platforms, stands and similar
                                          structures) in so far as that section relates to any matter in
                                          relation to which requirements are imposed by the terms and
                                          conditions of the safety certificate;
     1984 c.55.                       (d) sections 24 and 71 of the Building Act 1984 (exits, entrances etc.
                                           in the case of certain public and other buildings); and
                  Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987      c.   27                            27



           (e) any provision of a local Act in so far as it relates to any matter         P a r t III
               in relation to which requirements are imposed by the terms and
               conditions o f the safety certificate.
         (2)    Where an enactment provides for the licensing o f premises of any
      class or description and the authority responsible for licences thereunder
      is required or authorised to impose terms, conditions or restrictions in
      connection with such licences, then, so long as there is in operation with
      respect to the premises a safety certificate under this Part covering the use
      of the premises by reason of which a licence under that enactment is
      required, any term, condition or restriction imposed with respect to those
      premises in connection with any licence under that enactment shall be of
      no effect in so far as it relates to any matter in relation to which
      requirements are imposed by the terms and conditions o f the certificate
      under this Part.
^        (3) A person required by or under a local Act to do anything that would
      involve a contravention of the terms or conditions of a safety certificate
      under this Part shall not be treated as having contravened that Act if he
      fails to do it.

         34.— (1) It shall be the duty of every local authority to enforce within     E n fo rc e m e n t.
      their area the provisions of this Part and for that purpose to arrange for
      the periodical inspection o f sports grounds at which there are regulated
      stands, but nothing in this subsection shall be taken to authorise a local
      authority in Scotland to institute proceedings for an offence.
         (2)    In performing the duty imposed by subsection (1) above so far as it
      requires sports grounds in their areas to be inspected, local authorities
      shall act in accordance with such guidance as the Secretary o f State may
      give them.

        35. A person authorised by—                                                   P o w e rs o f e n try
                                                                                      a n d in sp e ctio n .
           (a) the local authority,
           (b) the chief officer o f police, or
^         (c) where the local authority is in Greater London or a
              metropolitan county, the fire authority or, in any other case, the
              building authority,
      may, on production if so required of his authority, enter a sports ground
      at any reasonable time, and make such inspection o f the stands and such
      inquiries relating to them as he considers necessary for the purposes of
      this Part, and in particular may examine records of the number of
      spectators accommodated, and the maintenance of safety, in the
      regulated stands at the ground, and take copies of such records.

        36. —(1) Subject to subsections (2), (5) and ( 6 ) below, if—                 Offences.
          (a) spectators are admitted to a regulated stand at a sports ground
              on an occasion when no safety certificate which covers their use
              of the stand is in operation for it, or
          (b) any term or condition of a safety certificate for a regulated stand
              at a sports ground is contravened,
    , any responsible person and, if a safety certificate is in operation, the
      holder o f the certificate, shall be guilty of an offence.
        (2) No offence under subsection (l)(a) above is committed if—
28                 c.   27         Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987


     P a r t III             (a) the determination that the stand is a regulated stand is not a
                                 final one, or
                             (b) an application has been made for a general safety certificate for
                                 the stand and has not been withdrawn or deemed to have been
                                 withdrawn.
                      (3) In subsection (1) above “ responsible person” means the person who
                   is concerned in the management of the sports ground or of the regulated
                   stand in question or in the organisation of any activity taking place at the
                   ground at the time when an offence is alleged to have been committed.
                       (4) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (1) above shall be
                    liable—
                          (a) on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding the statutory
                              maximum; or
                          (b) on conviction on indictment, to a fine or to imprisonment for a
                              term not exceeding two years or both.
                      (5) Where any person is charged with an offence under subsection (1)
                    above it shall be a defence to prove—
                         (a) that the spectators were admitted or the contravention of the
                              certificate in question took place without his consent, and
                              (b) that he took all reasonable precautions, and exercised all due
                                  diligence to avoid the commission of such an offence by himsell
                                  or any person under his control.
                           (6 ) Where any person is charged as a responsible person with an offencc
                        under subsection ( 1 )(a) above it shall be a defence to prove that he did not
                        know of the determination that the stand in relation to which the offence
                        is alleged to have been committed is a regulated stand.

                          (7) Any person who—
                             (a) in purporting to carry out a requirement under section 28(11)
                                 above or for the purpose of procuring a safety certificate or the
                                 cancellation, amendment, replacement or transfer of a safety
                                 certificate, knowingly or recklessly makes a false statement or
                                 knowingly or recklessly produces, furnishes, signs or otherwise
                                 makes use of a document containing a false statement, or
                               (b) fails to give a notice required by section 32(1) above; or
                               (c) intentionally obstructs any person in the exercise of powers
                                   under section 3 5 above, or without reasonable excuse refuses,
                                   neglects or otherwise fails to answer any question asked by any
                                   person in the exercise of such powers,
                         shall be guilty of an offence and liable on summary conviction to a fine
                         not exceeding level 5 on the standard scale.
                           (8 )   Where an offence under this Part which has been committed by a
                         body corporate is proved to have been committed with the consent or
                         connivance of, or to be attributable to any neglect on the part of a
                         director, manager, secretary or other similar officer of the body
                         corporate, or any person who was purporting to act in that capacity, he,
                         as well as the body corporate, shall be guilty of that offence and be liable
                         to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
            Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987        c. 27                          29


  (9)    Where the affairs of a body corporate are managed by its members, P a rt III
subsection (8 ) above shall apply to the acts and defaults of a member in
connection with his functions of management as if he were a director of
the body corporate.

  37. Except in so far as this Part otherwise expressly provides, and           Civil a n d o th e r
subject to section 18 of the Interpretation Act 1978 (offences under two or     liability.
more laws), the provisions of this Part shall not be construed as—              1978 c.30.

     (a) conferring a right of action in any civil proceedings (other than
          proceedings for the recovery of a fine) in respect of any
          contravention o f this Part or of any of the terms or conditions
          of a safety certificate thereunder; or
     (b) affecting any requirement or restriction imposed by or under
          any other enactment whether contained in a public general Act
          or in a local or private Act; or
     (c) derogating from any right of action or other remedy (whether
          civil or criminal) in proceedings instituted otherwise than under
          this Part.

   38.—(1) Any notice or other document required or authorised by or by         Service o f
virtue of this Part to be served on any person may be served on him either      d o c u m e n ts.
by delivering it to him or by leaving it at his proper address or by sending
it by post.
  (2) Any notice or other document so required o.r authorised to be served
on a body corporate or a firm shall be duly served if it is served on the
secretary or clerk of that body or a partner of that firm.
   (3) For the purposes of this section, and of section 7 o f the
Interpretation Act 1978 (service of documents) in its application to this
section, the proper address of a person, in the case of a secretary or clerk
of a body corporate shall be that of the registered or principal office of
that body, in the case of a partner o f a firm shall be that of the principal
office of the firm, and in any other case shall be the last known address of
the person to be served.

   39.—(1) The Secretary of State may, as respects any specified class of       P o w e r to m o d ify
stand at sports grounds, by order modify the provisions of this Part in         P a r t fo r classes o f
their application to stands o f that class.                                     s ta n d .

  (2) An order under this section may—
     (a) make different modifications in relation to different activities
         taking place at sports grounds; and
     (b) include such supplementary and transitional provision as the
         Secretary of State thinks expedient.
   (3) The power to make an order under this section is exercisable by
statutory instrument which shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of
a resolution o f either House of Parliament.
  (4) It shall be the duty of the Secretary of State, before making an order
under this section, to consult with such persons or bodies of persons as
appear to him requisite.

   40.—(1) Sections 26 to 29 above bind the Crown, but shall have effect,       A p p lic a tio n to
in relation to premises occupied by the Crown, with the substitution o f a      C ro w n .
reference to the Secretary of State for any reference to the local authority.
30                          c. 27      Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987


           P a r t III        (2)    Nothing in this Part shall be taken to authorise the entry of premises
                            occupied by the Crown.

I n te r p r e ta tio n .     41. In this Part—
                                “ building authority” means—
                                              (a) in England outside Greater London and the
                                           metropolitan counties, or in Wales, the district council,
                                              (b) in Scotland, the local authority within the meaning of
 1959 c.24.
                                           the Building (Scotland) Act 1959;
                                 “ the court” means, in relation to a sports ground in England and
                                        Wales, a magistrates’ court acting for the petty sessions area in
                                        which it is situated and., in relation to a sports ground in
                                        Scotland, the sheriff court within whose jurisdiction it is
                                        situated;
                                 “ general safety certificate” has the meaning assigned to it by section
                                        26(11) above;
                                 “ local authority” means—
                                               (a) in Greater London, the London borough council or the
                                            Common Council of the City of London,
                                               (b) in England, in the metropolitan counties, the district
                                            council;
                                               (c) in England outside Greater London and the
                                            metropolitan counties, or in Wales, the county council,
                                                (d) in Scotland, the regional or islands council;
                                  “ means of access” includes means of access from a highway or, in
                                         Scotland, from a road;
                                   “notice” means a notice in writing;
                                   “ safety” does not include safety from danger inherent in
                                         participation in a sporting or competitive activity,
                                   “safety certificate” has the meaning assigned to it by section 26(2)
                                         above;
                                    “special safety certificate” has the meaning assigned to it by section
                                          26(11) above;
                                    “ spectator” means any person occupying accommodation provided
                                          in stands for spectators at a sports ground;
                                    “ sports ground” and “ designated sports ground" have the same
                                          meaning as in the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975, and
     1975 c.52.
                                    “ stand” has the meaning assigned to it by section 26( 1 1 ) above; and
                                           “ regulated stand” has the meaning assigned to it by section
                                           26(5) above.
           Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport A ct 1987          c. 27


                                     P a rt   IV                                       P a rt III


                         I n d o o r S p o r t s L ic e n c e s


                     Licensing in England and Wales

    42.—(1) In Schedule 12 to the London Government Act 1963 (licensing            L icen sing o f
o f certain public entertainments in London), after paragraph 3 there shall        i n d o o r sp o rts
be inserted the following paragraphs—                                              pre m ise s in
                                                                                   London.
                                                                                    1963 c.33.
                           “Indoor sports licences
               3A.—(1) Subject to sub-paragraphs (2) and (3) below, no
            premises in a London borough or the City of London shall
            be used for any entertainment which consists of any sporting
            event to which the public are invited as spectators (a “ sports
            entertainment”) except under and in accordance with the
            terms of a licence granted under this paragraph by the
            Council.
               (2) Sub-paragraph (1) above does not require a licence in
            respect of any occasion when the sporting event which
            constitutes the entertainment is not the principal purpose for
            which the premises are used on that occasion; but this
            provision does not apply in relation to a sports complex.
               (3) Sub-paragraph (1) above does not appiy to a sports
            entertainment held in a pleasure fair.
               (4) The Council may grant to any applicant, and from time
            to time renew, a licence for the use of any premises specified
            in it for any sports entertainment on such terms and
            conditions and subject to such restrictions as may be so
            specified.
               (5) Subject to the next following sub-paragraph and to
            paragraph 19(3) of this Schedule, a licence granted under this
            paragraph shall, unless previously cancelled under paragraph
            8 or revoked under paragraph 10(4) of this Schedule, remain
            in force for one year or for such shorter period specified in the
            licence as the Council think fit.
          ;    (6 ) The Council may grant a licence under this paragraph
            in respect of such one or more particular occasions only as
            may be specified in the licence, and a licence granted by virtue
            of this sub-paragraph is hereafter in this Schedule referred to
            as an “ occasional sports licence” .
               (7) Where a licence has been granted under this paragraph
            to any person the Council may if they think fit transfer that
            licence to any other person on the application o f that other
            person or the holder of the licence.
               ( 8 ) In this paragraph—
                      “ premises” means any permanent or temporary
                            building and any tent or inflatable structure and
                            includes a part o f a building where the building is
                            a sports complex but does not include a part of
                            any other building;
                       “sporting event” means any contest, exhibition or
                            display of any sport;
                       “ sports complex” means a building—
32                        c. 27     Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987


        P art   IV                             (a) which provides accommodation and facilities
                                                      for both those engaging in sport and
                                                      spectators, and
                                                (b) the parts of which are so arranged that one or
                                                      more sports can be engaged in simultaneously
                                                      in different parts of the building; and
                                             “sport” includes any game in which physical skill is
                                                    the predominant factor and any form of physical
                                                    recreation which is also engaged in for purposes
                                                    of competition or display, except dancing (in any
                                                    form).
                                        3 B — ( 1 ) An applicant for the grant, renewal or transfer of
                                     a licence under paragraph 3A of this Schedule other than an
                                     occasional sports licence shall give to the Council, to the
                                     commissioner of police in whose district the premises to
                                     which the application relates are situated and to the fire
                                     authority not less than twenty-one days notice of his
                                     intention to make the application.
                                        (2) An applicant for the grant, renewal or transfer o f an
                                     occasional sports licence shall give to the Council and the fire
                                     authority not less than fourteen days’ notice of his intention
                                     to make the application.
                                         3C. The person making an application for the grant,
                                     renewal or transfer of a licence under paragraph 3A of this
                                      Schedule shall on making the application pay to the Council
                                      such fee as the Council may fix.”
                             (2) The consequential amendments of the said Schedule 12 specified in
                           Schedule 3 to this Act shall also have effect.

 L icen sing o f
                             43.    In Schedule 1 to the Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions)
 i n d o o r sp o rts      Act 1982 (licensing of certain public entertainments), for paragraph 2
 pre m ise s o u tsid e    (certain sports) there shall be substituted the following paragraph—
 London.                                   “ 2 .— (l) Subject to sub-paragraphs (2) and (3) below, no
  1982 c. 30.
                                       premises shall be used for any entertainment which consists
                                       of any sporting event to which the public are invited as
                                       spectators (a “ sports entertainment” ) except under and in
                                       accordance with the terms of a licence granted under this
                                       paragraph by the appropriate authority.
                                           (2) Sub-paragraph (1) above does not require a licence in
                                        respect of any occasion when the sporting event which
                                        constitutes the entertainment is not the principal purpose for
                                        which the premises are used on that occasion; but this
                                        provision does not apply in relation to a sports complex.
                                            (3) Sub-paragraph (1) above does not apply to a sports
                                        entertainment held in a pleasure fair.
                                            (4) The appropriate authority may grant to any applicant,
                                         and from time to time renew, a licence for the use of any
                                         premises specified in it for any sports entertainment on such
                                         terms and conditions and subject to such restrictions as may
                                         be so specified.
                                             (5) The appropriate authority may grant a licence under
                                         this paragraph in respect of such one or more particular
                                         occasions only as may be specified in the licence.
            Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987           c. 27


                (6 ) In this paragraph—                                                 P a rt IV
                      “premises” means any permanent or temporary
                           building and any tent or inflatable structure and
                           includes a part of a building where the building is
                           a sports complex but does not include a part of
                           any other building;
                      “ sporting event” means any contest, exhibition or
                           display of any sport;
                      “ sports complex” means a building—
                        (a) which provides accommodation and facilities
                            for both those engaging in sport and
                            spectators, and
                       (b) the parts of which are so arranged that one or
                             more sports can be engaged in simultaneously
                             in different parts of the building; and
                     “sport” includes any game in which physical skill is
                          the predominant factor and any form of physical
                          recreation which is also engaged in for purposes
                          of competition or display, except dancing (in any
                         form).”

                            Licensing in Scotland

   44 .— (1) After section 41 of the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982           L icensing o f
(“ the 1982 Act” ) there shall be inserted the following section—                   i n d o o r sp o rts
                                                                                    p rem ises in
"indoor            4 1 a — ( 1 ) Subject to subsection (2) below, a licence to be
                                                                                    S c o tla n d .
entertain-       known as an “ indoor sports entertainment licence” shall be        1982 c.45.
m en t licences, required for the use of premises as a place of public sports
                 entertainment.
              (2) Subsection (1) above shall not apply to any occasion on
            which the entertainment of the public by the sport is not the
            principal purpose for which the premises are used but this
            provision does not apply in relation to a sports complex.
               (3) W ithout prejudice to paragraph 5 of Schedule 1 to this
             Act, a licensing authority may attach conditions to an indoor
             sports entertainment licence—
                  (a) restricting the use of the premises to a specified kind
                      or specified kinds of public sports entertainment;
                  (b) limiting the number of persons to be admitted to the
                      premises;
                  (c) fixing the days and times when the premises may be
                      open for the purposes o f public sports
                      entertainment.
               (4) In this section—
                     “premises” means any permanent or temporary
                         building and any tent or inflatable structure and
                         includes a part of a building where the building is
                         a sports complex but does not include a part of
                         any other building;
                     “public sports entertainment” means any sporting
                         event to which the public are invited as
                         spectators;
34                            c. 27       Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987


         P art    IV                              “ sporting event” means any contest, exhibition or
                                                        display of any sport;
                                                  “ sports complex” means a building—
                                                      (a) which provides accommodation and facilities
                                                           for both those engaging in sport and
                                                           spectators; and
                                                      (b) the parts of which are so arranged that one or
                                                           more sports can be engaged in simultaneously
                                                           in different parts of the building; and
                                                   “ sport” includes any game in which physical skill is
                                                         the predominant factor and any form of physical
                                                         recreation which is also engaged in for purposes
                                                         of competition or display, except dancing (in any
                                                         form).” .                                               ^
                                  (2) On and after the date of coming into force of this section an
                               application made (but not decided) before that date for the grant or
                               renewal o f a licence for the use of premises as a place ol public
                               entertainment shall, where the entertainment for which the premises are
                               to be used will be a public sports entertainment as mentioned in section
                               41A of the 1982 Act, be treated for all purposes as an application lor a
                               grant or renewal (as the case may be) of a licence under the said section
                               41A.
                                   (3) On and after the date of coming into force of this section a licence
                                granted or renewed before that date for the use of premises as a place of
                               public entertainment under section 41(2) of the 1982 Act shall, where the
                                entertainment for which the premises are to be used will be a public sports
                                entertainment as mentioned in section 41A of the 1982 Act, be deemed for
                                all purposes to have been granted or renewed under the said section 41 A.
                                  (4) In section 9 of the 1982 Act (which makes provision for licensing
                                authorities to resolve when licensing is to be required) in subsection ( 1 )
                                after the words “ to 4 3 ” there shall be inserted the words “ (except section
                                41 A)” .                                                                         .
                                   (5) In section 41 of the 1982 Act (which makes provision for public           I
                                entertainment licences) in subsection (2 ) after paragraph (a) there shall be
                                inserted the following paragraph—
                                                “ (aa) premises in respect of which a licence is required
                                             under section 41A of this Act while such premises are being
                                             used for the purposes mentioned in that section; .


                                                                      P a rt   V

                                                       M isc e lla n e o u s a n d G e n e ra l


                                                                  Miscellaneous

     E n te r ta in m e n t
                                   45. The Royal Albert Hall shall cease to be exempt from the
     licences: re m o v a l      requirement for a public entertainment licence under paragraph 1 ol
     o f e x e m p tio n .       Schedule 12 to the London Government Act 1963.
      1963 c. 33.

     E n te r ta in m e n t
                                   46. In Schedule 1 to the Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions)
     licences: fees fo r         Act 1982 (licensing o f certain public entertainments), after paragraph lo,
     v a r ia tio n .            there shall be inserted the following paragraph
     1982 c. 30.
           Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987        c. 27                            35


              “ 16A. An applicant for the variation o f the terms,                 Par t V
            conditions or restrictions on or subject to which an
            entertainments licence is held shall pay a reasonable fee
            determined by the appropriate authority.”

  47. In section 10 of the Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions)         L u m in o u s tu b e
Act 1982 (luminous tube signs of certain voltage to have firemen’s             signs: E n g la n d
switches)—                                                                     a n d W ales.
                                                                               1982 c. 30.
     (a) in subsection (1), for the words “650 volts” there shall be
          substituted the words “ the prescribed voltage” ; and
     (b) after subsection ( 1 ), there shall be inserted the following
          subsections—
               “ (1A) In subsection (1) above “ the prescribed voltage”
            means 1000 volts A.C. or 1500 volts D.C. if measured
            between any two conductors or 600 volts A.C. or 900 volts
            D.C. if measured between any conductor and earth.
               (IB) The Secretary o f State may, by order made by
            statutory instrument, substitute such different voltages for
            those for the time being specified in subsection (1 A) above as
            appear to him to be appropriate for this purpose having
            regard to the current regulations of the Institution of
            Electrical Engineers.”

   48. In section 98 o f the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 (power       L u m in o u s tu b e
o f Secretary of State to make regulations for safe operation o f electrical   signs: S c o tla n d .
luminous tube signs) in subsection (2 ) for the words “normally exceeding      1982 c. 45.
650 volts” there shall be substituted the words “o f such description as
may be specified in regulations made under subsection ( 1 ) above” .

                                  General

  49.— (1) Subject to subsection (2) below, the enactments mentioned in        R e p ea ls a n d
Schedule 4 to this Act are hereby repealed to the extent specified in the      tra n s itio n a l a n d
third column of that Schedule.                                                 savin g p ro v isio n s.

   (2) The transitional and saving provisions contained in Schedule 5 to
this Act shall have effect.

   50.—(1) This Act may be cited as the Fire Safety and Safety of Places       S h o r t title,
o f Sport Act 1987.                                                            com m encem ent
                                                                               a n d exten t.
  (2) This Act shall come into force on such day as the Secretary o f State
may appoint by order made by statutory instrument; and different days
may be so appointed for different provisions or for different purposes.
  (3) This Act does not extend to Northern Ireland and—
     (a) in Part IV, sections 42 and 43 extend to England and Wales only
         and section 44 extends to Scotland only; and
     (b) in Part V, sections 46 and 47 extend to England and Wales only
         and section 48 extends to Scotland only.
  (4) Except as provided by an order under subsection (5) below, Parts II
and III of this Act do not extend to the Isles of Scilly.
   (5) The Secretary of State may by order direct that Parts II and III of
this Act shall, subject to such exceptions, adaptations and modifications
as may be specified in the order, extend to the Isles of Scilly.
                            Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987
36


     P art   V     (6) An order under subsection (5) above may contain such incidental
                 and consequential provisions, including provisions conferring powers or
                 imposing duties on the Council of the Isles of Scilly, as the Secretary of
                 State thinks necessary.
                    (7) An order under subsection (5) above shall be subject to annulment
                 in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.




                                                                                              (
                 Fire Safety and Safety o f Places of Sport Act 1987                                        c. 27                     37



                                           SCHEDULES

                                               SCH EDULE 1                                                          Sectio n 16.


            F ir e P r e c a u t i o n s : S p e c ia l P r o v is io n   for   C e r t a i n P r em ises


           SC HEDULE TO BE INSERTED AS SC H EDULE 2 TO FIRE
                        PRECAUTIONS ACT 1971

                                               “SCH EDULE 2

                           S p e c i a l P r o v i s i o n f o r C e r t a i n P re m is e s


                                                        P art    I

                                                 T h e P re m is es

   1. Subject to paragraph 2 below, the following are the descriptions of premises
in relation to which this Act is subject to the modifications specified in relation to
them in Part II—
     (a) premises constituting, or forming part of, a factory within the meaning
         of the FactoriesAct 1961 and premises to which sections 123(l)and 124                                      9 & 10 Eliz. 2 c.34.
         of that Act (application to electrical stations and institutions) apply (in
         this Schedule referred to as “ factory premises” );
     (b) office premises within the meaning o f the Offices, Shops and Railway                                      1963 c.41.
         Premises Act 1963, or premises deemed to be such premises for the
         purposes of that Act (in this Schedule referred to as “office premises” );
     (c)    railway premises within the meaning of that Act of 1963, or premises
            deemed to be such premises for the purposes of that Act (in this
            Schedule referred to as “ railway premises” ); and
     (d) shop premises within the meaning of that Act of 1963, or premises
         deemed to be such premises for the purposes of that Act (in this
         Schedule referred to as “ shop premises” ).
 2. Premises which are deemed to form part o f a mine for the purposes of the
Mines and Quarries Act 1954 are excluded from the descriptions of premises                                          2 & 3 Eliz. 2 c.70.
mentioned in sub-paragraphs (b) to (d) of paragraph 1 above.

                                                     P art      II

                                           T   he   M   o d if ic a t io n s

   3.— (1) This paragraph applies to premises in respect of which a fire certificate
is required which are factory premises, office premises, railway premises or shop
premises, and which—
     (a) are held under a lease or an agreement for a lease or under a licence and
         consist o f part of a building all parts o f which are in the same
         ownership; or
     (b) consist o f part o f a building in which different parts are owned by
         different persons.
   (2) In relation to premises to which this paragraph applies this Act shall have
effect with the following modifications.
   (3) For the references to the occupier in sections 5(2A), 5A(4), 5A(6), 5A(8),
5B(3), 5B(4), 5B(5), 6(5), 7(1), 7(3A), 7(4), 8(2) (except paragraph (c) and the
insertion made by sub-paragraph (5) below), 8(4), 8(5), 8(7), 8B(1), 9(5)(b),
9A(3), 9D(1) and 12(8)(b) there shall be substituted—
               c. 27          Fire Safety and Safety of Places o f Sport Act 1987
38


     Sch . 1       (a) in the case of premises falling within sub-paragraph (l)(a) above,
                       references to the owner of the building;
                       (b) in the case of premises falling within sub-paragraph (l)(b) above,
                           references to the persons who between them own the building.

                  (4) F or the words “ a fire certificate” where they occur in section 6(8) and where
               they first occur in section 7(6) there shall be substituted the words “a copy of the
               fire certificate” and in section 6(8) at the end o f the subsection there shall be
               inserted the words “ and the fire certificate shall be sent to the owner o f the
               building or, as the case may be, the person who owns the part of the building o
               which the premises consist.”
                 (5) In sections 8(2) and 8A(1) after the words “ fire authority;” there shall be
               inserted the words “ and the occupier shall, before the carrying out of the
               proposals is begun, furnish to the persons responsible for giving notice of the
               proposals to the fire authority any information in his possession which is relevant
               to those proposals;” .
                  (6) In section 8A(1) for the references to the occupier (except the reference
                inserted by sub-paragraph (5) above) there shall be substituted
                       (a) in the case of premises—
                                  (i) falling within sub-paragraph (l)(a) above; and
                                   (ii) in relation to which it is intended to carry out proposals
                                falling within subsection (2)(a) or (c) of that section,
                             references to the owner of the building; and
                        (b) in the case of premises—
                                   (i) falling within sub-paragraph (l)(b) above; and
                                   (ii) in relation to which it is intended to carry out proposals
                                falling within subsection (2)(a) or (c) of that section,
                             references to the persons who between them own the building.

                   (7)   The expressions “ owner o f the building” and "the persons who between
                 them own the building” do not include the Crown in the modifications made—
                        (a) by sub-paragraph (3) above of sections 7( 1), 8(7), 9A(3) and of the word
                            “ occupier” in the third place where it occurs in section 8(2); and
                         (b) by sub-paragraph (6) above of the word “ occupier” in the second place
                             where it occurs in section 8A(1).
                   4. In section 6(1) as it has effect in relation to factory premises there shall be
                 inserted after paragraph (e) the following paragraph—
                                    “ (f) particulars as to any explosive or highly flammable materials
                                    which may be stored or used in the premises, .

                       5. In section 8 as it has effect in relation to factory premises—
                         (a) for paragraph (c) of subsection (2) there shall be substituted the
                             following paragraph—
                                     “ (c) the occupier of the premises proposes to begin to store or use
                                     explosive or highly flammable materials in the premises or
                                     materially to increase the extent of such storage or use, , and
                         (b) in subsection (3) for the words from “ keep explosive” to “ that kind"
                             there shall be substituted the words “ store or use explosive or highly
                             flammable materials in the premises or materially to increase the extent
                             of such storage or use” .
                Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987             c. 27                     39


      6. In section 8A as it has effect in relation to factory premises, for paragraph       SCH. 1
    (b) of subsection (2) there shall be substituted the following paragraph—
                    “ (b) on the part of the occupier of the premises to begin to store
                    or use explosive or highly flammable materials in the premises or
                    materially to increase the extent of such storage or use;” .
       7. Where a licence issued under the Explosives Act 1875 or the Petroleum           38 & 39 Viet. c. 17.
    (Consolidation) Act 1928 is in force with respect to factory premises, office         18 & 19 G e o . V
    premises, shop premises or railway premises, section 31 of this Act shall not have    c.32.
    effect in relation to any term, condition or restriction imposed in connection with
    the issue, renewal, transfer or variation of such licence.
      8. Where any premises (“ the relevant premises” )—
         (a) are premises for which a fire certificate is required, premises for which
              a fire certificate is in force, premises to which section 9A of this Act
              applies or premises to which regulations under section 12 of this Act
              apply, and
         (b) are factory premises, office premises, shop premises or railway
              premises,
    section 28 shall apply to the premises or to any other premises comprised in the
    same building—
                   (i) with the substitution of the foregoing words (reading “ this
                 section” for “ section 28” ) for subsection (1);
                   (ii) with the insertion, in subsection (2)(a), after “ 8(5)” of
                 “9D(1)” ; and
                   (iii) with the substitution, for subsection (2)(c) of the following—
                     “(c) in order to secure compliance with section 9A or a
                          provision of regulations under section 12 of this Act;” .”




(
                c. 27          Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987
40

                                                                SCHEDULE 2
S ectio n 19.
                   E x t e n sio n   of
                                          A   p p l ic a t io n o f   S a fety   of   Sports G   rounds   A c t 19 75   to
                                                               S ports G     rounds                               _______

                                                                                        A m endm ent
                           Section

                Section 1(1).                              For the words “a stadium” , substitute the words
                                                              “a sports ground” .
                                                           For the words “ any sports stadium” , substitute
                                                              the words “ any sports ground” .
                Section 1(2).                              For the word “ stadium” , wherever occurring,
                                                              substitute the word “ ground” .
                 Section 1(3).                             For the word “ stadium” , wherever occurring,
                                                              substitute the words “ sports ground” .
                                                           For the words “ ‘designated stadium’” , substitute
                 Section 1(4).
                                                               the words “ ‘designated sports ground'” .
                                                           For the words “a stadium” , substitute the words
                                                               “ a sports ground” .
                 Section 2(1), (3) and (4).                 For the word “stadium” , wherever occurring,
                                                               substitute the words “sports ground” .
                 Section 3.                                 For the word “ stadium” , wherever occurring,
                                                                substitute the words “ sports ground” .
                 Section 4(7).                              For the word “ stadium” , substitute the words
                                                                “ sports ground” .
                 Section 8.                                 For the word “ stadium” , wherever occurring,
                                                                substitute the words “ sports ground” .
                  Section 9(1).                             For the Word “ stadium” , substitute the words
                                                                 “sports ground” .
                  Section 9(1 )(b).                          For the words from “ sections 168” to “ relate” ,
                                                                 substitute “ section 89 of the Civic Government
                                                                 (Scotland) Act 1982 (which makes provision as
                                                                 to the safety o f platforms, stands and other
                                                                 structures), in so far as that section relates .
                                                             For the word “ stadium” , wherever occurring,
                  Section 12(1).
                                                                 substitute the words “ sports ground” .
                  Section 12(2).                             Omit the words “ stadium or other” .
                                                             For the words “ ‘designated stadium’” , substitute
                  Section 17(1).
                                                                  the words “ ‘designated sports ground’” .
                                                             Omit the definition o f “ sports stadium” .
            Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987             c. 27                    41


                                   SCHEDULE 3
                                                                                      S ectio n 42.
                            I n d o o r S p o r t s L ic e n c e s

                         C o n s e q u e n tia l A m e n d m e n ts

                                      Preliminary
  1. In this Schedule references to paragraphs are references to paragraphs of
Schedule 12 to the London Government Act 1963.                                        1963 c.33.

                                     Amendments

                           Music and dancing licences
  2. In paragraph 1, at the end, there shall be inserted the following sub-
paragraph—
              “(7) In this paragraph ‘premises’ includes any place.”

                          Boxing and wrestling licences
  3. In paragraph 4—
     (a) in sub-paragraph (1), after the words “ which is provided” there shall be
         inserted the words “ wholly or mainly in the open air” and the words “ at
         the Royal Albert Hall” shall be omitted;
     (b) in sub-paragraph (5), for the words “ ‘occasional sports licence” ’ there
         shall be substituted the words “ ‘occasional outdoor boxing or wrestling
         licence” ’; and
     (c) after sub-paragraph (6), there shall be inserted the following sub-
         paragraph—
                “ (7) In this paragraph ‘premises’ includes any place.”
  4. In paragraph 5(1) and (2), for the words “ occasional sports licence” there
shall be substituted the words “ occasional outdoor boxing or wrestling licence” .

                     Licences continued during applications
   5. In paragraphs 6A and 6B, after the words “ paragraph 1” there shall be
inserted “ ,3A” .

                    Transmission and cancellation o f licences
   6. In paragraphs 7 and 8, after the words “ paragraph 1” there shall be inserted
", 3A” .

                Power to impose general terms etc. by regulations
  7. In paragraph 9(1), after the words “ paragraph 1” there shall be inserted “ ,
3A” .

                                     Enforcement
  8. In paragraph 10(1), (2)(a)and (4), after the words “ paragraph 1” there shall
be inserted “ , 3A” .
  9. In paragraph 12(1) after the words “ paragraph 1” there shall be inserted “ ,
3A” and, for the word “either” , there shall be substituted the word “ any” .

                           Provisional grant o f licences
    10. In paragraph 17(1), after the words “ paragraph 1” there shall be inserted
“ , 3A” .
I




    42                   c. 27          Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987


              Sc h . 3                                   Variation o f licences
                           11. In paragraph 18, after the words “ paragraph 1” there shall be inserted “ ,
                         3A” .

                                                                 Appeals
                            12. In paragraph 19—
                              (a) in sub-paragraphs (1 )(a) and (3), after the words “ paragraph 1" there
                                    shall be inserted “ , 3A” ; and
                              (b) in sub-paragraph (4), after the words “ paragraph 2(1)” there shall be
                                    inserted the words “ , 3B(1)” .

                                                        Meaning o f "premises ”
                            13. Paragraph 20 shall be omitted.


    S ectio n 49.                                           SCH EDULE 4

                                                                 R epeals

                           Chapter                 Short title                        Extent of repeal

                          1963 c.33.         London Government                In Schedule 12, in paragraph
                                               Act 1963.                          1(6), the words “ or the Royal
                                                                                 Albert Hall” , paragraph
                                                                                 4(1 )(b) and paragraph 20.
                          1971 c.40.         Fire Precautions Act           . In section 2, the words from “ of
                                                1971.                             any o f the following” to “ any
                                                                  1               premises” where last occurring.
                                                                              In section 5(3)(c), the words from
                                                                                  “ for use” to “ the building” .
                                                                              In section 6(1 )(d), the words from
                                                                                  "for use” to “ the building” .
                                                                                In section 12(1), the words
                                                                                  “ other than paragraph (d)” .
                                                                               In section 43(1), in the definition
                                                                                  of “ the court” , the words “ and
                                                                                  the Schedule thereto” .
                                                                               Section 43(2).
                           1974 c.37.         Health and Safety at             Section 78(4).
                                                Work etc. Act 1974.
                           1975 c.52.         Safety of Sports               Section 5(4), (6), (7) and (8).
                                                Grounds Act 1975.            In section 7, in subsection (3), the
                                                                               words “ , subject to subsection
                                                                                (4) below," and subsections (4)
                                                                                and (5).
                                                                             In section 12(2), the words
                                                                                “ stadium or other” .
                                                                             Section 15.
                                                                             In section 17(1), the definition of
                                                                                “ sports stadium” .
              Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987                c. 27                    43


                                       SCH ED U LE 5
                                                                                           S ectio n 49.
                      T r a n s it io n a l   and   S a v in g P r o v isio n s


                                          Preliminary
   1. In this Schedule—
        “ the 1963 Act” means the London Government Act 1963;                              1963 c.33.
        “ the 1971 Act” means the Fire Precautions Act 1971;                               1971 c.40.
        “ the 1975 Act” means the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975;and                    1975 c.52.
       “ the 1982 Act" means the Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions)               1982 c.30.
     Act 1982.

                  Certain certificates deemed to be fire certificates
   2. Where immediately before a fire certificate becomes required by or under the
1971 Act in respect of any premises a fire certificate issued or deemed to be issued
under regulations made under the Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974 (a                1974 c.37.
“ 1974 Act certificate” ) was in force in respect of those premises, the 1974 Act
certificate shall continue in force and shall be deemed to be a fire certificate within
the meaning o f the 1971 Act validly issued with respect to the premises with
respect to which it was issued and to cover the use or uses to which those premises
were being put immediately before a fire certificate becomes required by or under
the 1971 Act in respect o f those premises; and, without prejudice to the generality
of the foregoing, the 1974 Act certificate—
     (a) may be amended, replaced or revoked in accordance with the
         provisions o f the 1971 Act; and
                                               I

     (b) shall be treated as imposing in relation to the premises the like
         requirements as were previously imposed in relation to the premises.

                          Charges for fire certification work
   3. Section 8B of the 1971 Act which is inserted by section 3 of this Act does not
apply as respects an application for a fire certificate made before the said section
3 comes into force.

                             Fire safety: emergency orders
  4. The substitution effected by section 9 of this Act of section 10 of the 1971
Act shall not affect any order o f the court in force under that section when that
substitution comes into force and any such order may be enforced, or an appeal
made against it, accordingly.

                   Sports grounds: certain existing designations
   5. Any designation of a sports ground made under section 1 o f the 1975 Act by
virtue of an order under section 15 of that Act and in force immediately before
the repeal o f section 15 by section 19 o f this Act shall not be affected by the repeal
but shall continue in force as if made under section 1 as amended by section 19 of
(and Schedule 2 to) this Act.

                        Sports grounds certificates: appeals
  6. The amendments effected by section 22 o f this Act in section 5 o f the 1975
Act shall not affect any appeal pending when those amendments come into force
and any such appeal may be determined (with or without an inquiry and report
thereon), and the decision on the appeal shall have effect, accordingly.
44              c. 27       Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987


     Sc h . 5                               Sports grounds: emergency orders
                  7. The substitution effected by section 23 o f this Act of section 10 of the 1975
                Act shall not affect any order o f the court in force under that section when that
                substitution comes into force and any such order may be enforced, modified or
                cancelled, or an appeal made against it, accordingly.

                                     Entertainment licences for sports generally
                   8. Where the use of any premises for the purpose of an entertainment will, by
                virtue o f the amendments effected by section 42 o f this Act in the 1963 Act or by
                section 43 o f this Act in the 1982 Act, require to be covered by a licence, then, if
                an application for a licence to cover their use for that entertainment has been
                made (and not withdrawn) when the amendments come into force, the use o f the
                premises for that purpose shall continue to be lawful pending the disposal o f the
                application.
                  9. The amendment o f Schedule 1 to the 1982 Act effected by section 46 o f this
                Act does not apply as respects an application made before that section comes into
                force.

                                                  Boxing or wrestling licences
                    10. Any licence under paragraph 4 o f Schedule 12 to the 1963 Act covering the
                 use of premises for a boxing or wrestling entertainment which was granted before
                 the date o f the coming into force of the amendments effected by section 42 of (and
                 Schedule 3 to) this Act shall, if it relates to premises to which the paragraph 3A
                 inserted by that section applies—
                       (a) have effect as from that date as if granted under the paragraph 3A
                            inserted by those amendments by the Council on and subject to terms,
                            conditions and restrictions corresponding to those on and subject to
                            which it was held immediately before that date; and
                       (b) in the case of a licence granted or renewed for a specified period, remain
                            in force, subject to paragraphs 8, 10(4) and 18 o f the said Schedule 12,
                            for so much of that period as falls on or after that date.     _________
                                                 P R IN T E D IN E N G L A N D BY J A D O L E
                               C o ntroller a n d C h ie f Executive o f H e r M ajesty's Stationery Office an d
                                                    Q u een 's Printer o f Acts o f Parliam ent.
                                          R eprinted in the S tan d ard Parliam en tary Page Size.
                                                           1st Impression M ay 1987
                                                      2nd Impression N o vem ber 1988

                                    L O N D O N ; P U B L IS H E D BY H E R M AJEST Y’S STA TIO N E R Y O F F IC E


                                                             Price £5.10 net

                                                           I S B N 0 10 542787 X
                                                                       (5 42771)
