      s .8.9/Canada.peb
                                                HOME OFFICE
                                         Queen Anne's Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                                Direct line: 01-273 3322
                                               Switchboard: 01-273 3000


Our reference:
                                             9 August 1990
Your reference:



    The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
    Royal Courts of Justice
    The Strand
    LONDON     WC2




    Dear Lord Justice Taylor

    You may recall me as one of the faces on the other side of the
    table when the Home Office met you in connection with the second
    part of the Hillsborough Inquiry.

    I enclose a copy of a note which was sent by facsimile to the
    Home Office Press Office from the Hamilton-Wentworth Regional
    Police in Hamilton Ontario.   As you will see the note asks the
    Home Office for assistance in locating a guest speaker to make
    a presentation on the Hillsborough stadium disaster at a
    conference on disaster management which is being held from
    April 16 to April 19 1991. I gather that the first approach was
    made by telephone and our Press Office suggested that you should
    be invited.   Although I am happy to pass the invitation on to
    you, I am afraid that I have no knowledge about the precise
    expectation:   whether for example you would be invited for the
    whole of the conference or for how long you would be expected to
    speak.

    If you feel that you would like to attend the conference, may
    I suggest that your clerk establishes contact with the Canadians
    direct.  Perhaps he will let me know the outcome.

    If you feel unable or disinclined to attend please let me know.
    We may be able to find an alternative speaker, though not one who
    would speak with the same authority or perspective.

    I am slightly embarrassed that we have not written to you to keep
    you informed about the progress which has been made in
    implementing the recommendations in your final report on the
    Hillsborough Stadium disaster. You may therefore be interested
to see the enclosed copy of a reply to a Parliamentary Question
from Mr John Carlisle MP given by Mr Patten on 25 July. You may
have seen it reported that Mr Norman Jacobs will be the first
Chairman of the Football Licensing Authority.    (A press notice
about the appointment is enclosed.) Names of other members wilL
probably be announced next week.     The first Chairman of the
Advisory and Design Council is to be Mr D Gwilym M Roberts.
A copy of a Football League press notice about his appointment
is also enclosed.

                                        Yours sincerely




                                          IIjUA
                                        P E BOLTON
                                        (Fire and Emergency
                                        Planning Department)


Encs
HULj   U 1         1 _i • Ui_'   iU   fcJ r 1         D io ^ l   rK U l i   riWKr'   ril-i   .m .   j _ - w i -.i_i   m_."   "   '   ,'   r . tjc.




                   Hamilton-Wentworth Regional Police
                   155 King W illiam Street, EO.Bax 1060, Station A, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada, LAN 4C1 Ttetephane: (416)522-4925
                   Adm inistration Ruo (416)522'6953 Operations Fax (416)522-9199
 IJEgional
   po uce          Chief of Police Colin T. M illar




             August 1, 1990


             TO:     Rosemary Waugh
                     Home Office, Press Office
                     London, England


                                                RE:     HILLSBOROUGH SOCCER DISASTER


             The Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth is hosting its second National
             Conference on Disaster Management from April 16 to April 19th, 1991, in
             Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

             Our 1989 Conference was International in scope attracting over four
             hundred emergency responders and support people from across Canada, the
             United States, and abroad.      Our twenty-three speakers included actual
             Incident Commanders and specialists who were involved directly or
             indirectly with major disasters around the world ie: Ramsteln Germany air
             crash, Chernobyl nuclear disaster, Zeebrugge Ferry, etc.

             I am contacting the Home Office to ask for your assistance in locating a
             guest speaker to make a presentation on the Hillsborough Soccer Disaster.

             Your recommendation of Lord Justice Taylor is an excellent suggestion. We
             would be most honoured should he be able to attend.        All transportation,
             lodgings, meals and any fee would be paid by the Conference.

              We feel there are lessons to be learned from this tragedy and hope we can
              make the necessary arrangements.




              Gordon J. MacFarlane
              Staff Superintendent
              Operations Bureau
              Conference Chairman

              GJM:jd
