              with compliments




               THE LIBRARIAN
PEMBROKE COLLEGE • CAM BRIDGE
    Postcode       CB 2 i r f   Telephone:   ( 0223) 338100

Direct line ( 0 2 2 3 )                 Fax No: ( 0 2 2 3 )
An Environmental

              Grounds
  David Canter, Miriam Comber,
            and David L Uzzell
                   Fortw ofi%
 v. S     Sir Oliver Popplewei
FOOTBALL IN ITS PLACE
   FOOTBALL IN ITS
       PLACE
An environmental psychology o f football
              grounds


DAVID CANTER, MIRIAM COMBER,
     AND DAVID L. UZZELL




                  R
            ROUTLEDGE
         London and New York
                    First published 1989
                         by Routledge
          11 N ew F etter L ane, L ondon E C 4P 4EE
         29 W est 35th Street, N ew York, N Y 10001

© 1989 D avid C anter, M iriam C om ber, a n d D avid L. Uzzell
Phototypeset by In p u t T ypesetting L td, L ondon SW19 8D R
           Printed a n d bound in G reat B ritain by
            Biddles, Guildford an d K ings L ynn
      All rights reserved. No p a rt of this book m ay be
     reprinted or reproduced or utilized in any form or
    by any electronic, mechanical, or other m eans, now
    known or hereafter invented, including photocopying
       and recording, or in any inform ation storage or
    retrieval system, w ithout perm ission in w riting from
                        the publishers.
         British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data

                      C anter, D avid, 1944-
            Football in its place : an environm ental
                  psychology of football grounds
              1. G reat B ritain. Association football
         supporters. Behaviour. E nvironm ental factors
           I. T itle II. C om ber, M iria m II I . Uzzell,
               David L. (David L aw rence), 1951-
                               306'.483

                    ISB N 0-415-01240-6
                         CONTENTS




  List of tables and figures                vii
  Foreword by Sir Oliver Popplewell          xi
  Introduction: background and beginnings   xiii

1 FOUR THEM ES                                1

2 S P E C T A T O R S ’ V IE W S             22

:» C L U B C U L T U R E S                   57

4 C R O W D S A N D E M E R G E N C IE S     86

f) C O P IN G W IT H V IO L E N C E         103

6 T H E FIN A L SC O R E                    127

  Notes                                     166

  Index                                     170




                                      v
             TABLES AND FIGURES




figure 1.1   T otal Football League attendances over the p ast 24
             years.                                                        x
figure 1.2   R atio o f total arrests per 10,000 spectators, inside and
             outside the ground, over the past 10 years.                   x
Figure 2.1   Percentage o f yes and no answers to the question: “ D o / ,
             did you go regularly to the ground?”                         27
figure 2.2   Percentage responses to the question: “ H ow often d o /
             did you go to the ground?”                                    28
figure 2.3   Percentage w ho w atched their team last season.              29
figure 2.4   C om parison o f the percentage of lapsed and regular
             supporters w ho said they w ent to m ost gam es, a t each
             of ten clubs.                                                 33
figure 2.5   C om parison o f the percentage of lapsed and regular
             supporters w ho said it was all right to share the home
             ground, at each o f ten clubs.                                34
figure 2.6   C om parison o f the percentage o f lapsed and regular
             supporters w ho said an enjoyable gam e was more
             im p o rtan t th a n winning, a t each o f ten clubs.         35
figure 2.7   C om parison o f the percentage o f lapsed and regular
             supporters w ho said “ it’s all right to take the mickey” ,
             a t each o f ten clubs.                                       36
figure 2.8   C om parisons of the proportions w orried ab o u t safety
             at hom e and aw ay m atches, a t each of ten clubs.           39
Figure 2.9   C om parisons of the socio-economic status o f those who
             sit and those w ho stand - percentages of classes A,
             B, C l.                                                       43
Figure 2.10 Percentages of those who sit and those who stand who
            agree th a t an enjoyable gam e is m ore im p o rtan t than
            winning.                                                       44


                                    v ii
Figure 2.11 Percentages o f those w ho sit a nd those who stand who
            agree th a t “ I w ouldn’t be as critical o f physical
            violence a t a football m atch as I would be in other
            situations” .                                                  45
Figure 2.12 Percentages o f those w ho sit a nd those w ho stand who
            agree th a t “ I t ’s all right to take the mickey o ut of
            other sides’ football supporters” .                            46
Figure 2.13 Percentages o f those w ho sit a nd those who stand who
            would pay more for better facilities.                          47
Figure 2.14 Percentages of respondents, a t each of ten clubs, who
            w atch othe r team s and percentages w ho support
            m em bership schemes.                                          50
T able 2.1   T eam s w atched by m ore th an 3 per cent of each club’s
             supporters                                                    52
Figure 2.15 Percentages o f respondents, a t each o f ten clubs, who
            go/w ent to m ost m atches w ho agree/disagree w ith
            m em bership card schemes.                                     53
Figure 2.16 Percentages o f respondents, a t each o f ten clubs, who
            agree w ith the statem ent: “ I t ’s all right to take the
            mickey out o f other sides’ football supporters” , who
            agree/disagree w ith m em bership card schemes.                54
Figure 2.17 Percentages of respondents, a t each o f ten clubs, who
            think it would be w orth paying a little m ore if facilities
            at the ground were better, w ho agree/disagree with
            m em bership card schemes.                                     55

Figure 3.1   Percentages of respondents w ho go to m ost games,
             com pared across ten clubs.                                   59
Figure 3.2   Percentages o f respondents w ho go to aw ay gam es, at
             each of ten clubs.                                            60
Figure 3.3   Percentages of respondents w ho hold season tickets, at
             each o f ten clubs.                                           61
Figure 3.4   Percentages o f respondents w ho have seen their team
             play abroad, a t each o f ten clubs.                          62
Figure 3.5   Percentages of respondents who norm ally stand, at
             each o f ten clubs.                                           65
T able 3.1   Ratings given to the physical conditions a t each ground      66
Figure 3.6   Percentages of respondents w ho think the ground is
             comfortable, a t each o f ten clubs.                          67
Figure 3.7   Percentages o f respondents w ho think conditions are
             above average, a t each o f ten clubs.                        68




                                                                                L
      I i«mv 3.8     Percentages of respondents w ho think th at
                     im provem ents are needed, at each o f ten clubs.               69
45    1'iKurc 3.9    Percentages o f respondents w ho agreed th a t they heard
                     a lot o f obscene language, and percentages who were
                     w orried by any b ad language, a t each o f ten clubs.          71
46    l iKiirc 3.10 Percentages o f respondents w ho agree “ there are a lot
                     o f racist shouts or c h an ts” , and w ho agree “ the racist
                     shouts or chants do w orry m e” , a t each o f ten clubs.       73
47
      l .tl.lc 3.2   Percentage o f regular supporters from the ten clubs
                     agreeing w ith each o f three statem ents                       77
50    Table 4.1      Sequence o f events a t B radford City football ground
                     fire                                                            99

52



53




54




55


59


60


61


62


65
66

67


 68
Figure 1.1 : Total Football League attendances over the past 24 years.
            40000 -




            30000-




            20000-




            10000-




                 1900            1966            1970          1975

Note: Overall attendances at football league matches over the 24 years from
      1961 to 1985 have dropped from the peak of around 29 million in the
      late sixties, w hen England held the w orld cup, to around 18 million in
      recent years. The attendances have fallen off most steeply from the
      beginning o f the eighties.


Figure 1.2: Ratio of total arrests per 10,000 spectators, inside and outside the
            ground, over the past 10 years.


                                                                             •A




                      75*7 8 -   76-77   77-78     78*79    79-80    80-81   81-82   82-83   83-84   84-85
                                                     Eleven London clubs

Note: Ratio of total arrests per 10,000 spectators, inside and outside football
      grounds of eleven London football clubs over the ten years from 1975 to
      1985. The steady increase in arrests outside grounds is apparent despite
      the variation in arrests within the grounds. This variation relates to
      legislation in the early seventies (applying to first division clubs),
      and the late seventies (applying to other clubs), requiring stricter
      controls on football grounds. The legislation was brought in as a result
      of m ajor incidents at football matches.
                   FOREWORD
                         by
               Sir Oliver Popple well




W hen I was asked to conduct the enquiry into the fire disaster at
 Bradford and the outbreak of violence in the L eeds-B irm ingham
match, I had little or no knowledge of the psychology of football.
 Happily David C a n te r was invited to provide and did provide me
with a wealth of evidence on all aspects o f the game which was a
major contribution to our understanding of the problems confront­
ing football.
   This book is a comprehensive work which deserves to be read
and digested not only by fellow researchers, bu t by a wider public
audience which has an interest in the game of football. T here is no
subject upon which people talk with such confidence and so little
knowledge, or where the gap between fact and fiction is so great.
   As David C a n ter points out the strands which go to m ake up the
fabric of football are m any and varied. T here is the interrelation
of the spectators with their differing backgrounds and separate
environments; of the grounds with differing facilities and separate
histories; of the m anagem ent varying in quality and outlook; o f the
players contributing through their skill and behaviour to reaction
on the terraces; o f the police whose handling of problems is funda­
mental to the exercising of control; and of the government interven­
ing only in moments of crisis (what David C anter calls regulation
by crisis).
   All these factors affect the psychology of the game. It is a particu­
larly interesting statistic th at spectators generally think their ground
is comfortable or quite comfortable. I confess th at when standing
                             FOREWORD


on the terraces in the rain on a W ednesday evening in February
during my enquiry I did not share th at view. Perhaps I would have
m ade a poor statistic. But facts and figures are im portant in any
“ in d e p th ” enquiry in this field and they are well deployed.
    T he scientific approach adopted in this book lays bare the myths
with which we are fed by the media. T h e subject of hooliganism is
a constant topic for discussion, with instant remedies and wild
headlines. Historically lthe m atter is put in perspective. Remedies
are suggested which the authorities would do well to heed. I f past
experience is anything to go by, they will not. T h ere is one worrying
statistic relating to the num bers of police required every week not
ju s t inside the ground b ut in the town both before and after the
game and in the elaborate military-style planning at a higher level
which is involved throughout the year.
    O ne question which needs to be asked is w hether such an enor­
 mous expenditure of police resources can any longer be justified
 simply to enable a m inute proportion of the community to attend
 a function run by a private organization for profit. D uring my
 enquiry we were told that, in one county, between one third and
 one half of the whole police force was deployed on a Saturday
 afternoon when there was a football m atch on. How long can this
 situation continue?
    O n e club we visited (who shall be nameless) had however cured
 their hooligan problem. O n the first occasion of trouble the spectator
 was pu t out of the ground. O n the second occasion he was brought
 back in and forced to w atch the game!
    No one however could be bored with this excellent and well
 researched book and it is a m ajor contribution to the subject. It
 gives me great pleasure to have been invited to write the foreword.
              INTRODUCTION:
             BACKGROUND AND
                BEGINNINGS




            Duas tantum res anxius optat, panem et circenses
     (He longs for only two things - bread and the big match)
           Juvenal, O f the Citizen these Days, circa AD 100




                    H E R IT A G E AND BEY O N D
T he world’s most popular team sport, football, grew out of medieval
village melees in which two groups struggled with each other to
move a leather-covered bladder to a place defended by their
opponents. M any different local groups took part, perhaps the most
intriguing being the annual m atch between the m arried women and
the spinsters of Cross of Scone in Scotland, in which the spinsters,
i( seems, were usually badly defeated.
    T hese melees tended to happen as m ajor com m unal events on
annual feast days, most usually on Shrove Tuesday, which was then
a day of festival before a fast. So, the occurence of the m ajor national
football finals in the early spring, places them quite close in the
n ilend ar to their archaic forebears.
    The exuberant social qualities of these mediaeval festivities did,
also, a t times go beyond the limits the authorities were prepared to
tolerate. O ne of the earliest docum ented annual games, played in
Chester and possibly dating back to R om an times, was stopped in
I lie M iddle Ages because it had become so violent; it was replaced
with a running m atch. Yet the interest in these com m unal compe­
titions grew, so th at by 1365 Edw ard I I I prohibited football because
lie feared it was distracting youth from pastimes seen as being of
more military importance, such as archery.
                            INTRODUCTION


   However, w hat is particularly noteworthy about the early con­
tests, out of which present-day football grew, is that they were very
firmly located in both a com m unity an d a physical location. Indeed
for m any centuries the rules of the games played were so specific
to the p articular village and the p articular places in which they
were played that matches between groups from different areas were
virtually unknown. T hu s on the famous occasion in 1823, when
W illiam W ebb Ellis, contrary to local rules, carried the ball in a
game a t Rugby school, thereby inventing Rugby football, his actions
were merely characteristic of the confusions of the day, when it was
still not established whether the ball could be handled or not.
   It was only with the evolution o f different types of football and
the codification of the rules in the m id-nineteenth century that
games between teams from different localities became possible. As
a consequence, the game changed from being essentially a parochial
pastime. It had unfolded according to local possibilities and predi­
lections, in which the young and active of the com m unity could all
take part. I t now became the special preserve o f a team that could
represent the com m unity in competition with those from other
places. T hus spectactors an d players became distinct.
   W ith the advent of professional football there was an obvious
need to create special places in which spectators could w atch and
where teams could play on a reliable pitch. This brought a further
stage in the separation from each other of the various groups
involved in football. It also started the distancing of the football
club from the local com m unity out of which it had grown. W here
originally a village would take p a rt in an annual festival, there
developed the m anagem ent, training and organisation of a specially
selected group of individuals to take p a rt in a competition of more
im portance for its national than for its local significance.
   O f especial significance is the way this development generates a
new class of performer in the football enterprise: the paying spec­
tator. Yet the basic organisation o f football is built around w hat
happens on the field of play. T h e team m anager, like the theatrical
director, is seen as the most significant figure. But the theatre has
had centuries of development th a t has lead to a great variety of
different building forms, and the development o f an astute un der­
standing of how to woo the audience. At m any footballing events
in Britain it is still possible to feel th at you are little removed from
the medieval days, when you might have stood on a hill overlooking


                                  x iv
                                     INTRODUCTION


Dn-       I lie village green watching the spinsters try to force a leather-covered
ery       Madder past the m arried women of the parish. T he im portant
:cd       diflcrence, though, is that it is not your village, your sister is not
lfic      amongst the players and you have been charged half a day’s pay
le y      Id stand in the rain and watch.
ere          T he most im portant message to take from this potted history of
le n      football is th at players and spectators, m anagers and supporters
n a       and all the other different groups associated with professional foot­
ons       ball, have come into existence because of the way football has
ivas     developed from its very early origins as a team gam e into its present
         status as a m ajor spectator sport. T h e fragm entation this has prod­
ind       uced is at the heart of the problems football faces as a commercial
hat      enterprise. I t is the very existence o f these different groups, removed
 As      from their com m unity and from their followers, that makes the
tiial    study of the present-day experience o f football, and the places in
edi-     which it is played, so im portant.
  all        T he shouts an d jeers that are expected in a football crowd, the
 uld     terraces and the pie stalls, the team heroes and mascots, scarves
.her     and banners, are all a natural p art o f its origins in village melees.
         But as so often happens, it can take decades, or even centuries, for
ous      a popular activity to change its nature to accom m odate changes in
and      the society around it. It is often only when there is some sort of
ther     public outcry that the pressures build up for a radical re-examin­
 ups     ation of activities previously taken for granted. In writing this book
ball     we think that football is reaching the point at which it will be able
here     to respond to the necessary reappraisals.
here         W e believe th a t the source for such appraisals is in a close con­
 ally    sideration of the actual experience of going to a football match.
lo r e   This experience is linked to a particular set of activities and a
         specific location, which provides a secondary focus for the book.
es a         We will use our focus on football to illustrate the contributions
pec-     o f a perspective th at studies the hum an implications of the physical
vhat     environment. This approach, known as environmental psychology, has
rical    m atured over the past few years through an exam ination o f build­
 has     ings such as hospitals, offices, schools and the wider environment.
y of     Only recently have environm ental psychologists begun to look at
 der­    more informal places - settings for leisure activities. Football stadia,
 ents    then, do provide an interesting context in which to explore further
from     this approach.
king


                                           xv
                           INTRODUCTION



                      READY T O R E SPO N D
T h e prim ary reason why professional football may now respond to
an environmental psychological analysis is that it has received a
great deal of media attention over the last few seasons, usually
because of failings in the way it has been m anaged or its spectators
have behaved. A few social scientists have acknowledged this atten ­
tion and recognised th at the terraces provide a rich field for
research.1
    As seems inevitable these days, like m uch social science research,
the research agenda is indirectly set by politicians and the media.
T he research that is the focus o f this book is in that tradition. It
em anated from a request from Sir O liver Popplewell to provide
evidence for his Com m ittee of Inquiry into Crowd Safety and C o n ­
trol at Sports G rounds.2 This was set up in the afterm ath of the
disastrous events of the early sum m er of 1985 w hen fire broke out
at Bradford City Football C lub, a wall collapsed at the Birmingham
City ground and fighting between fans in Heysel Stadium led to
m any deaths. Yet from our initial contacts with the official inquiry
it became clear to us th a t there was a need to examine our national
sport with a broader perspective than that provided in dealing
directly with those tragic events.
    W e are aware th at present-day professional football, like all other
uses of particular places, is founded on a mixture of frequently
contradictory objectives. W e are also aware th at the divisions we
have outlined between players, m anagers and spectators provide an
implicit challenge to the view th at opinions on football are the
prerogative of the spokesmen of the football associations. W e posed
the question as to w hat the public, the spectators, think about
football and the facilities at football grounds. W e argue that the
future of football m ust lie with its consumers and that it is to them
th at we should turn for a fuller understanding of the predicaments
it faces.
    O u r investigations posed a num b er of questions: W hat, for exam ­
ple, do spectators think about the facilities a t football grounds? Are
 they comfortable during matches? W h a t sort of event or occasion
are spectators looking for when they go to a football match? W hat
 is the typical experience o f visiting a football ground? Do they feel
 safe from violence or accidents? W here in the ground is safest? How
 racist is the crowd and do political groups provoke violence? And


                                   xvi
                                     INTRODUCTION


          « h a t of lapsed supporters, those people who were regular visitors
          in grounds until a year or so ago, b ut who have now stopped
d to      attending? W ho are these people? W hy did they w ithdraw their
ed a      uipport? Are their perceptions of football and the football experience
lally     ilillrrent from those of supporters still attending?
itors
tten-
                             A P S Y C H O L O G IC A L V IE W
  for
           \\V came to this book not essentially as journalists or football
irch,     riilhusiasts (although we have and do play both roles on occasion)
sdia.     l>u( as psychologists. W e see ourselves as scientists arm ed with
a. It     theories and m ethods th a t allow us to explore the social and environ­
ivide     mental processes that structure hum an actions and experiences. It
Gon-      luts been our concern to set our analysis and comments within
f the     aii essentially social and environm ental psychological framework.
: out     Hrcause environm ental psychology is the study of how people relate
 ham      to and interact with their environment, it is especially applicable to
:d to     <111 investigation of h um an behaviour in a clearly defined type of
juiry     place such as a sports stadium . Issues ranging from the siting of
ional     • rush barriers and the optim um width o f exits to the symbolism of
aling     having fans segregated into recognisable territories are all p a rt of
          the dom ain of environm ental psychology. Environm ental psy­
D th er   chology also draws heavily on its older cousin, social psychology.
e n tly   This has been addressing issues such as group polarisation, stereo­
is we     typing, segregation an d competitiveness for over half a century now.
ie an      There is also m uch we already know about changing attitudes and
e th e    behaviour, the discussion of which m ust be a t the centre of any
Dosed     informed policy for the future of British football.
ibout         In order to develop o ur argum ent and acquire evidence that
t th e    would test and illustrate it, several sources of information have been
th em     used. Accounts o f all incidents at football m atches, in Britain and
n en ts   overseas, which have occurred since 1972 were examined. T hese
          include fire emergencies, walls collapsing and violent incidents. In
xam-      some cases, such as the Bradford fire and the collapse of a wall at
? Are     Birmingham City, very detailed information was available. In other
asion     cases, however, there has been very little docum entation o f the
W hat     incident.
y feel        We were also able to spend some time with the Fulham division
 How      of the M etropolitan Police. T h ro ugh their friendly and instructive
 And      co-operation we were able to observe in detail the preparation for,
                           INTRODUCTION


and policing of, matches. N aturally, this also involved discussions
with the police and with m any people involved in the m anagem ent
and control o f the games. We are very grateful to all concerned for
their kind and willing help.
   T he Red Cross and the St Jo h n A m bulance Brigade also kindly
let us have their figures for casualties at football matches, which
include both injuries caused by violence and the types of casualty
which may occur a t any large gathering of people, such as other
large sports, leisure or political events. T hese statistics were used
in conjunction with figures on arrests to give an outline picture of
the extent of disorder a t various matches. T o these two organisations
we also wish to record our thanks.


                           T H E SU R V EY
 An examination of emergencies th at have occurred in public places
 and the patterns of behaviour associated with them gives an essen­
 tially objective, external account of actions in stressful, dangerous
 situations. It throws into high relief dram atic episodes and particu­
 lar, extreme incidents. Yet millions of people attend hundreds of
 football games in Britain each year. Very, very few of these are
 m arred by any unpleasant incidents at all. But the objective facts
 are not w hat influences people’s actions. It is their understanding
 and interpretation of the facts that is significant to them. So, we
 considered it im portant to get at least a glimpse of spectators’ own
views on safety and conditions a t the grounds they visit.
    O u r largest single source of information was a survey which
canvassed the views of nearly 1,000 supporters at ten clubs across
the U nited K ingdom in both the Football League and the Scottish
League. T h e survey and its findings are central to later chapters.
T h e views and experience of supporters are obviously im portant
and yet often ignored. W e owe a special debt of gratitude to the
Popplewell Inquiry for recognising the im portance of the spectators’
perspective and so supporting our survey.
   Finally, and not unim portantly, we have been attending football
matches for over twenty years. I t would be difficult not to stand on
the terraces w ithout looking a t the spectators, place and activities
through professional eyes as psychologists. This has necessarily
contributed to our perceptions and conclusions.



                                x v iii
                                           Chapter One

.cussions
agement                         FOUR THEMES
;rned for

so kindly
s, which
 casualty
 as other
 ere used
licture of
nisations

                              W H A T IS F O O T B A L L ’S PLACE?

              lo our title for this book we draw attention to the need to think
              «Ih>uI where professional football happens - not ju s t its physical
 ic places
              I<
               h   rtiion, although we are giving that m uch more attention th an it
an essen-
              xMi.tlly receives, but we are also considering its place in the lives
angerous
              • ils supporters and in the com m unity that houses it.
  parti cu-
                  We know that the title to this book is ambiguous. I t could imply
ldreds of
              tlutl we wish to p u t football firmly in some obscure place th at m any
these are
              ttirty argue it deserves. O r our title could, with equal force, suggest
tive facts
              ilull professional football should be given the pride of place that
-standing
              would reflect its significance. O u r argum ent is that the problems
l. So, we
              iliiil beset British football could lead in either direction. I f it is to
tors’ own
              Ijiow in a positive direction, then, it is essential to understand w hat
              jiiospccts its environm ent —its social and physical context —has to
:y which
              nllrr.
bs across
: Scottish
chapters,                                   Four Themes
m portant
de to the      Hie place of football, then, includes the concrete and metal that
Dcctators’    mnkc up football stadia and house the grounds and their facilities.
              11 includes the location of those facilities within the metropolitan
g football    or urban community. But, more im portantly, it includes the percep­
 stand on     tion and attitudes of those who support, or might support, football,
activities    tlie position they assign the game and their experience of watching
ecessarily    il. A better understanding of spectators’ views is, therefore, one of
              (he themes of our study.
                 A second them e is th at each football club evolves its own culture. i_


                                                  1
                       FOOTBALL IN ITS PLACE


 This derives from recognising that when looking a t the location of
 football in a com m unity of interested parties such as supporters and
 m anagers, or in a physical community such as Chelsea or Everton,             Hi
 there will be im portant differences between and within those com­         hI |
 munities. These different cultures need to be taken account of in          •fc* |
 discussing w hat actions should be taken and by whom.                      if**
    T he challenge of football comes in its ability to attrac t regularly
 lar£c_.-9Lowds of people. I t is therefore also typically positioned in    fcwrtl
 people’s minds next to considerations about the behaviour of large         «**(<
 crowds and the need to m anage them. This aspect of the particular         Ml
 qualities of the experience of w atching football requires special
 consideration and so forms the essence of the third theme to our
 book.                                                                      «MI
   W hen football crowds contain violent elements, the particular           •mmt
 physical qualities of a crowded football stadium and the place that          A
football takes in people’s m jnds create a powerful combination. A          • in
negative spiral of thoughts and actions may then be set in motion.
Football is shunted into a corner for those who will tolerate violence,     *Mt«l
and it is difficult for it to obtain a better place thereafter. Coping      •«*l
with violence therefore is our fourth theme. I t is not our first because   • »IU
the' problem of the violence associated with football has to be seen        ***•
as p a rt of the general context in which football operates. I f all
violence were to stop a t football matches we think it unlikely that
football would regain all its lost supporters, b u t until such violence
is stopped it is unlikely that football will be able to put itself on       •M m
target to regain the pride of place it held in earlier years.                   I
                                                                            f*«i4

              E N V IR O N M E N T A L PS Y C H O L O G Y                   • mm
                                                                            0*m
Central to our approach through the field of environmental psy­             %**il
chology is the idea that our physical surroundings are relevant to          *m*>*
our actions and well-being, but usually not in any clear an d direct        w<f •
way. I t is the unravelling of these indirect processes that makes this     •m
such a difficult yet im portant topic for study.                            W it
   M any of the processes th at can be seen operating in football can
also be seen in m any other places of public entertainm ent in other             I*
areas of our cities. So, in focusing on football, we can touch on           •Mfh
themes of a more general kind as well and perhaps help prevent              itlxfiw
other sports, like cricket or rugby, from drifting the way of football.     x*W«


                                   2
                                           FOUR THEMES


cation of      M*»iy of the principles that emerge w hen considering football are
rters and      *(mi very useful for looking at other socially im portant issues.
Everton,          Hr lore considering some of the general principles of environmen-
ose com-       »*l psychology, however, it is necessary to emphasise th at despite
unt of in           general relevance of the study of football grounds, there is one
               *!«•< ui I difficulty in writing about football and its place in our lives
 regularly     •ml communities: many, m any more people have seen snippets of
 tioned in     ftiMitlmll matches on television th an have ever been to a football
r of large     Mutch. Although only 1 in 20 men go to a football m atch within
aarticular     »ity tfivcn m onth, 2 out of 3 British men w atch a football m atch on
:s special     «*lrvixion in th at time. Further, even though it is less than 1 in 100
ne to our      women who go to a football m atch in a m onth, half of all British
               women adm it to having w atched a m atch on television during that
aarticular     O iiir.1
Diace that        A m ajor international m atch m ay be seen on television by at least
nation. A       I in 3 of the population. 23.7 million people in Britain watched
n motion,       t.ngland play Argentina in the 1986 W orld C up. T h e W orld C up
  violence,     Ikmtl is probably seen by 1 person in 5 of the population of the
r. Coping       world. Football is as m uch a central p a rt of the culture of our global
it because      v illiige as Ja m e s Bond and Coca Cola. Its m ajor heroes, w hether it
 o be seen      »      Stanley M atthew s, Dixie D ean, Bobby C harlton or Pele in the
tes. I f all    |mnt, Lineker or Diego M arrad o n n a now, have a following that
ikely that      |M»liticians aspire to and salaries of which even barristers can only
ti violence     dream. So, most of us think we know about football from the highly
t itself on     diluted, indirect yet vivid accounts we have h ad of it.
                    The professional accounts of football present a com plem entary
               .problem to the researcher. T h e people who write about football
                (mid m any o f the people who have studied it) are enthusiasts. T heir
                views are inevitably coloured by their own particular desires for the
                game. So, if we w ant to throw any new light on the problems British
ental psy-      football is facing it is essential to disentangle the m any threads that
elevant to      come together a t and around football matches. M ost importantly,
in d direct     we must try to establish some scientific principles on which to base
nakes this      our considerations. Otherw ise the discussion will continue on the
                basis o f opinion and supposition with vested interest distorting the
otball can      argument.
it in other         In the usual public debate particular aspects of the problem are
  touch on      highlighted by specific incidents. T hen , general myths th at grow
 p prevent      from saloon b a r discussions are used to elaborate those ideas. F ur­
)f football.    ther, there is no evidence that the central authorities o f international


                                                    3
                        FOOTBALL IN ITS PLACE


football work any more systematically in coming to their con­                   *»4|Wf
 clusions. N ewspaper outrage appears, on occasion, to be enough to
 stim ulate rapid reaction such as the banning of British teams from            *«*<lll
 European competition.                                                          I          M
    O u r approach is rather different to this. W e have tried to consider
football as an aspect o f h um an behaviour and experience in a
particular type of place. T his has enabled us to draw upon a scien­                 W li
tific, psychological approach. This has a num b er of distinguishing            • • M ir *
characteristics.
    First of all, a scientific psychological analysis attem pts to work
with forms of explanation that are draw n from as clear a definition            <«(■%*«•s
as possible of w hat the various constituents mean. It also attem pts           <“ **llll
to provide a logically consistent account of the relationships between          •-Mll I
the various constituents. So, the notion o f a crowd or a hooligan is           ■ »«l«iu
not taken as having an obvious incontrovertible meaning. Instead,                   tlwin

an attem p t is m ade to be as clear as possible as to how these terms
are being used and w hat they are being taken to mean. In the                        V |r
present book we shall try to avoid the often pedantic style that is             >*«<>»

almost inevitable when a full scientific discourse of everyday m atters                  lltll

is involved; but we will none the less endeavour to draw upon such              ■lw I «<
a background and m ake it as clear as possible to the reader.                            lilt
   T h e second distinguishing characteristic of a psychological focus
is the type o f evidence on which the research scientist draws. This             i M>(r

is usually graced with the term ‘d a ta ’. W hat this means is th at a          • t I m' I i

systematic, precise and organised account of w hat is being used to
defend the argum ents and viewpoints is p u t forward. W herever                I- *.«mi
possible such evidence is in the publicly available domain. In other                         I
words it is not personal opinion. It may be based upon a sum m ary              Aim I f *

of the opinions that m any people hold, but in this case the sum m ary
is derived from a systematic exploration o f those opinions. In this                     i« i.
sense it is open to public view because any researcher could establish          ■«*i$ ii>
w hether or not he or she would be able to obtain a similar set of                       ( t><
opinions if approaching people in the same way.
   W hat differentiates new spaper fact-gathering from psychological                I*
‘d a ta ’ is th a t in the latter a large sam ple of people is systematically
asked for its views using unbiased questions. Newspapers only ask                V ••***<
a few people for their views, and the questions they ask will deter­
mine the answers they receive. Newspapers will report w hat they
w ant to report and will select evidence to fit the story and argum ent
they are putting forward. In this way certain groups can become


                                     4
                                         FOUR THEMES


:ir con-     •« A|n'goats to feed the popular imagination. For example, if some
ough to      l«o|»lc on the way to a football m atch are involved in a fight, the
ns from      itr millines may emphasise ‘Football Hooligans in Pre-M atch Fracas’.
              I lie social scientist would w ant to be sure th at football played some
consider     MKiiificant p a rt in the fight before giving the activity the ‘football
ce in a      IxHiligan’ label.
a scien-         W hat is said in newspapers may, of course, be used as data. W hat
^uishing     witnesses say to the police or results that come from participant
             ••l>»ervation or the analysis of interview records or questionnaire
to work      <r*ponses all provide d ata based on views and opinions. These,
:finition    however, are treated as information which is open to systematic,
 ttem pts    Mirntific exam ination and analysis. Again, the full technicalities of
between      m i i 'I i analyses require a certain sophistication in statistical pro-

jligan is    ii ilures and so we shall avoid presenting the details in the present
Instead,     Milume. However, we will be draw ing upon such analyses in devel­
se terms     oping o ur case.
   In the        Science, of course, like all other h u m an endeavours is not free of
; th at is   <n or or of hu m an foible. T h e difference is th a t the errors are
 matters     identifiable. T he controllable foibles are usually revealed through
 on such     ilir course o f open debate am ongst scientists.
r.               This scientific process is frequently misunderstood. T he image
:al focus     presented in the m edia and often presented at school is th at science
n s . This   it solely about the collection of ‘facts’. T h e am assing of d ata is seen
s th at a     it* being the very essence of scientific activity. This is quite mistaken,
  used to     lor although d ata are im portant to science, w hether it be natural
Wherever      tcience or social science, the data are only a means to an end. T he
In other     objective of all science is to develop systems o f explanation th at can
um m ary      lie tested against the facts. In a word, science is concerned with
um m ary      theories. Social science develops theories about social behaviour.
. In this          It follows, therefore, th at the most appropriate way of sum m aris­
establish     ing the results of a nu m ber o f years of environm ental psychology is
ar set of     10 give an account of the general principles that have emerged from
              these studies. T his is m uch m ore helpful in understanding the place
lological     ol' football than recounting all the d a ta that have been collected;
natically     .ilthough, as will become ap parent, we did collect a substantial
only ask      ipiantity o f data to help us develop and test these ideas in the
ill deter-    context of football.
h at they
rgum ent
  become


                                                  5
                       FOOTBALL IN ITS PLACE


                   D IF F E R IN G P E R S P E C T IV E S                   • I il


  O ne of the most common findings o f environm ental psychological           W
  research has been the difference in perspective th at different people    lw««
 can have on the same place. School teachers see their schools very
 differently from the way their pupils see them. Teachers may com­          Itff*
 m ent on a cram ped classroom, where children will only notice a           m hf
 spacious playground. Architects think and talk about most buildings        '• »*«

 in ways th at are different from the people who actually use those         mu
 buildings. T hey will see the form and interplay of spaces where           i4 ti
 users will see something th at is ju s t big and draughty. Ask a keen      H (Il

 fisherman to talk about the Norfolk Broads and contrast th a t with
 w hat a yachtsm an tells you about the same place and you would
 think they are each describing completely different places.
    T h e point about all these different viewpoints is th at they com p­
 lement one another. T h ere is no definitive basis on which it is          » ***
                                                                            M> II
 possibly to say th a t some are right and some are wrong.
                                                                            Ik # )
    T he differing views derive from different types of contact with
 the place. I f anyone wishes to understand w hat the experience of
                                                                            Hh*l
w atching football is all about, how it m ight be improved or changed,
                                                                            ("ill
then it is not enough to discuss this with a few friends or even to
ask a num ber of ‘experts’. I t is essential to question systematically
                                                                            mu
a variety of different groups involved, and most im portantly to reach      |Ui|(
the group whose views are least often canvassed - the spectators            (l*<l
themselves. T his type of consum er research can be rem arkably
                                                                            m *r
revealing if carried out in an ap propriate way.
                                                                            mi|n
    We shall describe in some detail in later chapters the survey we        Itaxi
conducted o f ‘lapsed’ and ‘regular’ supporters, b ut it is w orth noting      I'
here a few of the benefits o f carrying out a survey irrespective of        lN#Vf
w hat is done with the results. O ne of them is the direct public           •liai
relations value of m aking consumers of a service aw are that the
providers o f the service are indeed interested in their reaction.          Will
Simply doing the survey, quite independently of its results, may            •»|»i
therefore be beneficial.                                                    w»
   A second benefit is th a t the act o f carrying out such a study does    *>«•»»»
reveal current understanding of who should be approached and                (wtir
why. O u r initial overtures to some club m anagem ent revealed their         HI
belief that they were already in contact with spectators through the
officials o f their supporters’ club. This indicated to us an ignorance     ■**»«


                                    6
                                         FOUR THEMES


             ol die likely differences between members o f the supporters’ club
             iiiid m any other spectators.
hological        Wc also found that in undertaking our particular study we
i t people   liccame aw are of the great variety of people who have an interest
ools very    mi w hat goes on in football grounds. Probably the biggest surprise

lay com-     here was the very large police involvement in football. It is only
 notice a    when you go behind the scenes, and begin to add up the num bers,
Duildings    that it becomes a p p a re n t that there is a huge adm inistrative police
ise those    ny.stcm in existence solely to deal with football crowds. T h e police,
es where     of course, do have their own particular perspective as well and this
k a keen     Ih draw n upon throughout subsequent chapters.
 hat with
 u would                        S Y M B O L IC S IG N IF IC A N C E
             Knvironmental psychologists have also draw n attention to the
:y comp-
             powerful ways in which our surroundings carry implications, not
 ich it is
             1 0 much through their direct effects on us as through the meanings
             dicy convey. M ost of us can look a t a place and form a view as to
act with
             die type o f person who m ight be found in th at place, w hat they are
rience of
             likely to do there and why. W ithin these patterns o f associations,
:hanged,
             judgments can be m ade about the status of those involved and
  even to
             ahout the nature of their involvement with the activities being
natically    curried out. A surprising variety of other informed guesses and
 to reach    judgments about places, the activities and people they house, is also
nectators    frequently made. Let us emphasise th at these judgm ents are not
narkably     necessarily correct. T hey m ay well be systematically wrong. T he
             im portant point is th at they are m ade, frequently with great convic­
irvey we     tion, an d therefore people frequently act on those judgm ents.
 h noting        For example, consider a large industrial factory with its u nre­
ective of    lieved concrete an d iron supports, its flights of stairs leading to
:t public    draughty workshops and its generally dull appearance. C ontrast
 that the    dial with a bright superm arket full of gaily packaged goods with
reaction.    Koft music and well-dressed staff. Now, w hat do you think will be
Its, may     typical o f the people in these different settings? T h eir age, style,
             »ex, how they feel about things and how they treat each other will be
ady does     assumed to be different. It is even possible to show that judgm ents of
hed and      potential inhabitants vary with quite small differences in the build-
led their    iug details. In one study carried out m any years ago, people were
Dugh the     itliown pictures of private offices and asked to guess w hat the people
jnorance     were like who used those offices.2 It was found th at the pleasantness


                                                 7
                           FOOTBALL IN ITS PLACE


    o f the possible occupant was ju d g ed to be higher if the room had
    a sloping ceiling rather than a flat ceiling.
        M arket research and consum er research organisations have long
    known about the possible implications o f the implicit messages that
    the physical environm ent carries to its users. T hey know w hat are
    regarded as masculine colours and designs, w hat is up-m arket and
    w hat is not. T here is often more hearsay than science in their
    approach bu t at least the environm ent is considered. We are not
    aw are of any such considerations being consciously acted on in the
    majority of British football clubs.
         This is not to say that people’s judg m ents on the relevance or
      influence of design are necessarily accurate. T hey may be very wide
      of the mark, bu t this will not influence how strongly they are held.
      M ore im portantly it is often the case th at beliefs influence what
      people do rath er than any notionally ‘objective’ facts.
         T aking these two principles of environm ental psychology serves
      to show why the spectators’ perspectives are so im portant. It is
      almost certain th at their perspectives will differ from that o f m any
      other groups involved with football and that these differences will
      relate as m uch to symbolic or subjective aspects of football grounds
      and m atches as to any overt observations.
\ j      ^ follows that the key to the future of professional football is in
 : | w hat spectators think about w atching m atches and w hat they think
    | about the places in which it is played. I t is these spectators who
I • form views o f the facilities, who feel welcome or not and who accept
 V Sor create the patterns of activities associated with w atching the
      game.
       W hen you consider the im portance o f understanding the variety
   o f viewpoints people hold; when you recognise the fact that sup­
   porters are likely to view a club very differently from its m anage­
   ment; when you realise that the m anagem ent itself is likely to think
   about the club differently from the way the police do, or the way
   in which Football Association officials do, then it is surprising how
   little attention has been paid to spectators’ perspectives on football.
   I t is assumed th a t because club directors w atch a m atch and may
   once themselves have been spectators on the terraces that they
   implicitly understand w hat all groups of spectators w ant, even those
   groups from whom football clubs would plan to attract more paying
   customers in the future. Yet the problems o f football discussed
                            FOUR THEMES


rarlier suggest th a t club m anagem ents may not understand fully
spectators’ requirem ents or how to go about satisfying them.


               D IF F E R E N C E S B E T W E E N CLU BS
The different perspectives do not develop in isolation. T hey are part
of a set of interrelated factors including the environm ent and culture
of which the person is a part. In effect, ju s t as a group of plants
and anim als will develop into a balanced system, an ecology, so
 hum an groups form p a rt of a system o f interrelated perspectives.
This can lead to im portant differences between different football
clubs. As a consequence we need to understand the ways in which
the whole atm osphere, or ‘culture’, of clubs may differ.
   So far, we have considered football and football clubs as if they
were one am orphous, homogeneous mass. A lthough they do have
certain characteristics in common there are m any differences
between them. After all, British football clubs are nam ed after the
local com m unity in which they grew up. For a long time players
were actually draw n from that local com m unity and aspiring pro­
fessional footballers would only think of playing for their local, home
team. As the game became more competitive the m anagem ent of
clubs became more overtly commercial so this local focus became
less apparent. Players now m ay not even be nationals of the country
in which they play.
   Like m arket stalls and local concert halls that once were very
much a showcase for the skills, crafts and talents o f the local com­
munity, football clubs have now become p art o f a national and
international m arket o f footballing commodities. O ne can see the
sponsoring o f clubs by m ajor international companies almost as
part o f the strange ‘futures’ market. T hey are investing in an antici­
pated future success which will give kudos to their firm by associ­
ation. But the local context has not disappeared entirely. In some
clubs it is more a pparent than in others but all still have their own
particular ethos. Associated with that are differences in attitudes
and in the general behaviour of the club and its supporters.
   It is im portant to recognise th at these differences do exist because
the experience of the facilities, the types o f crowd behaviour that
will occur and the m anagem ent of a crowd will all take on different
emphases in different locations. I t is not only the size of the club
or the division in which it is playing that creates the overall atm os­
                          FOOTBALL IN ITS PLACE

                                                                              prcdic
    phere o f a football club, although both o f these are im portant
                                                                              causes
    contributors, too. A set of expectations and rules of behaviour are
                                                                              picdic
    all intertwined to give each club its own particular qualities.
                                                                              have
       These qualities may be a function of the history and environment
                                                                              bctw e
    in which the club operates or they may be a product of the sup­
                                                                              picfer
    porters which the club has attracted over the years. Certainly ju s t
                                                                              where
    as those who play in the football teams are no longer draw n from
                                                                                 Th
    the local community so the supporters are not necessarily local.
    Keen supporters will travel great distances to watch their favourite      ith th<
                                                                              rxam
    club. It is also worth noting th at m any supporters do, indeed, go
    to w atch an interesting game o f football rath er than their own         Hiant
    particular team. This means th a t spectators are not necessarily          to a
                                                                              »|)CCt
    staunch supporters of a particular team, special to themselves. They
    may follow the fortunes of a num ber of clubs quite assiduously. T he     used
                                                                               prcci
    image of the two staunchly opposing sets of fans, as ritualistically
    antagonistic to each other as the players on the field, is a greatly      one,
    oversimplified version of the actual complexities o f interest and        a nee
    support that characterises spectators of a variety of different clubs.    had
    W e have therefore devoted C h a p te r 4 to the consideration of club     toulc
    cultures.                                                                  wc r
                                                                               chur
                                                                               audi
                        C O N T R O L IS C R IT IC A L                           G
    A third point th at emerges from the study of the im pact o f physical     wha
    environments is th at the stress they cause and the dissatisfaction        mod
    they produce is often not a direct product o f the quality of those        Wh<
    surroundings. I t is usually more directly related to the extent to        thes
    which each person knows w hat is being dem anded of him or her              ccrt
    and the control they have over those dem ands. An interm ittent               C
    noise that occurs a t random and about which absolutely nothing             ccss
    can be done, is m uch more distracting than a constant, m uch louder        pro
    noise th a t can be predicted and stopped if it gets too bothersome.        acti
       This notion of control is an im portant b u t complex one. Reason        wc
    dictates th at if you can choose where you go and w hat you do there,       and
    it is more likely th a t you will be satisfied with the actions and the     acti
    place in which they happen. But for most of us, a lot o f the time,         ina
    this freedom is constrained both by the places available and what              1
    we are allowed to do there. So we keep some element of control by           situ
    going to places where we know and accept w hat is allowed.                  affc
       O ne way of thinking about this is th at we like to be able to           do


I                                     10
                            FOUR THEMES


predict w hat is expected o f us in any given place. U npredictability
causes anxiety. T h e m ore familiar a person is with a place the more
predictable it is to them and so the more control, in a sense, they
have over their actions there. O f course, there are big differences
between people in the type of control they look for, b u t m any people
prefer a situation where they know w hat is expected of them and
where they believe they are able to do w hat is expected.
   This draw s attention, then, to w hat some social scientists talk of
as the ‘rule-system’ in any situation. An amusing, rather unusual,
example serves to illustrate how we can take complex rules for
granted, forgetting they exist. W e once took a C am eroonian friend
to a C hristm as pantom im e. She was enthralled by the glitter and
spectacle she had never seen before, b u t she was particularly im pre­
ssed by the audience response to the people on stage and the
precision and vehemence with which the audience responded, as
one, to the now traditional jibes from the actors. After the perform­
ance, o ur visitor asked in all seriousness if the people in the audience
had rehearsed their responses. She could not see how else they
could have performed in such unison. I f we had visited her country
we m ight have felt the same way about the responses given in
church by the congregation, wondering in our turn about how the
audience knew w hat to say when.
   Gospel chants o r pantom im e shouts are ju s t extreme examples of
w hat happens daily in m any other ways. We are educated into
modes of behaving and responding in m any different situations.
W hat environm ental psychologists are beginning to uncover is th at
these rule-systems are characteristic of certain places as well as of
certain activities.
   O ne o f the most im portant consequences o f all the above pro­
cesses is w hat has been called the self-fulfilling prophecy. This is the
process whereby we all expect certain people to be, and particular
activities to occur, in particular locations. We then decide whether
we wish to be p art of those events. I f we do, we go to that place
and take part, or indeed initiate w hat we consider to be appropriate
activity. By our actions we fulfil the prophecy we ourselves have
made.
   This mechanism can be readily illustrated from m any common
situations. Say, for instance, you believe a party will be a riotous
affair with people cavorting in some degree of wild abandon. I f you
do not w ant to be p a rt of such an event you will stay away. Provided


                                   11
                      FOOTBALL IN ITS PLACE

a num ber of others share your view of the likely party and decide
they wish to enjoy such an event, they will turn up in an appropriate
mood (and with the appropriate spirit no doubt). T his is then likely
to produce the lively party you feared. Because of the prophecy,
people m ade the action occur. I f the prophecy had not been made
it would be less likely to occur. So, the prophecy fulfilled itself.
   T h e problem with some of these processes is th at they are difficult
to break. I f football matches are seen as places to go and shout and
yell at, then those who like shouting and yelling will go. It would
take a very concerted effort to attra c t very different people with
very different expectations before this could be reversed.
   As will become app arent in more detail in later chapters, the
messages, rules and self-fulfilling prophecies all have great signifi­
cance in the understanding of m any aspects of football grounds and
the activities associated with them. T hey help to show why small-
scale piecemeal attem pts to deal with these problems are doomed
to failure.



                   Crowd Management and. Emergencies

A further aspect of the theme o f personal control in thinking about
football and football grounds is the fact th a t large num bers of people
in these very special types of settings pose a particular problem of
m anagem ent and organisation. This is a problem th at takes on
more dram atic proportions when there is an emergency. O f course,
p a rt of the essence of crowd m anagem ent and control is to make
sure th at an emergency does not happen; b ut as we have seen over
the past twenty years a nu m ber of emergencies continues to occur
in and around football games. This is partly a. function o f the size
and num ber of people involved and the fact that they are brought
together in a constrained space with limited access and limited
possibilities for leaving.
    W e tend tacitly to assume th a t thousands of people can leave a
 large space through a limited num ber of corridors and exit doors.
 Yet even the simplest calculation will reveal that it would be very
 easy lor I lie crowd to become jam m e d in a limited escape route.
 Ti.iHic j.ims in cities arc ju s t a large scale version of the problems
 tliat i tin li.i|)|)cn with pedestrians. T h e problem is compounded by
 tlic l.iii ili.il people will typically wish to arrive over an extended


                                    12
                           FOUR THEMES


period o f time but will all wish to leave at once. In an emergency
 lliey would wish to leave in some hurry.
    The emergencies th at can occur are not limited to the obvious
disasters th at can be caused by rapid crowd movements, running
from fires and fights. Bomb scares are not unknown in football
grounds and the collapse of the physical fabric itself does, of course,
give rise to very dangerous situations.
    W h at emerges from an exam ination of crowd m anagem ent is th at
the processes of com m unication between the people responsible for
th at m anagem ent and the com m unication to the crowd as a whole,
is absolutely critical to safe evacuation under normal circumstances.
It is this com m unication th at is often the difference between life
and d eath in emergency situations. T his is rather different from the
popular m yth that any dangerous event such as fire or some other
emergency will inevitably give rise to uncontrolled flight and wild,
mindless panic.
    T he problem of crowd control therefore becomes one of having
carefully prepared plans and good effective communications that
are ready for possible emergency. T his turns out to be more difficult
than m ight first seem to be the case. A large num ber of people
leaving a stadium does not behave like a flow of w ater passing
through a pipe. People will choose one route in preference to
another, they will wait or look for friends. People do not necessarily
fill the whole available exit channel in the m an ner of a liquid, nor
do they all start to move together in one even action.
    All these differences from the flow of inanim ate material pose
especial difficulties for calculating how quickly people will leave a
large building when un der some life-endangering threat. T he prob­
lem is magnified by the knowledge and expectations th at we had
cause to mention earlier in relation to other aspects of watching
football. This means th at simply calculating the speed at which
people walk and then putting it into some general estimates of
num bers and exit widths is unlikely to give very accurate answers.
A more systematic study of h um an behaviour is required. T he
results of such studies are reviewed in C h ap ter 4.


           C R O W D A G G R E S S IO N AND V IO L E N C E
O ne of the m ain dilemmas of present-day British football, central
to our book, is that the excitement and enjoyment associated with
                      FOOTBALL IN ITS PLACE


being part of a large, lively crowd can also be felt as threatening.
In m any people’s minds hooliganism and football are closely inter­
twined. W ithout d oubt it is one, but not the only, im portant contri­
bution to people staying away from football matches. A nu m ber of
surveys has shown the significance of this fear. In the British Crime
Survey of 1984, 10 per cent of m en said th at the threat of violence
kept them away. A year or so later our own Survey o f Supporters, to
be reported in more detail in later chapters, revealed that 20 per
cent of respondents would be encouraged to go to football matches
more often if violence was reduced. In a M O R I public opinion
survey of 2,069 people in the sum m er of 1985, 25 per cent of people
gave potential violence as a reason for not going to football matches.
T his com pared with 17 per cent who said they preferred to watch
football on television.
   T his association in the popular im agination is interesting in its
own right. W hy should people immediately think o f football hooli­
ganism b u t not of cricket hooliganism or horse racing hooliganism?
T he ready answer is the frequency of its occurrence, b u t this is not
supported by close examination.
   For example, m any o f the acts th at are described as football
hooliganism do not take place within football grounds and are
only very loosely associated with people going to football matches.
Furtherm ore, acts of violence or vandalism that do not occur in
association with football are more likely to be described as the
criminal acts they are rather th an obtain headlines under the label
of ‘hooliganism’. So the sets of expectations that journalists and
other people have about football help to generate greater awareness
of things th at happen th at may support those expectations. This
self-fulfilling prophecy then intertwines with the other expectations
discussed earlier.
   W hen a close look is taken at actual incidents th at have been
labelled as ‘hooligan’ then a great variety of actions is apparent. At
its most benign level it is gangs of young men shouting abuse at
each other. At its most vicious it is an extended battle in which
blood is draw n and lives are lost. By looking closely at the offences
th a t people in football crowds have been charged with, Eugene
Trivizas3 has shown th at offenders are rarely charged with criminal
dam age or assault. T he most common charge was for threatening
or insulting behaviour, accounting for 438 offences out of the 652
examined, ju st over two-thirds. O nly two cases were for assault.


                                  14
                                   FOUR THEMES


ng-    T he other m yth th at Trivizas scotches is that the offenders are all
ter-   working-class youths. O nly 1 in 5 was under 17 years old. Two-
tri-   thirds were aged between 17 and 20 and the rem ainder were older.
r of   These 'hooligans’ are certainly not schoolboys. T he indications are
ime    that the people arrested were typically m anual workers, far more
nee    of them being employed th an unemployed.
 to       N ot a lot is understood about the circumstances under which the
per    typical, abusive behaviour changes into the m uch rarer violence or
aes    vandalism. T here is not even clear evidence th at the two extremes
on     of aggression are closely connected. W h a t evidence there is, though,
pie    will be discussed in C h ap te r 6. This indicates th at some of the
es.    dangerous and dam aging activities th at occur in association with
ch     football do grow out of m uch less dangerous and less intentionally
       malicious activities. But there is also evidence th a t some components
its    of football violence are p a rt of a very malicious, planned activity.
li-       T here is also clear evidence to show that the courts do not deal
n?     with acts of violence associated with football in the same way as
ot     they do when it is associated with other activities. T he work of
       Eugene Trivizas has already been mentioned. H e is a lecturer in
all    Criminology and Penology at the University o f Reading. H e has
 re    carried out a num ber of studies of the legal aspects o f football
:s.    hooliganism, and from a detailed study of sentencing of offenders
in     he concludes that:
be
         Persons com m itting offences in football crowd disorders were
el
         punished more severely than persons committing similar
id
         offences in other circum stances.4
ss
is     O n average, Trivizas shows, football related offenders are fined
is     a bout half as m uch again as those charged with the same crime in
       circumstances unrelated to a football m atch. W hatever the reason,
n      the courts see acts of aggression committed within the context of
it     football crowds as more serious than similar acts in crowds of
it     dem onstrators or other incidents.
h         T here are m any reasons why there is a variety o f legal differences
‘S     in the way anti-social acts associated with football are treated when
 e     com pared with similar acts in other contexts. For example, the size
il     of a football crowd m ay be such that policemen may need to be
g      draw n in from a variety of distant locations in order to police a
2      m atch. Policemen are m en an d women, often with spouses and
       families. Any arrests an d charges they make th at will be contested


                                          15
                     FOOTBALL IN ITS PLACE


m ay require them to return a t some distance to take part in local
court proceedings. T hey would not be h u m an if they did not some­
times try to avoid such inconvenience. Furtherm ore, the charges
th at are brought will often be charges that it is known will bring
convictions with the type of evidence available in a large crowd
disturbance. This may m ean that m any actions th at could more
appropriately be placed un der one heading, b u t which would
dem and stronger evidence, will be placed un der a different heading
with more hope of achieving a conviction. These and other similar
m atters make the close examination of the legal proceedings sur­
rounding football violence very problematic.
   A further complication comes from the perspectives th at are held
on football and the aggression associated with it. Clearly there is
some feeling th at there is a particularly disturbing quality to acts
of aggression th at occur in large crowds brought together to support
the symbolic conflict between two opposing teams. T here is not a
great deal of detailed study but the fact that football is banned as
a professional game on Sundays goes back to the puritanical view
th at playing football is not a particularly wholesome activity and
too frivolous to w atch on the L ord’s day. T h e argum ent has not
been expressed as such for m any years but is easy to find below the
surface, in cartoons and other examples, that going to w atch a
football m atch is a direct dereliction of domestic and other duties.
Such a view provides a breeding ground within which unfavourable
views can easily be born and reproduced. However, these attitudes
towards the potential unsavouriness of football crowds and the
football-watching activity do not really go very far towards explain­
ing why violence has been associated with football spectators so
consistently during the course of this century.
   In recent years there has been a n u m ber of attem pts to under­
stand football violence and hooliganism more directly. T he expla­
nations th a t have emerged from these studies have usually been one
of three kinds. O ne explanation has draw n on ideas about the
nature of people and the anim al origins o f aggressive behaviour
between groups. A second has related to the nature of the activity
itself and the ways in which it stimulates or generates particular
types of aggressive action. A third type of explanation has been a
broad social one seeing football violence as a reflection of wider
problems o f aggression and violence within society as a whole. Each
of these explanations lias some ^em i of truth within it and we


                                 l<>
                            FOUR THEMES


shall try to p ut together our view of their combined perspective in
C h ap ter 5.
    In focusing on the association of hooliganism and football and
explanations for it, it is easy to be driven to the situation where it
is difficult to understand why violence does not normally occur at
football matches. For th at is certainly the tru th of the matter.
Hooliganism and violence associated with football matches takes
up a very small proportion o f the total range of crowd activities
involved. Good hu m our an d moderately impolite badinage is far
more the hallm ark of a football crowd than is any act of aggression.
Considering the millions of people who go to watch football in
Britain each Saturday, the few thousand who are arrested for th reat­
ening or insulting behaviour during the course of a football year
account for a very small portion. O n average there are less th an 5
arrests per 10,000 spectators, although a few large incidents will
distort this average greatly. It follows, as a consequence, that any
explanation of football hooliganism m ust take account o f why it does
not usually occur and provide an understanding of the particular
circumstances in which it is likely to occur.
    T he explanation of hooliganism and football-related violence is
not a purely academic m atter. It is central to any sensible attem pt
to control it. I f the problem is one of particular types of people or
of p articular innate characteristics of individuals, then approaches
to control would need to keep such people out of football grounds.
If, on the other hand, the problem was a product of the particular
circumstances themselves, the place, the culture, the perspectives,
then these would need to be m anaged an d controlled more effec­
 tively. Explanation and its implications for approaches to control­
 ling football hooliganism, then, are a central feature of later ch ap­
 ters. But it m ust be emphasised th a t this is such a central feature
 because of the public awareness of the association of hooliganism
 with football and its direct implications on w hether football sup­
 porters will be prepared to attend football matches. I t is this inter­
 play of attitude, explanation and approaches to control th a t makes
 the whole issue so m uch more complex than m ight be app arent
 from the headlines in popu lar newspapers.
     T he violence th at breaks out from time to time at large sporting
 events is a product of who goes to those events, where they take
 place and w hat happens a t them. As we have indicated there is an
 identifiable, if subtle, interplay between people, place and activities.
                       FOOTBALL IN ITS PLACE


This interplay is shaped by the expectations, attitudes and perspec­
tives th at people have. I t will take different forms in different cul­
tural contexts and it will be modified by the processes of crowd
m anagem ent and control. W e are concerned to elaborate the details
of this complex system both as a way of illustrating the nature and
contribution of environmental psychology and as a way of helping
football and other spectator sports find their place.


                       T H E WAY FO R W A R D
 As we have seen, football is a special com bination of particular
 circumstances. It has a problem th at relates to those circumstances
 and to the particular place football plays in our national conscious­
 ness. M ajor public inquiries throughout the century have m ade
 recommendations in relation to improving football but still various
 problems continue and, virtually as a consequence, the resources
 available for solving them are reduced. Against this background
 there, cannot be any simple, straightforw ard single answ er to foot­
 ball’s predicam ent. Yet the answ er to falling attendances and a bad
 press does lie with the football clubs themselves.
   W hat other area of public recreation exists th at has seen a 60 per
cent drop in support over forty years? Is there any other activity,
once param ount, th at has seen such competition for the recreational
pound from other more family-orientated recreational and leisure
attractions? Is there another large spectator activity where the
physical conditions in which clients partake of the recreation have
not improved m uch over fifty years, so th a t a majority of the paying
customers is expected to stand on cold, wind and rain-swept
expanses of concrete terracing for two hours or more with less than
basic lavatory and refreshment facilities? Is there any other area of
public entertainm ent for which, over the last five years, nearly
 100 spectators died, either through the irresponsible an d aggressive
activities of a small section of the client group, or deficiencies in the
design and m anagem ent of the physical facilities of the spectator
attraction?
   It is not surprising to find any such a recreational activity in
chronic financial difficulties. Yet for most others you would assume
that their m anagem ent would be desperately trying to impose a
range of solutions to reverse their fortunes and a ttract back the
clients they have lost. O r you m ight expect it to be a minority


                                   18
                            FOUR THEMES


interest th a t is being allowed to die slowly. Yet this is no bizarre
and curious little-known sport. I t’s professional football in G reat
Britain.
    Yet football is still an enormously popular spectator sport. T he
W orld C u p final can attract a world-wide television audience o f 500
million viewers. In Britain ordinary League matches televised on
Sunday afternoons are viewed by several million people. Millions
of pounds of sponsorship are injected into football each year. Such
sponsorship goes not only to the glam our clubs but also to those in
the lower divisions and even non Football League teams. T o be a
footballer is still a dream of m any children, and like some other
sports and pop music, it offers a ticket ‘out of the ghetto’. Football,
then, is still the num ber one spectator sport in Britain. Football
therefore does, a t present, have trem endous resources and goodwill
on which to draw but, if the current decline in attendances continues
 and football m anagem ents rem ain so unadventurous in their
 approach to their paying clients, it could be a minority sport in
 G reat Britain before the tw entieth century draws to a close.
    T he former m anager of Liverpool Football Club, the late Bill
 Shankley, once said, ‘Some people think football is as im portant as
 life and death. I can assure them th at it is m uch more serious than
 th a t.’ Indeed, as soon as normally sane and rational people start
 discussing football, reason and balanced ju d g m en t can fly out of
 the window. Standards and criteria which are applied to other
 places, activities and organisations are all too often forgotten. Foot­
 ball inhabits a world of its own as a recreational activity and
 spectator sport. T he terms and conditions of some of its employees
 are arguably as over-generous as the facilities and conditions which
 the paying customer has to endure are mean. W e believe th at this
 is one of the fundam ental problems of football today. It is our view
  that football should be assessed like any other recreational activity
 for the public, in which the football spectator is seen as an im portant
  client whose attention, interest, comfort and support should con­
  stantly be sought, encouraged and m aintained. I f football grounds
  were construed by football clubs as visitor attractions in competition
  with the best visitor and tourist attractions, quite different standards
  of facilities and services would be expected and required.
     H ere, then, is the key to the solutions to the complex problems
  of football. C ertainly professional football is an integrated and sig­
  nificant p a rt of our society. I t does not exist in isolation. T he


                                    19
                      FOOTBALL IN ITS PLACE


 social, legal and com m unal environm ent in which it exists provides
 im portant constraints and opportunities that shape its nature. But
 beyond all this it is a mass entertainm ent of potential attraction to
 a wide variety of people. By em bracing this basic notion many
 changes will follow.
    For example, the reader will have noticed that we have referred
 to the supporter as ‘he’, thereby making the sam e assum ption that
 football clubs make - th at is, the football supporter is male. H ow ­
 ever, the proportion o f women attending football matches is not
 insignificant. In a M O R I poll conducted in 1985, in which a random
 sample of 2,069 people were asked how often they go to w atch a
football m atch at a League club, 4 per cent of women interviewed
 said they attended a m atch at least once a year, com pared with 20
 per cent o f men. I f this is an accurate reflection of the proportion
of males and females who attend football matches, this would sug­
gest th at on average up to one-fifth of the people attending a Foot­
ball League m atch are women. This ties in with the 1983 General
Household Survey, which suggests that 1 person in 6 attending a
Football League m atch is female. Yet the facilities for women are
quite simply appalling at most football grounds.
   Consider also the continuing debates about the ownership of
grounds. T hese rarely relate to the spectators’ experience. T hey are
almost always seen in pure profit terms. For example, C harlton
Athletic have had to leave T h e Valley, because the owners of the
ground acquired planning permission to build a superm arket on
the site and so the site value increased considerably. C harlton
Athletic now share a ground with Crystal Palace at Selhurst Park.
Bristol Rovers play on the ground of Southern League team, Bath
City, in the neighbouring town! For the spectator this means high
travelling costs and disenchantm ent. Such moves might be more
understandable and acceptable if they led to improvements in the
facilities and services for supporters. It is doubtful w hether this is
ever the case, or w hether this has even been considered.
   T he scale of the resources football clubs have is app arent as you
fly over any city. T here is always one m ajor aspect o f the urban
architecture that stands out, because of its size and the dom inant
form it has in the city landscape. This is the sports stadium . Outside
of the baseball belt of N orth America, these stadia are invariably
oval or rectangular because their prim ary purpose is to house spec­
tators watching professional football. Yet, curiously, as dom inant


                                  20
                            FOUR THEMES


as these places are from the air, they do not play a very large part
in our discussions of the city and its facilities. Attention is draw n
to football grounds when there are acts of crowd violence associated
with them, when there are m ajor fires, or other headline-catching
disasters there. As a consequence of this sporadic silence about
football grounds, there is now a real risk th at these potentially
enormous com m unity resources will lose their function because their
original, prim ary objective for being there —football matches —are
losing their public attraction. Football has an identifiable place,
physically in the urb an fabric and spiritually (or symbolically), in
our ideas about society. T he football authorities m ust recognise this
significance and respond to it positively if football is to m aintain its
place.




                                    21
                            Chapter Two


            SPECTATORS’ VIEWS




                        Experts on the Terraces

 In most situations and with most problem areas trust is placed in
 the opinion of experts. T o take two obvious examples, we m ay go
 to a doctor with our health problems or to an estate agent to sell a
house. Public or private inquiries and the courts may call on experts
or expert witnesses to give their opinion of the issues in question.
O u r trust in these experts is based on two things - their training
in a certain field such as medicine, civil engineering or stadium
m anagem ent, and their experience of working in that field. A new
practitioner fresh from a training course is not yet considered expert.
Real expertise comes from repeated experience.
   Often it seems that only professionals are considered to be
experts, that formal qualifications, letters after the name, are what
counts. As environm ental psychologists we take a different view,
however, putting forward the case for the user (or consumer) as
expert. This view relies more heavily on the second facet of expertise
- experience - and suggests that m any of the real experts on the
subject of watching football are the spectators. T he emphasis is
placed not on one opinion from an outsider but on a num ber of
opinions covering the broad experience of football. This is not to
deny the value of outside judgm ents. I t is often profitable, for
instance, to study emergencies at football matches and the behav­
iour of those involved, from the point of view of an outsider. This
throws into relief a series of highly-charged dram atic an d extreme
incidents. T he real story of football, however, is about events in a
popular, norm al, weekly event, in many ways a routine occurrence,
albeit often surrounded with non-routine cxcitement.


                                  22
                        SPE C T A T O R S’ VIEW S


   In order to find out more about this event, therefore, w r asl^ed
some experts - nearly 1,000 football supporters- for their perspective
on football. W hat did they tninK about the facilities at football
grounds? W ere they reasonably comfortable during matches? Did
they feel safe from violence or accident? W here in the ground was
safest? How racist was the crowd and did political groups provoke
violence at their ground? We were also interested in lapsed sup­
porters: those who had been regular visitors to the ground until a
year or two ago, b ut who had now stopped attending. We wanted
to discover who these people were, why they withdrew their support
and w hether their views differed from those of current supporters.
   W hat psychology brings to this survey of views and opinions is
a methodology which enables us to draw inferences about the views
of football spectators as a group from the views of m any individuals.
It is not always possible to sum m arise the views of a group of people
without discounting im portant differences within them. In this case
we have looked for differences between supporters depending on
w hether they are current or lapsed, which club they support and
even w hether they prefer to sit or to stand. T he differences we are
interested in are not simply differences in the num ber of people who
agree with any statem ent, b ut rather the underlying difference in
attitude which that discrepancy may represent. Therefore, rather
than place weight on single questions we look at trends across a
num ber of issues so as to have a broader understanding of the
spectator’s perspective.
   Ten clubs were chosen to give a range across size, wealth, League
position and location. T hey were Celtic, Coventry City, Chelsea,
 Fulham , M anchester U nited, Millwall, Preston N orth End, Sou­
 tham pton, Sunderland and T ottenham Hotspur. As the survey was
 carried out in 1985, all the comments refer to that time. Although
 we asked                              made any changes since then,
 only three, M anchester U nited, Millwall and Sunderland, replied
 to this question. These clubs had m ade some interesting improve­
 ments, in crowd control measures, in trying to attract more families
 and in com m unity involvement.
    O nce the clubs had been chosen, interviewers found local sup­
 porters by calling on houses near the ground. T he sample therefore
 represents the views of people supporting their local team, rather
 than those ardent supporters who may follow a team hundreds of
 miles from where they live. A comparison of our respondents with


                                    23
                      FOOTBALL IN ITS PLACE


 those who took p art in other surveys suggests that they are represen­
 tative of football supporters generally.1
    W e were interested in two types of supporters: those who attended
 matches regularly at the time of the interview and those who had
 given up within the last two years. These two groups are referred
 to from now on as ‘regular’ and as ‘lapsed’ respectively. In the case
 of each club, half those interviewed were selected to be regular and
 half lapsed, so th at we could com pare the views of these two groups
 and look at the reasons people gave for their lapsed support. T he
 respondents were selected to be roughly half over 25 years old and
half under, so there would be a balance of views from younger and
more m ature supporters.
    O ne advantage of carrying out the interviews in the respondents’
homes rather than at matches was th at more time could be allowed
for the interview and so more open-ended questions could be asked
than is normally possible. This allowed us to ask supporters how
they would improve the ground w ithout m aking suggestions which
m ight influence them in any way. It released us from the constraint
of having to ask people to choose from a list of w hat we thought
the alternatives were, rath er than getting their opinion directly.
   Four m ain topics were covered in the interview: (a) comfort and
conditions, (b) possible improvements, (c) reasons for no longer
attending matches and (d) spectator violence.
   Comfort and conditions covered such topics as the physical con­
ditions at the ground and how comfortable it was, either standing
or sitting. Respondents were also asked w hat improvements they
thought the club should m ake and which of these improvements
was a priority. O ne specific im provem ent we asked about was the
introduction of more seating. We dealt w ith this specifically because
all-seater stadia have often been discussed in governm ent reports
as an im portant way forward for football.
   We asked lapsed supporters why they had stopped going to foot­
ball matches and w hat they thought m ight attract more people to
matches. W e also looked at the differences between the views of
lapsed and regular supporters on the other issues to see whether
those who had lapsed were more dissatisfied with the levels of
comfort and safety.
   We asked people w hat they thought about violence at soccer
matches, w hether they had ever been worried about their safety,
w hether they thought political groups m ight be involved in provok-


                                  24
                        SPE C T A T O R S’ VIEW S


ing violence and w hat they thought of the police presence in and
around the grounds. W e also explored their attitudes to w hat might
be called violence-related issues, such as racist language and
‘mickey-taking’.
   O ne im portant com ponent of the experience of a ground is the
size of crowd it normally attracts. I f the ground normally operates
near full capacity then there may be crowding. Q ueues and facilities,
such as toilets and refreshment stands, will be stretched to the limit.
O n the positive side, the atm osphere will be more exciting and the
club should be doing well financially. If a ground is often quite
empty, there is less stress on facilities and space but tb~ atmosphere
may be dull, bad w eather more noticeable and the club m ay be
heading for financial difficulties. In any case, the size of the gate
reflects the fortunes of the club and it would be strange indeed if
this did not colour the experience o f ‘being there’. We have therefore
listed clubs in subsequent figures in order of their average gate
taken as a proportion of their g round’s capacity, Celtic being the
most consistently full ground and Coventry the least.


                        T H E SUPPORTERS

T h e football supporters who took p a rt in this survey tended to be
young, even though the sample was selected to split respondents
evenly between under and over 25 years old. Three-quarters of
them were und er 30 and nearly a third were und er 20. This reflects
the composition of football crowds and is similar to the age distri­
bution found in other studies.
   M ost were w hat is usually called working class, i.e. skilled and
unskilled m anual workers, although there was also a sizeable per­
centage of white-collar workers. T he socioeconomic characteristics
of the respondents m ust depend to some extent on the character of
the area around each stadium , because of the way the sample was
selected. However, as a bias towards the working class is usually
found in studies of football spectators, we can assume th at the
sample of men who took p a rt in the survey is representative of male
football supporters in general.
   O u r respondents tended to be quite committed as supporters.
Even those who had now stopped going to football were keen in
their day. A bout three-quarters of respondents described themselves
as regular supporters (Fig. 2.1) and half went to all or nearly all of


                                    25
                       FOOTBALL IN ITS PLACE


their clubs’ home matches, with a further 20 per cent going once a
m onth (Fig. 2.2). J u s t und er half the respondents also travelled to
w atch their team play away matches (Fig. 2.3). T h eir interest in
football was generally confined to their local club. Nearly three-
quarters only went to see their own team play, although this pro­
portion varied across clubs and depended on w hether there was
more than one club in th a t particular area. In London, where a
num ber of clubs are close together, people were more likely to w atch
other teams as well as the one they lived closest to.
   In sum m ary, in keeping with other samples of football supporters,
we found that the men who took p art in the survey were mostly
young and working class and were com m itted to supporting their
home team, and even those who had now lapsed had been reason­
ably regular attenders when they did go to matches.

                         Comfort and conditions
O ver two-thirds of respondents thought that their ground was
comfortable or quite comfortable. In addition, almost all respon­
dents thought th at the conditions at their ground were average or
above. O n the other hand, only ju s t over one-third thought that
their ground was alright as it is, needing no improvement. Sixty-
four per cent thought th at improvements would encourage more
people to go to matches. Twenty-eight per cent said th at they
themselves would go more often. T w o reasons were given for not
going even in improved conditions: either they felt that they already
attended as often as possible, or they had given up w atching football
matches altogether and could not be tem pted back. T he improve­
m ents suggested ranged from basic upgrading of the facilities offered
to more substantial changes aimed at encouraging more people and
certain groups in particular to come to football matches. O n the
basic level respondents w anted the ground to be clean, structurally
sound and to have adequate, clean toilets.

                       What Would You Improve?

  ‘All of it. I t’s pretty dirty and very basic.’
                                                                    Celtic
  ‘T he first thing is the toilet facilities, they’re the worst in the
  Football League.’
                                                                 Millwall


                                   26
                                                                                                C/3   I   I




Figure 2.1   Percentage of yes and no answers to the question: “Do/did you go regularly to the ground?
Figure 2.2   Percentage responses to the question: “ H ow often d o /did you go to th e ground?”
60i




      Figure 2.3   Percentage who w atched th e ir team last season.
                     FOOTBALL IN ITS PLACE


A typical example of a structural im provem ent is to provide some
sort of weatherproofing.
  ‘I think they should have a roof-covering for the supporters.
  You can ’t cxpcct people to pay £3 [1985 prices] to stand in
  the rain.’
                                                           Fulham

This quote is also an example of m any respondents feeling th at the
conditions they encountered at football grounds were simply not of
a high enough standard for the sort of money they were paying for
tickets.
   A nother set of suggested improvements concerned things such as
family enclosures or increasing the num b er of seats.
  ‘H ave a family enclosure and try to entice the right people to
  the gam e.’
                                                            Fulham

M any of these suggestions are aimed at encouraging ‘respectable’
supporters and families back to football as a way to com bat football
hooliganism, a them e to which we shall return in the final chapter.
  Fifty-seven per cent thought th a t m aking the ground all seated
would improve attendance, bu t again mostly that o f ‘other people’.
W hether these ‘other people’ exist is a moot point but the tone
suggests th at supporters feel improvements would be useful and
make the gam e more attractive. These supporters may feel that,
while they themselves are keen enough to p u t up with discomfort
for the sake of the team, for other less enthusiastic supporters the
disadvantages may outweigh the advantages.
   T he supporter’s perception of the views held by generalised
‘others’ is an im portant illustration of a phenom enon well recog­
nised by social scientists. It reflects people’s ideas of the ‘image’
they see football as having; the way it is thought of or perceived by
people in general. T his has m any ramifications for the future of
football, the support it will get from the public at large and those
who see themselves as representing th at public. But it also means
that supporters are unlikely to try and convince their friends and
associates to come to matches because the supporter expects a
rebuff, in part because of existing conditions.




                                 30
                        SPE C TA T O R S’ VIEW S


      W HY PEOPLE N O LONGER GO T O FOOTBALL
                      M ATCHES

M uch concern has been expressed, both in this volume and else­
where, about the n u m ber of people now attending football matches.
Indeed, of the ten clubs in this survey, eight had a drop in attend­
ances between 1984-5 and 1985-6. We felt th a t it was im portant
to look at the reasons for this drop in attendance in some detail.
W e took two approaches to the problem. First, we asked people for
their reasons for not going to matches anymore. Second, we com­
pared lapsed with present supporters to see w hether certain types
of supporter were more likely to lapse.
   T he threat of violence at or near football grounds is probably the
most often cited reason for the fall in attendances. T h e feeling is
th at ‘real’ fans and families are too frightened to go to matches any
more, not w anting to risk being caught up in any disruptions. It
can be argued that if people who fear violence are less likely to go,
the proportion of the crowd for whom it is not a threat will tend to
increase. This increase can then provide the context within which
disruptive or anti-social behaviour can increase. This is a self-
fulfilling prophecy. O nce football grounds are labelled as violent
places th at very label ensures th a t they will get even more violent.
   Indeed, when we looked at the reasons lapsed supporters gave
for quitting, violence and safety were mentioned by more people
than any other factors. However, while violence stands out if we
look at the reasons one by one, it is eclipsed by the total num ber
of other, more m un dan e reasons given. Losing interest in football
was m entioned 69 times with people saying, for example, th at they
had grown out of the pastime. T h e poor performance of the local
 team came up 72 times, with supporters giving up if the club had
a run of failure or dropped to a lower division in the League.
 Respondents also blam ed other commitments, such as working or
 playing football themselves. O thers could no longer afford the
 admission charges, thought it too uncom fortable or inconvenient,
 or had simply moved away from the vicinity of the ground and did
 not w ant to make the extra effort th at attending would now involve.
   A lthough worry a bout violence and safety is therefore undoubt­
 edly keeping people away from football, this is only one of a num ber
 of disincentives. In other words, m any of these lapsed supporters
 would not be won back simply by hooligan-frce stadia. T hey w ant


                                   31
                      FOOTBALL IN ITS PLACE


to w atch a successful team play exciting football and are not likely
to stick with their home team through thick and thin.
   O ne way to look at w hat sorts of supporters give up football as
a pastime is to compare how solid their support was when they did
go with the regularity of the support of current supporters. In the
great majority of cases the regular supporters go to matches more
often than the lapsed supporters ever did (Fig. 2.4). This is a finding
supported by m arket research and well in accord with common
sense. It is the fan(atic) who sticks with a club through thick and
thin and the occasional supporter who is most likely to lose interest
if the game is less attractive for any reason.
   Lapsed supporters are less likely to see the home ground as a
special preserve (Fig. 2.5). They are also more concerned to enjoy
w atching the game than simply to see their team win (Fig. 2.6).
   These differences m ight be thought of as differences in lapsed
supporters’ overall approach to the game, i.e. they may place more
emphasis on certain aspects such as entertainm ent value. O ne com­
parison illuminates this further. W e presented people with the state­
ment, ‘I t ’s alright to take the mickey out of the other side’s football
supporters.’ It is difficult to ask people questions about attitudes
which they know are socially unacceptable because they are likely to
give you the answer they believe to be the acceptable one. Therefore,
instead of asking for views on hooliganism, we asked about attitudes
toward a mild degree of confrontation, using the slightly more
acceptable term ‘mickey-taking’, in the hope that this would give
some clues about attitudes towards more serious manifestations of
inter-club rivalry. W e are not suggesting th at all those who think
that mickey-taking is acceptable are hooligans. However, these
people are more likely to be tolerant of physical aggression than are
those who do not even tolerate taunts. O f p articular interest in the
responses were the big variations between clubs. For Sunderland
even such a mild statem ent is only acceptable to 16 per cent, but
for Celtic regulars and M anchester U nited supporters it is endorsed
by over 60 per cent (Fig. 2.7). These club differences will be con­
sidered in more detail in C h ap ter 3, but for the present they serve
to illustrate the discrim inatory power of this and related attitudinal
questions.
   From the point of view of the general argum ent the trend towards
the regulars being more prepared to accept ‘mickey-taking’ and the
lapsed less so is an im portant piece of the jigsaw. T he trend is small


                                   32
             100-.

             9 0-

             8 0-

             7 0-

             60-




                     |   | Regular

Figure 2.4    C om parison o f the percentage o f lapsed and regular supporters who said they w ent to most gam es, a t each of
                                                             ten clubs.
                       ^>6       &yr
               |     | Regular                                         I Lapsed

Figure 2.5   C om parison o f the percentage o f lapsed an d regular supporters who said it was all right to share the home
                                                 ground, at each o f ten clubs.
                 |    | Regular                                    H      Lapsed
Figure 2.6   C om parison o f the percentage o f lapsed an d regular supporters who said an enjoyable gam e was m ore im portant
                                                 th a n winning, a t each of ten clubs.
         100-1

             90-

             80-

             70-




                                   < o^o'

                   |   | Regular                                          Lapsed

Figure 2.7    C om parison o f the percentage o f lapsed an d regular supporters who said “it’s all right to take the mickey” ,
                                                       at each o f ten clubs.
                        SPE C T A T O R S’ VIEW S


b ut overall those who accept the statem ent are in the majority in
the regular group and in the minority am ongst the lapsed.
    I t would be wrong to place too m uch credence on these small
b ut consistent differences taken on their own. T hey do, however,
reveal a tendency th a t accords with two other sources of data. First,
as we have mentioned already, there has been a fall-off in the
num bers attending football since the Second W orld W ar. T he
decline has not been constant but the overall trend is downwards.
Second, there has been an upw ard trend in the num ber of arrests
relative to attendance for clubs in the London area. Therefore, while
attendances drop, arrests increase. T he patterns of d a ta we are
talking about show only small subtle differences but until we have
full clear records of all incidents of crowd disorders and until we
know more about how small outbreaks of abuse and scuffles relate
to near riots it would be foolish to dismiss the consistencies indicated
here.
    T he critical point here is that the overall decline in attendances
appears to relate to a process that m ight be likened to distillation.
I t is the ardent fans who are most likely to rem ain faithful to the
club. T hese supporters are also likely to be more tolerant of
aggression. T h e ‘real’ supporters are not, in fact, being scared off
by hooligans. It is the occasional enthusiasts who have w ithdraw n
their support. This is grim news for the club m anagem ent, who
m ust attra c t back to football'not th e traditional supporter but the
more fickle and less easily pleased crowds who can fill the stadium
on the right occasions.


                                 Safety

Because worry about safety was so im portant, being the initial
reason for the survey, we explored the issue in further detail. O ne
question asked was, ‘H ave you ever been worried for your safety
when you have been going to, leaving, or at a m atch?’ T h e question
was deliberately directed at people’s worries about themselves,
rather than at their witnessing of events where the safety of others
may have been endangered, or at general opinions of how safe
football grounds are. W e w anted to know of direct experiences
rather than of hearsay or public images. Looking at the num b er of
people who answered yes, it is hard to believe that the event in
question is supposed to be entertainm ent. O ver one-third of the


                                   37
                      FOOTBALL IN ITS PLACE


respondents had been worried at some time (Fig. 2.8). For Coventry
this figure goes up to almost two-thirds. In fact, for all clubs except
Sunderland more th an 1 person in 4 had worried about their safety.
   T h e low percentage at Sunderland is interesting. I f all the clubs
had had more or less the same num ber of supporters who answered
yes to this question then we m ight conclude that the worry was
simply linked to going to football matches. A small proportion of
any large crowd may be anxious, w hether it be because they are
nervous people or because the experience of being p a rt of a large
crowd may be inherently frightening. Because of the wide variation
in the num ber of worried people across clubs we can reasonably
conclude that the worry is caused by spectators at some clubs
having been exposed to dangerous situations of one sort or another.
   To examine this issue further, we asked people to recount w hat
had happened at the time they were worried. T he incidents fell into
three categories: (a) violence caused by fans, (b) crushing caused
by crowding and (c) crushing caused by m ounted police. W hich
category was mentioned most often varied from club to club but
the most commonly reported type was violence caused by fans. We
looked in more detail at the five clubs which had the highest percent­
age of worried supporters.



                         Violence caused by fans

Although respondents were not asked about the previous season in
particular, it is worth pointing out that Coventry City had had its
fair share of crowd trouble in the season before the survey was
carried out. D uring the 1984—5 season there were pitch invasions
on 1 Septem ber at the m atch against Leicester and again on 29
September, w hen the opposing side was Arsenal. O n 1 Ja n u a ry
M anchester City fans rioted, ripping out around 500 seats. T here­
fore there had been am ple opportunity th at season for Coventry
City fans to witness crowd trouble at first hand. T he other clubs
did not have entirely quiet seasons either. Celtic had trouble on 7
N ovem ber during their m atch against R apid V ienna, which was
serious enough for a U E FA ruling that the m atch should be replayed
a t least 100 miles from Glasgow. Crowd violence at Chelsea in a
m atch against Southam pton on 20 O ctober led to Chelsea fans
being banned from visiting Southam pton. Chelsea had more trouble


                                   38
                                                           I
               I    IWorried about safety at home match                Worried about safety at away match

Figure 2.8   C om parisons o f the proportions w orried ab o u t safety at hom e an d aw ay matches, a t each o f ten clubs.
                     FOOTBALL IN ITS PLACE

on 4 M arch when m ounted police were called in to deal with a
pitch invasion during the Sunderland match.
   These are the m ajor incidents th a t occurred at these grounds.
They take no account of m inor scuffles or of recurrent aggressive
acts such as throwing missiles such as coins at the players on the
field or at other supporters with intent to injure them, which was
frequently mentioned. However, the num ber of m ajor incidents at
each ground bears some relation to how worried spectators at each
ground were.

  ‘It was against Glasgow Rangers. T hey were throwing bottles
  and coins and using threatening behaviour. T h e police were
  trying to get them off the pitch.’


  ‘I t was when they played Chelsea last season. T hey were spread
  over the ground. T hey ran riot, fighting, spitting, swearing. I
  even was frightened.’


                      Crushing caused by crowds

Some of the most notorious soccer disasters, such as at Bolton in
1946 and at Ibrox in 1971, have been caused by crowd crushes.
W hile the Bolton disaster was caused partly by the ground being
simply too full, the Ibrox tragedy was caused by crowd movement
in a limited space. This was one of the most commonly mentioned
worries in this category. Although there have been guidelines for
some time governing the w idth of exits and passageways, as dis­
cussed in C h ap ter 4 these guidelines cover only physically danger­
ous levels, yet even crushing which m ay not be considered as
officially dangerous can be quite frightening.
  ‘At the back of the shelf the gangways becam e very congested
  on leaving the m atch and we felt in sym pathy with a sardine.’

A second worry was crowd surges on the terraces. Some people
rem em bered how frightening it was when they were children and
could be lifted off the ground by the force of a crowd swaying
forward to follow the action on the pitch.




                                 40
                        SPE C T A T O R S’ VIEW S


                   Crushing caused by mounted police

Incidents mentioned in this category were of two types. In the first,
crowd crushes were caused by m ounted police advancing into an
enclosed space. As those closest to the horses moved back to get
out of the way, those farther back were crowded into limited space,
against walls or into small alleyways. Second, as the horses them ­
selves are large animals, some people said they had been frightened
or worried by close contact with them.

  ‘Celtic v Rangers, [in] a small street leading to the game, a fight
  started. Police on horseback came. Small children playing in
  the street could have been h u rt.’

I t is paradoxical that police action taken to reduce the potential
risk from crowd violence should in itself put spectators in w hat
they feel is a dangerous situation. O ne can imagine th a t innocent
bystanders may be particularly affronted to find themselves crushed
because of mounted-police action trying to sort out trouble else­
where. T he dangers associated with policing tactics in an enclosed
space are already known. W hen police used tear gas to dispel rioters
in Lim a N ational Stadium , Peru, in 1964, 218 people were killed
in the ensuing crush. W hile a m ajor contributory factor in this
disaster was th at the stadium doors were locked, the incident still
serves as an extreme example of the potential dangers of badly
m anaged crowd control.


                       Safer parts o f the ground

T he respondents were asked which parts of their ground were safest.
Leaving aside quips such as ‘the directors’ box’ the responses were
coded from plans of the stadia as standing at a goal end, standing
on the sides, or being seated. T he general trend was that the seats
were seen as being safest, followed by the sides and then the ends,
although there were some interesting differences, such as at Sunder­
land, where this trend was completely reversed. W e will come back
later to the question of differences between the seats and the ter­
races. I t would seem though th a t the seats have a safer image.
   M ost studies of crowd control at football matches address the
issue of seated versus standing accommodation. Seating produces a
crowd of uniform, low density and makes observation easier. O n


                                   41
                       FOOTBALL IN ITS PLACE

 the other hand, in less than capacity crowds, troublemakers can be
 more difficult to reach in seats than they would be on the terraces.
 W e have seen that seats are seen as typically safer than the terraced
 ‘ends’. Is this because of some effect that the provision of seating
 has on crowd behaviour or because the stands attract a different
 sort of spectator than the terraces? Some people may be draw n to
 the stands because they believe them to be safe. Sitting is typically
 more expensive than standing at matches and we would therefore
 expect th at people of higher socioeconomic status would be likely
 to sit: This is in fact the case (Fig. 2.9). Those who choose to sit
 also tend to be older than those who stand. Not surprisingly, they
 also find the grounds to be more comfortable.
    O f more interest are the differences in attitudes between the two
 groups. Generally, the people who sit are less concerned with their
 team winning than with watching a good game (Fig. 2.10). They
 would be more critical of physical violence at a football m atch (Fig.
 2.11) and they would be less likely to think ‘taking the mickey’ was
 acceptable (Fig. 2.12). But, although the overall figures are in the
 direction th at supports the hypothesis of a younger, slightly more
 aggressive, set of people on the terraces, the pattern is far from
strong and varies considerably from club to club. O ne further ques­
 tion illuminates these patterns. W e asked w hether it would be worth
paying a little more for better facilities. T h e patterns of answers to
this will of course be a function of the socioeconomic status of
spectators and of how good they think the conditions are already,
but beyond the fact that most supporters would like to see better
conditions and would be prepared to pay for them, it is clear that
those who sit are more likely to w ant their comforts than those who
stand (Fig. 2.13).
    W h at emerges from these comparisons is a picture of older, more
staid supporters going to a m atch to w atch a game in comfort as
characteristic of those who sit and a tendency in m any clubs for
those on the terraces to be more youthful and high spirited. There
are certainly no surprises here, except that this pattern is not strong
and rigidly applicable to all clubs. I t also has to be taken against
the background of people recognising the terraces as less safe.
    W h at we have here, then, are spectators who think that the
conditions at football grounds are quite good b u t at the same time
feel th at m any improvements could be m ade, either to the facilities,
the fabric of the stadium , or m anagem ent and players. They also


                                  42
   100-1

    90-

    80-

    70-

    60-

  % 50-




                                                                  Stand

Figure 2.9   C om parisons o f the socio-economic status .of those who sit an d those w ho stan d - percentages of
                                                classes A, B, C 1.
                                                                           Stand

Figure 2.10   Percentages o f those w ho sit and those w ho stan d w ho agree th a t an enjoyable gam e is m ore im p o rtan t than
                                                            winning.
        100-1

         90-

         8 0-

         70-

         60-

      % 50-




                                                                          Stand

Figure 2.11     Percentages o f those w ho sit and those who stan d w ho ^gree th a t “ I w ouldn’t be as critical o f physical
                              violence at a football m atch as 1 w ould be in o th e r situations” .
                                         ^ U S ta n d
o f those w ho sit and those w ho stan d w ho agree th a t “ I t ’s all right to take the mickey o ut of
                    other sides’ football su p p o rters” .
                                                                                                                       4




% 50“




              ^                          ^                   ^          ^       /"           ^         O'

     I        I Sit                                                  Stand

Figure 2.13       Percentages o f those w ho sit an d those w ho stan d w ho would pay m ore for b etter facilities.
                      FOOTBALL IN ITS PLACE

feel th at it would be w orth paying at least a little m or- for these
improvements.
   W e have also highlighted differences in people’s attitudes. For
example, we have shown th at people who prefer seats tend to be
older and more interested in comfort and entertainm ent th an those
on the terraces. W e have suggested th at this is related to the general
belief th at the seats are safe. This belief will encourage those who
w ant to keep away from any possible trouble to congregate together
in one area and in turn that area will tend to be quieter because of
the type of supporters it attracts, reinforcing the belief that it is
safe. O f course, if hooligans moved to the seats en masse then all
this might become true of the terraces rather than the seats. Such
a move is also a m uch greater general threat to football. O nce even
the seats are no longer seen as safe then the whole perception of
the grounds goes down a notch. Those affrays in recent years that
took place in the seated areas would therefore be expected to be
especially threatening to the future o f the game.
   In the same way th at worry about the possibility of trouble may
discourage the less committed supporters from going to matches, it
is possible th a t football may be left to those who actively enjoy
‘hooliganism’ or to those dw indling num bers of supporters who
m anage to tolerate it because of the strength of their loyalty to the
sport. In this situation the level of violence a t matches can only
increase. Furtherm ore, any small incident th at is given great p u b ­
licity will be taken by all as evidence for the continuation of the
threatening situation they perceive at present.
   In conclusion, then, although it is not the whole reason why fewer
people attend matches, spectators’ concern for their safety at football
matches is the most im portant reason why people stop going to
matches. T hey see crowd violence as the single most significant
cause for th at concern. In the next chapter we look a t w hat hooligan­
ism actually is, a t some of the explanations th at have been put
forward to account for its existence, and at suggested ways of reduc­
ing it.


                    M E M B E R S H IP SC H E M E S
Legislation to create m em bership schemes for football clubs has
been introduced since we did our survey. But at that time, as now,
it was a highly contentious issue. T h e proposal was th at supporters


                                  48
                        S PE C T A T O R S ’ VIEW S


could register as members of the club they support and be given
an identity card as evidence of th at m em bership. I f matches were
then m ade ticket-only, or at least restricted to members, the club
would have direct control over who can atten d their ground. M em ­
bership would initially be given to anyone who asks, but anyone
who causes trouble could, at the discretion o f the m anagem ent,
have their m em bership w ithdraw n by repossession or invalidation
of their identity card. T h us troublemakers could be excluded at
subsequent matches. I f all clubs had such program m es then sup­
porters could be adm itted to away matches on the basis of m em ber­
ship of their own club. W hile this would require some co-operation
between home and away clubs for each m atch, the problems should
not be insurm ountable. M ore serious difficulties m ight arise in
reliably identifying troublemakers and in m aking the case for w ith­
draw ing a sup porter’s m em bership rights. Closed-circuit television
would be very useful in these circumstances because, while m anage­
m ent could w ithdraw m em bership or refuse admission without
giving reasons, as is often done in night clubs, concrete evidence
that innocent supporters are not being mistakenly barred would be
essential for the smooth and peaceful running of such a scheme.
   W e asked the survey respondents w hether they would agree with
a m em bership-card scheme. T here was general resistance to the
idea, with 62 per cent disagreeing completely. I f a membership-
card scheme were to be introduced 57 per cent said they would
prefer a club system, while 43 per cent would prefer a national
system. Some people think th a t a national scheme is very close to
a national identity-card system and they dislike the ‘Big B rother’
control implied. W hile it is preferred, a club system may in fact be
more difficult to adm inister, for the simple reason that people follow
more than one team. W hile all clubs had supporters who also
w atched other clubs play, the percentage of respondents who sup­
ported more th an one team varied from club to club (Fig. 2.14).
This means that some clubs may, possibly, be in favour of club
m em bership schemes where others would only countenance a
national m em bership scheme.
   O u r results, as subm itted to the Popplewell Inquiry, pointed out
the great difficulty of ever running a club-based m em bership scheme
across the country. I f someone does only w atch one club, as is
likely to be the case for a Sunderland supporter, then a local club
mem bership may be less irksome. But for someone who watches


                                    49
                   Mem bership schemes are a good idea         |     | Watch other team s

Figure 2.14   Percentages of respondents, a t each o f ten clubs, w ho w atch o th e r team s and percentages w ho support
                                                 m em bership schemes.
                        SPE C T A T O R S ’ VIEW S


 two, three or more clubs such a club-based system gets so compli­
 cated and bothersome th at m any people would almost certainly
 rather stay at home. Chelsea supporters, for example, nam ed 21
other clubs which they watched. While most interest centred around
other London clubs, some supporters w atched north o f England or
 Scottish teams (Table 2.1).
   T he recommendations in the Popplewell report took account of
 these considerations and the proposal for a national membership
scheme was p ut before parliam ent. So although the idea of a
national scheme appears more feasible than the club schemes that
were originally being mooted, the outcry at even th at proposal was
predictable from our results. Sunderland, after all, was the only
club, out o f the ten we looked at across the country, where the
majority of supporters were in favour of a m em bership scheme.
   A nother difficulty with m em bership schemes is that they discour­
age casual spectators. I f the schemes were strictly enforced, one
would no longer be able simply to turn up a t a m atch on the whim
of a moment. O ne would expect, then, that those least in favour of
the idea would be the infrequent supporters. In fact, it turns out
that the opposite is true. M ost opposition came from those fans who
go to most games (Fig. 2.15). Those in favour of the schemes are
less likely to approve o f mickey-taking and more likely to agree to
pay more for improved conditions (Figs. 2.16, 2.17). It seems, then,
that supporters of m em bership schemes have a good deal in
common with lapsed supporters, in terms of both attitudes and
attendance patterns, an observation which does not augur well for
the future of the schemes.
   M em bership schemes have little support an d are unlikely to suc­
ceed unless provision is m ade for the num erous football fans who
support a num b er of clubs. At the m om ent the schemes are not
presented as having an im m ediate benefit to the club member.
Unlike most other clubs, members do not get anything extra for
joining - the schemes are envisaged purely as exclusion devices.
L ater on in the book we will argue th at football needs a more
positive attitude about w hat belonging to a club means. Perhaps
such a n attitude would make schemes such as these at least more
palatable, if not more easily administered.




                                   51
                                    I’O O T B A I . I , IN I I S PLAC E


Table 2:1 T eam s w atchcd by more than 3 per cent of each clu b ’s
___________ supporters__________________________________________________
Supporters              O ther club watched                                   %

CHELSEA
                        Tottenham Hotspur                                     9
                        Fulham                                                9
                        Q ueen’s Park Rangers                                 8
                        Manchester United                                     4
                        Wimbledon                                             4
FULHAM
                        Chelsea                                               14
                        Arsenal                                               8
                        West H am United                                      4
                        Manchester United                                     3
                        Luton                                                 3
                        Q ueen’s Park Rangers                                 3
                        Brentford                                             3
M ILLW ALL
                        Arsenal                                               9
                        Tottenham Hotspur                                     9
                        Charlton                                              7
                        Chelsea                                               5
                        West H am United                                      4
                        Crystal Palce                                         4
PR ESTO N
                        Liverpool                                             10
                        Manchester United                                     5
                        Tranmere Rovers                                       4
CELTIC
                   Rangers                                                    16
                   Clyde                                                      5
                    Partick Thistle                                           4
TO TTEN HA M H O TSPUR
                   Chelsea                                                    4
                   West H am United                                           3
                   Arsenal                                                    3
M A N C H E S T E R U N IT E D
                   Manchester City                                            7
                   Stockport County                                           3
                   Oldham Athletic                                            3
SO UTH AM PTO N
                   Manchester United                                          4
                   Liverpool                                                  4
                   Portsmouth                                                 3
                   Everton                                                    3
                   Tottenham Hotspur                                          3
COVENTRY
                   Birmingham City                                            3
                   Leicester City                                             2

N o m ore th a n 2 p er cent o f S u n d e r la n d su p p o rters w atc hed a n o th e r team. T h o se te am s were
M a n c h e ste r U n ite d , New castle U n ite d a n d Liverpool.




                                                        52
   100-j

    90-

    80-

    70-

    60-




re 2.15    Percentages of respondents, a t each o f ten clubs, w ho go/w ent to m ost m atches w ho agree/disagree with
                                            m em bership card schemes.
       % 50-




               I   | Disagree                                           I Agree

Figure 2.16 Percentages of respondents, a t each o f ten clubs, w ho agree w ith the statem ent: “ I t ’s all right to take the
          mickey out o f other sides’ football su p p o rters” , wfio agree/disagree w ith m em bership card schemes.


                                                                                                                                  'V *
Figure 2.17   Percentages of respondents, a t each o f ten clubs, w ho think it w ould be w orth paying a little more if facilities
                       a t the ground were better, w ho agree/disagree w ith m em bership card schemes.
                       FOOTBALL IN ITS PLACE

                             SU M M A R Y

 This chapter has been concerned with turning the spotlight on
 football’s ‘m an in the street’, the spectator. W e w ant to show th at
 the opinions of the supporter have as m uch worth as those of the
 experts who are often called on to contribute to debates on the
 present state and possible future of football. W e have also pointed
 out, however, th at the views of spectators m ust be tapped in a
 systematic way, both to avoid bias and to ensure th a t the sum m ary
 we present does justice to the varieties of opinion which exist within
 so large a group.
    O f the areas touched on by our survey, three have been high­
 lighted in this chapter: the physical conditions encountered at
 grounds, the differences which emerge between clubs, and the recur­
 ring emphasis on hooliganism.                          ,
    I t appears that some degree of comfort and reasonable facilities
are im portant to spectators. In particular, although m any sup­
porters felt th at their home ground com pared favourably to others,
two-thirds of supporters would like at least some im provem ent and
about the sam e proportion felt th at these improvements would
encourage more people to go to matches.
    W e have found that the climate of opinion varies from club to
club. For example, when we looked at attitudes toward seating,
Coventry supporters usually disagreed with supporters from other
clubs. As Coventry was the only club to have had an ‘all-seater’
experiment, this difference o f opinion has obvious roots. V ariations
in attitude from one club to another caution us against treating
football supporters, or football clubs, as one homogeneous group.
W e will look more closely at the variation between clubs in the next
chapter where we suggest that these differences add up to a unique
culture at each club.
    Spectators seem to be worried about their safety from violence at
matches, to a disturbing degree. Hooliganism is also cited as a
reason why people give up going to football matches. W e therefore
turn, in C h a p ter 5, to an exam ination of hooliganism. W e will look
a t how social scientists, am ong others^ have tried to explain the
phenom enon and at the implications these explanations have for a
long-term solution to the problem.




                                  56
                          Chapter Three


               CLUB CULTURES




Ask any fan about the differences between his club and others and
he can tell you. It seems obvious to supporters that clubs vary
widely, th a t each has its own ‘personality’. Ask most outsiders and,
while they can see that clubs come in various sizes and have varying
success, they would be a t a loss to see any uniqueness. After all,
players and m anagers move from one club to another and back
again. O ne club’s new star player may have been doing his best to
score against them last season. W hen people talk about football’s
falling gates, a lone cry of ‘our attendance went u p ’ can be easily
hidden am idst the general shouts of soccer is becoming less popular,
getting more dangerous, and so on. M ost o f the discussion about
soccer takes it to be a single monolithic entity.
   O f course, clubs do have a lot in common with each other. But the
view of their homogeneity also seems to feed a desire for neatness. If
football is homogeneous then all clubs will have sim ilar problems,
and solutions to those problems should be applicable with equal
success to all clubs. Any attem pts to find a stand ard panacea is
likely to be m et with the comment, ‘Nice idea b ut it w on’t work
here’, because simple solutions ignore the individuality of the clubs.
   T he differences we are talking about here are more than ju st
differences in size, wealth or geographical position, although of
course these come into it. M ore interesting and at the heart of
soccer’s problems are differences in w hat might be called the ‘ethos’
of clubs. Some clubs are perceived as friendly, some as impressive,
some as apathetic and some as hostile. These are the types of
characteristic which can easily be described anecdotally bu t which
are notoriously difficult to pin down. In this chapter we attem pt to


                                  57
                      FOOTBALL IN ITS PLACE


do ju s t that, by looking at the patterns of attendance, com m itm ent
and attitudes to football across the ten clubs in our sample.


     D IF F E R E N C E S IN A T T E N D A N C E P A T T E R N AND
                            C O M M IT M E N T

There are a num ber of clubs, not always First Division sides but
often wealthy and prestigious, which regularly attra ct gates of
30.000 or more. It does not necessarily follow that they have the
most committed supporters. A crowd o f 30,000 can be produced by
90.000 supporters who come to 1 game in 3 or by 30,000 supporters
who never miss. Looking at sheer num bers gives a poorer m easure
of com m itm ent than looking at the percentage of supporters who
turn up regularly to cheer from the terraces. In o ur survey we were
able to look at which clubs have relatively high proportions of
committed supporters and at w hether there are different types of
com m itm ent to be found in each club.
   A bout half of th e 965 supporters interviewed said they went to
most games. This proportion varied somewEat bu t not greatly
across clubs. T he club that had the most committed supporters in
our sample was Coventry, where 66 per cent of respondents said
they went to most games. T he least committed was Celtic with 40
per cent (Fig. 3.1). Yet this is not the whole story, for by contrast
69 per cent of Celtic supporters travel to away matches b ut only 37
per cent of Coventry supporters do (Fig. 3.2). J u s t over a quarter
of the Coventry supporters had season tickets whereas only 4 per
cent of Celtic supporters did (Fig. 3.3). Tw enty three per cent of
Celtic supporters had been to see their team play abroad, in contrast
to only 4 per cent of Coventry supporters (Fig. 3.4). T he two
clubs seem to offer good examples o f different types of support. In
C oventry’s case there is a high level of local commitment, of sup­
porting the team at home, shown by regular attendance and the
longer-term com m itm ent of buying a season ticket. In contrast,
Celtic supporters are travellers, they are the fans most likely to
w atch their club play away, more so th an supporters of other clubs
who have more th an one team in their city. Given more opportunit­
ies for foreign travel than Coventry, Celtic fans are also most likely
to w atch their team play abroad. T hey are, however, not such
reliable fans at home.
   Spurs supporters come somewhere between these two, showing


                                  58
Figure 3.1   Percentages of respondents who go to m ost games, com pared across ten clubs.
 80-i


 70-




% 40-




        Figure 3.2   Percentages of respondents w ho go to away games, a t each o f ten clubs.
Figure 3.3   Percentages o f respondents w ho hold season tickets, a t each o f ten clubs.
Figure 3.4   Percentages o f respondents w ho have seen their team play abroad, a t each o f ten clubs.
                           CLUB CULTURES


m oderate levels of attendance at both home and away matches,
travelling abroad and buying season tickets. Spurs fans have the
advantage of following a successful London team th a t has many
local First Division rivals, so that m any of the team ’s away matches
are relatively easily accessible. C om pared with the other London
clubs in our sample, Spurs supporters w atch other teams least.
Chelsea an d Fulham supporters watched other teams most often.
Distance is obviously critical as it was most often the neighbouring
team th a t was watched, with Chelsea fans watching Fulham and
F ulham fans Chelsea.
   T here would seem, therefore, to be at least two types of sup­
porters, locals and travellers. W hile all clubs will have some of each,
some clubs, because o f tradition, geographical position or success
rate, m ay have a preponderance of one or the other.


                 D IF F E R E N C E S IN A T T IT U D E S
As well as asking supporters w hat they did (how often they went
to matches or how m any other teams they watched) we also asked
them w hat they thought. W e have already considered supporters’
views on the physical conditions a t grounds in C h ap ter 2. W e can
now look a t the differences between clubs. Since grounds differ in
size, age, capacity and state of repair, we would expect people’s
opinions of them to vary from ground to ground as well. T he
im portance of these opinions is that a football stadium is not ju st
an open-air building but probably the most enduring symbol o f the
home team.
   W e also examined from two angles supporters’ attitudes towards
the event of w atching football. First, we asked about events a t their
home ground; the use o f obscene language and racist chants; the
involvement of political groups and w hether they had been worried
for their personal safety. T he issue of safety had been discussed in
C h a p ter 2, where we pointed out th at there were noticeable differ­
ences across clubs in how worried their supporters were. Second,
we asked respondents to agree or disagree with a num ber of state­
m ents which represented possible views about going to football,
about which aspects of watching a m atch are most im portant and
a bout the acceptability of verbal and physical aggression between
rival fans. All three o f these aspects o f attitudes, ratings of the home
ground, views on the events which take place a t the ground, and


                                    63
                      FOOTBALL IN ITS PLACE

opinions about going to football, combine to produce an idea of
w hat it is like to be a home supporter at a certain ground.
   I t might be said that people go to football matches to watch
football and that w hat really m atters is the standard o f play on the
pitch, the team and how it is m anaged. Therefore, how people feel
about their club will be influenced first and foremost by these things.
W hile this may be so, these are not the only aspects to play a role
in defining the identity of the club. It is also true to say th at both
the intangibles, such as club history and traditions and the ‘feel’ of
a club and the physical reality of the ground, will change probably
less often than the m anager and certainly more slowly than the
composition o f the team. T hey therefore make a m ajor contribution
to the enduring qualities of the club. So when people start to
support, say, T ottenham H otspur, their experience o f ‘w hat it is to
be a Spurs supporter’ and of actually being at W hite H a rt Lane
are ju s t as im portant as their perceptions of events on the pitch.
Unfortunately, these are also the aspects which are least often dis­
cussed or studied. W e will highlight some of these differences
between clubs.


                              The ground
W e have already touched on supporters’ perceptions o f the grounds
in C h a p ter 2. W e can now look in more detail a t the differences
between clubs. T h e atm osphere at football grounds varies consider­
ably and is often described in glowing terms. Brian Inglis, in his
book Football Grounds o f England and Wales, calls O ld Trafford ‘a cave
of red and white aggression’.1 G rounds may be impressive, cosy,
tatty or depressing. These overall images of stadia are m ade up of
num erous facets and can be difficult to m easure without an in-
depth study of people’s reactions and perceptions. W e d id n ’t have
the option of allowing our respondents a completely free rein and
so looked at essential points: W as the ground comfortable? How
did it com pare to other grounds? Did it need improvement?
   M ost of our respondents w atched the game standing on the ter­
races (Fig. 3.5). T he exception was Coventry, where the proportion
of the ground given over to seats is high, and only 30 per cent stood.
Generally speaking, however, over three-quarters of the respondents
stood and so the following comments should be seen in th a t light.
   For people who do not follow football the idea th at cold, wet,


                                  64
Figure 3.5   Percentages of respondents \yho norm ally stand, a t each of ten clubs.
                             FOOTBALL IN ITS PLACE


windblown and litter-strewn terraces are comfortable may come as
something o f a shock. But those who frequent them say that they
are moderately comfortable (19 per cent), quite comfortable (48 per
cent) or even comfortable (21 per cent) (Fig. 3.6). I f respondents
at all clubs rated their grounds as equally comfortable one might
suspect that this was a defensive reaction, protesting too much, as
it were. Instead, there is variation. Coventry and Fulham are rated
as very comfortable and Preston and Celtic less so. A pparently
comfort is a relative concept. This question was approached within
the framework of w hat one can reasonably expect of an outdoor
sport. I f one wants to stand outside for two hours in mid-winter,
then the overall level of comfort one expects is less than would be
expected in a cinema. Therefore, to say th a t a football terrace is
very comfortable is jud gin g it in context.
   T he question which seemed to bear a better relation to the level
of m aintenance and the state of the fabric o f the ground was whether
respondents thought th at physical conditions, rather than comfort,
were above o r below average (Fig. 3.7). Overall more respondents
thought th at their ground was above average than below. T he
top three rated clubs were M anchester U nited, Coventry City and
T otten ham H otsp ur and the bottom three were Sunderland,
Millwall and Southam pton. In other words ratings seem to depend
on the size and condition of the ground.
   T h e picture of general complacency suggested by the comfort
ratings changes when we consider improvements to the ground (Fig.
3.8). Eighty-three per cent of Celtic supporters and 81 per cent of
Millwall supporters thought their ground needed improvement. In
fact, the lowest percentage was 40 per cent a t M anchester United.
   These three questions address three different aspects of sup­
porters’ satisfaction with their local stadium . W e can now look at
how the clubs are rated on all three in conjunction (Table 3.1).


Table 3.1    R atings given to the physical conditions a t each ground_______

                 Man   Cov     Spu    Ful         Chel   Sund Mill    Pres   Cel   Sou
Comfort          ***   ***      **   ***         **      **   ***    *        *    *
Conditions       ***   ***     ***   **          ***     *    *      **      **    *
Improvements ^           ^     ^^    ^^          ^       ^    ^              ^     5^^

*** V ery good
** M e d iu m
* Poor




                                            66
100-1

 90-




Figure 3.6   Percentages of respondents w ho think the ground is comfortable, a t each of ten clubs.
Figure 3.7   Percentages of respondents w ho think ,conditions are above average, a t each of ten clubs.
   100-

    90-




Figure 3.8   Percentages o f respondents w ho think th a t im provem ents are needed, a t each of ten clubs.
                       F O O T B A L L   IN   IT S   P L A C E




   M anchester U nited and Coventry come top o f the list with high
ratings all round. O th er clubs, such as Millwall, have more mixed
ratings suggesting in this case th at the respondents can see that the
conditions are not ideal bu t do not let this affect their overall
assessment of the ground.


                        STY LE O F S U P P O R T
A second aspect which contributes to the feel of a particular club
is the style o f support it attracts. This can be expressed in m any
different ways but one of the most noticeable is the views that
supporters have on w hat is appropriate by way o f chants and shouts.
From outside the crowd the most noticeable feature is the sheer
noise. From inside the words become clearer and more salient.
W hen these chants and shouts are obscene, vulgar o r insulting, does
it matter? O r do outsiders interpret these chants wrongly by taking
them out of context?


                   Bawling, shouting, cursing, swearing
Although Liverpool is supposedly the home of most chants, the
repertoire from which chants and songs are taken seems to be
common to all clubs. M any o f these chants use obscene language
and some are openly racist. For m any people ‘rich’ language is part
and parcel of w hat goes on at soccer matches. This is, after all,
still predom inantly a male pursuit and ‘m inding your language’ is
traditionally associated with mixed-sex gatherings. O n the other
hand some people may find this language extremely offensive. It
seemed that people’s attitudes towards the use of obscene language
m ight be one indication o f how ‘rough’ a club was.
   Figure 3.9 shows, first, the percentage of people who thought that
there was a lot o f obscene language at their local ground and,
second, the percentage who were worried by this. T he percentage
who reported a lot of swearing varies considerably, from 68 per cent
at Celtic to 18 per cent at Fulham . W hile the percentage who
expressed their dislike of the am ount of swearing also varies, it is
immediately ap p aren t that this num ber is relatively small. It does
seem, then, that ‘bad language’ is accepted as part of the football
event - it is p a rt of w hat goes on a t a m atch and not really something
to worry about. T he strength, or weakness, of disapproval varies


                                         70
             80-,


              70-




Figure 3.9
              llk l in■ There is a lot a obscene language       |
                                                                          t
                                                                         <F
                                                                           sr        j S>*




                                                                      | The obscene language worries me

             Percentages of respondents w ho agreed th a t they heard a lot of obscene language, an d percentages who were
                                    w orried by any b ad language, a t each of ten clubs.
                      F O O T B A L L   IN    IT S   P L A C E




from club to club, i.e. the gap between the two figures differs. For
example, 39 per cent report a lot o f bad language at Coventry and
over half that num ber (24 per cent) dislike it. At Millwall, however,
45 per cent say that there is a lot o f swearing but only 4 per cent,
less than one-tenth, disapprove. So, while swearing is accepted
overall, feelings about it depend to some extent on the club.


                           Racism and fascism
Figure 3.10 compares the percentage who say there are a lot of
racist chants a t their ground with the percentage who are worried
by them. Also included is the percentage of supporters who said
that political groups are involved at their ground. Here, the picture
is totally different from th at for ‘bad language’. W ith the exception
o f Celtic, more people are worried by racist chants than think they
hear a lot o f them;, people are even worried by w hat they themselves
think is a low incidence of racially prejudiced chants. Football
supporters are seemingly less tolerant of open racism th an of swear­
ing. M ost chants are heard a t Celtic (66 per cent) and fewest at
Fulham (15 per cent). Fulham are also most worried about the
chants (64 per cent) and Celtic the least (25 per cent).
    I f we go on to look at political involvement we find th at Celtic
comes in the bottom three at 39 per cent and, further, that the
group involved is not the N ational Front or the British M ovem ent
b u t the IRA. H ere we come across one m ajor cross-club difference
 based on the local and regional history of a club. In Glasgow the
 great rivalry between Celtic and Rangers is based on the religious
 and ethnic origins of the two clubs, with Celtic being Irish Catholic
 down to its team colours and Rangers Scottish Protestant. W e must
 suppose that this gives rise not only to racism a t Celtic Park but
 also to its acceptance as p a rt of the traditional rivalries of their
 football scene.
    O n the other hand, racism in England tends to be focused on
 blacks, Asians and Jew s. T he English club where most racist chant­
 ing was reported was Chelsea, M any respondents also thought that
 political groups, for example the N ational Front, were active at
 Chelsea. However, Chelsea supporters are not complacent about
 this position. J u s t over half the supporters interviewed were worried
 by racist chanting.
     W orry about openly expressed racism is not necessarily related


                                         72
                    I There are a lot of racist         The racist chants w orry me |     |Political groups are involved
                    • chants
Figure 3.10   Percentages of respondents who agree “ there are a lot o f racist shouts or ch an ts” , a n d who agree “ the racist
                                   shouts o r chants do w orry m e” , a t each o f ten clubs.
                       F O O T B A L L    IN   IT S   P L A C E




 to the am ount reported. Some of the clubs where fewest said there
 were racist chants were most worried by the level they did report.
 H ere the results can be seen to fit also into the overall pattern of
 variations across clubs, bu t more detailed examination would be
 necessary to establish how representative our sample of supporters
 were for each individual club.


                              A T T IT U D E S
  O u r earlier discussion of the opinions and com m itm ent of sup­
 porters gives an account of some aspects of their attitudes. But this
 account is somewhat oblique. It is quite feasible to ask people
 directly about their views on various m atters and so reveal their
 attitudes from their own comments. Asking such questions is a fine
 art, in order to avoid bias and avoid people simply giving w hat
 they think will be an acceptable answer.
    For our survey of football supporters we did find a num ber of
 questions that were subtle enough to reveal differences between
 clubs. T o generate these questions we used the time-honoured pro­
 cedure of listing statem ents that are typical of those used by our
 respondents and then asking them if they agreed or disagreed with
 those statem ents. T he percentage of supporters who express agree­
 m ent is then a useful indication of the attitudes of that group of
supporters.
    In all we had thirteen statem ents that were presented to all
respondents. T heir answers do reveal a num ber of interesting differ­
ences between groups of supporters. T hey go a lot further to support
our general point that there are indeed large variations between
clubs in the attitudinal culture that is created by their supporters.
    In C h ap ter 2 some of the responses to the attitudinal statements
were presented in order to help our understanding of the differences
between lapsed and regular supporters and between supporters who
choose to sit and those who choose to stand. In order to look a little
more closely at the attitudinal differences we will turn to the regular
supporters for each of the ten clubs.
   In looking at the attitudinal differences it is im portant to be
aware of the relationships between different attitudes. U ntil now
we have discussed supporters’ attitudes to the club as if each were
entirely independent. In fact, opinions about a particular issue are
more usually part of a constellation of attitudes. This is accepted


                                         74
                          C L U B   C U L T U R E S




in everyday life, where we expect people to show some consistency
across a num ber of issues. T hus, if someone is an anti-bloodsport
hunt saboteur, then we will expect that they will not wear fox-fur
coats and perhaps th at they will advocate ‘h ealth ’ foods. I f someone
votes Conservative we expect them to support private enterprise
and public schools. W e are sometimes wrong in our assumptions
about these consistencies. W e may make inferences about people’s
likely attitude or behaviour in any situation from w hat we know of
them already and find th at their actual behaviour comes as a sur­
prise. T h e reason for this discrepancy can be th at we have grouped
together attitudes which are not, in fact, closely related to each
other a t all. A person m ay have sym pathy with wild foxes only and
class fur from farmed foxes along with sheepskins and leather shoes
as acceptable products. T he interest lies in finding which attitudes
belong in which constellations, which go together in meaningful
groups and which groups allow us to distinguish between different
types of people. I f our Conservative voter chooses to send his child
to a comprehensive school we may question w hether we should
have included school preference in this particular group of attitudes.
   In our case we are looking a t differences not between people but
between football clubs. T here were differences between the clubs
on the answers their supporters gave to each of thirteen questions.
Now we w ant to see w hether there was any pattern in these differ­
ences th at would m ake them easier to conceptualise in a more global
way. In other words, can we group these questions together so that
we can say, for example, these questions are all about comfort, these
are about winning, and these about facilities? O f course, we could
do this by discussing the questions am ongst ourselves and deciding
which groupings seemed appropriate. I t is more fruitful, however,
to use the respondents’ views. I f we find that people who think
seating is im portant also w ant weather-proofing and some even
w ant footrests, then we can argue th at these three hypothetical items
belong together in a group labelled ‘the im portance of comfort’. I f
we also find that those who think th at winning is im portant also
think that all the club’s money should go to buy good players and,
further, that they do not care w hether the stands fall down as a
result, we can put items addressing these issues in the ‘importance
of w inning’ category. Now, instead of looking for differences between
clubs on one item at a time we can look for differences in the
im portance accorded to comfort or to winning.


                                     75
                      F O O T B A L L   IN   IT S   P L A C E




     In the present case the different aspects of the constellation of
attitudes are quite well reflected in ju st three representative state­
ments. In other words the differences between the clubs are most
clearly shown by concentrating on three of the thirteen attitudinal
statem ents. These statem ents were chosen because they represent
key constituents of the variety of attitudes explored. T o reiterate,
w hat we m ean by ‘key constituents’ here, pu t simply, is that all the
attitudes were found to relate to each other. So, a few carefully
selected statem ents can be taken as representative of the whole
‘system ’ of attitudes.
    T he connections between the attitudes were established by the
use of advanced statistical procedures2 that it would be beyond the
scope of this book to elaborate. None the less, consideration of the
three statem ents th at we will focus on will help to make clear the
range of attitudes explored.
    Consider, for example, the statem ent, ‘I t ’s alright to take the
mickey out of the other side’s football supporters.’ People who agree
with this statem ent also tend to agree with the statem ent, ‘You
expect to see a bit of trouble as part of going to a football m atch.’
Clearly both these statem ents reflect attitudes about the ru m b us­
tious, lively give-and-take a t a football m atch. They were carefully
phrased to avoid any indication of a pejorative view an d so encour­
age people to adm it to aspects of the slightly aggressive nature of
crowds at football matches th at they might otherwise have denied.
    T he statem ent on ‘mickey-taking’ deals with a very different
attitu de from the statem ent, ‘Sitting in reasonable comfort and
w atching a good game is as im po rtant as my team winning.’ This
deals with the enjoyment of the game rath er th an with aspects of
the crowd. Its significance can be further seen from the fact that
agreements with this statem ent are highly correlated to agreements
with the statem ent, ‘Football is more about entertainm ent than
about winning.’
    A third statem ent adds another aspect. T his is the statem ent,
‘I t ’s alright for teams to share the same home ground.’ This state­
m ent relates closcly to the statem ent, ‘Clubs could do more to
encourage families to go to m atches.’ I t really picks up attitudes
towards the social aspects and com m unity connections of a club,
rath er than emphasising its relationship with a particular team.
    These three statements, then, can be taken to illustrate three


                                        76
                            C L U B   C U L T U R E S




components of the overall set of attitudes. For simplicity we can
refer to these as:
  (a) acceptance of mickey-taking
  (b) im portance of comfort
  (c) endorsem ent of sharing of grounds
Now, in looking a t the reactions of different clubs across these three
components it is necessary to bear in m ind w hat they already have.
Clearly a club that is already sharing its ground with another,
or one that has a sum ptuously comfortable ground, would have
supporters whose attitudes reflected these circumstances. For exam ­
ple, those who had comfort m ay not regard it as very im portant
any more. It could be that clubs th at shared their grounds did so
because their supporters were happy with this, or the reverse could
be true. Supporters could have accepted a decision that they orig­
inally did not agree with. T he point is that the causes and conse­
quences of these attitudes cannot be derived in any simple fashion
from knowing w hat the attitudes are.
   In order to discover the causes or consequences of the attitudes
held by club supporters a more detailed study would be necessary
than the one we have been able to carry out. None the less, we can
establish the nature of the differences th at exist a t present. These
differences do provide a useful insight into club differences and
emphasise the value of future study of these matters.

Table 3.2   Percentage of regular supporters from the ten clubs agreeing
            w ith each o f three statem ents

                           (a)                   (b)                 (c)
                      Acceptance of          Importance of    Endorsement o f
                      mickey-taking            comfort       sharing o f grounds
Sunderland                 14                           71           100
Southampton                43                           79           55
Preston                    50                           47           58
Coventry                   50                           51           25
Fulham                     56                           61           41
Chelsea                    56                           61           39
Millwall                   63                           67           40
Spurs                      64                           65           33
Celtic                     64                           57           28
Manchester                 65                           40           23
United


  In T able 3.2 the percentage of regular supporters who agreed


                                        77
                      F O O T B A L L   IN   IT S   P L A C E




with each of the three statem ents has been listed for all ten clubs.
A t the top of the table it is very clear that Sunderland hold mickey-
taking in low regard and th a t this is balanced by an emphasis on
comfort an d the fact th a t 100 per cent of those interviewed were
happy to share a ground. T he attitudinal culture of this club and
the way its supporters see it as a p a rt of their com m unity entertain­
m ent is very clear.
   T he contrast with M anchester U nited is graphic. Com pared with
the 14 per cent of Sunderland supporters who agreed with mickey-
taking there are 65 per cent of M anchester U nited supporters.
C om pared with the 71 per cent who emphasised comfort there are
40 per cent at M anchester U nited. C om pared with the 100 per cent
of Sunderland supporters willing to share a ground there are only
23 per cent at M anchester United. Clearly this is a club in which
the culture is linked to a robust support of the club team and its
focus on winning.
   Between these two extremes the clubs have been ordered in terms
of their gradations from the community orientation of Sunderland
through to the team orientation of M anchester United. N ear to
Sunderland but not very close are Southam pton and Preston. They
are not very keen on sharing the ground bu t have moderately high
percentages agreeing with the statem ent on mickey-taking. T he
subtleties of these attitudes can be gauged, however, from the fact
th a t Southam pton has the highest proportion of people who believe
th at sitting in reasonable comfort is as im portant as the team win­
ning. T heir 79 per cent agreem ent compares with 71 per cent for
Sunderland.
   At the bottom of the table Spurs and Celtic have patterns that
are very similar to M anchester United. T heir m ain difference lies
in a rather higher agreem ent with the need for comfort. This could
reflect the overall feeling a t M anchester U nited that their ground
is a very comfortable one. However, despite the variations within
the groups the distinctions between Sunderland, Southam pton and
Preston on the one hand an d between Spurs, Celtic and M anchester
U nited on the other are very striking. O ne could well imagine that
their supporters go to football matches for very different reasons
and would probably not agree with each other on the m ain criteria
to be considered when evaluating an effective football club or
acceptable football grounds.
   Fulham , Chelsea and Millwall, interestingly three of our London


                                        78
                                                                                1

                           C L U B   C U L T U R E S




clubs, sit together in our table and are quite close to our fourth
London club, Spurs. This is because they all have a similar pattern
in terms of moderately high agreem ent with the acceptability of
mickey-taking and m oderately low preparedness to share the
ground, yet the significance of comfort is higher for them th an for
Celtic or M anchester U nited but lower than for Sunderland or
Southam pton. This is a different sort of, hybrid, culture. A desire
for robust comfort may be an appropriate way of describing this
group. O ne could see them shouting abuse a t their opponents from
the comfort of their padded seats.
   Coventry has a curiously distinct profile. M ost of the clubs that
are low on mickey-taking are higher on sharing and vice versa. Yet
Coventry supporters’ endorsem ent of mickey-taking is in the middle
at 50 per cent b u t their desire to share is one of the lowest at 25


                                                                            f
per cent. T here may well be local circumstances that would explain
this difference, or as in all these data this may be one of the artefacts
of our relatively small samples.
  ~"lhe atllllNllHUl m aterial, then, is very intriguing. It does show
that we can identify reasonably subtle differences in some of the
attitudes th a t are at the heart of going to football matches. T he
initial inquiry was not really set up to explore these attitudinal
differences so we were only able to make a first stab at examining
these m atters. However, the fact th at such differences occur so
dram atically does go a long way to explain the difficulties that the
m any clubs in the Football Association have in working together.
They are providing very different sorts of facilities, as seen by their
supporters. T h eir supporters are also bringing quite different sets
of aspirations and expectations to w atching a football m atch. In
any other recreational industry this could be regarded as a great
strength. I t shows the possibilities of very different markets and of
the possible provision of very different types of products. T he
implied homogeneity of the League and Association of Football
Clubs misses a critical recreational and consum er fact of life. T he
m arket place is m ade up of m any different groups of people. As in
other m arket places the differences between supporters need to be
understood and harnessed rath er than ignored.




                                       79
                      F O O T B A L L   IN   IT S   P L A C E




             C U L T U R E , T H E PAST A N D P R E SE N T

So far we have tried to pin down some of the salient differences
between clubs which give rise to a recognisably unique culture at
each. These differences included such issues as patterns of atte n d ­
ance, patterns of behaviour and attitudes, both towards the club
and towards watching football as a pastime. From time to time we
have touched upon the background to some of these differences.
For example, Celtic was noticeably different to the rest of the clubs
on a num ber of issues, such as attendance and the involvement of
political groups. T he most obvious reason for these differences is
that Celtic was the only Scottish club in the sample. N ot only is
Scottish culture different from English b ut the development of foot­
ball in Scotland has taken a slightly different route, so th a t there
are, for example, differences in the types of crowd disorder experi­
enced in Scotland.3 However, we can no more consider all Scottish
clubs to be the same than we could English clubs. Even within one
city, Glasgow, the traditions of its two m ain clubs are such that
they can m aintain a deep and long-standing rivalry.
   W e can go beyond talking about differences between clubs in this
specific way to look at w hat m ight be described as the culture of a
club. W hile culture is often thought of as an attribute of societies
there is a growing interest in organisational or corporate culture.
Definitions of organisational culture vary but a good example would
be:

  ‘a set o f common understandings for organising actions and
  language and other symbolic vehicles for expressing common
  understandings.’4

   W hile this definition was intended to apply to business organis­
ations it can apply ju s t as well to football clubs. A football club is
an organisation ju s t as a business is, but with an unusual two-tier
structure. O n one level there is the professional club, m anagem ent,
players and service staff, who belong to the organisation because it
is their job. This p a rt of the organisation m ay have a very formal
structure and the links between members may be based very m uch
on their working relationship. T he second level, which consists of
the supporters, is more loosely organised. Part of this level consists
of the official Supporters’ Club, which will have a semi-formal
structure, b u t the organisation also includes casual supporters who


                                        80
                          C L U B   C U L T U R E S




turn up to a m atch if the mood takes them and those people who
have ‘followed’ the team for years w ithout ever going to a match.
These people will not know each other and may never meet. T heir
link is through support for one particular football club.
   It may seem rather far-fetched to describe this loose conglomerate
of football fans as an organisation. It m ay seem even more far
fetched to suggest that this organisation has an identifiable culture.
T h a t the first of these suggestions is in p art true has already been
dem onstrated. M arsh5 and others identify a ‘career’ structure for
supporters and could even show how a person’s spot on the terrace
corresponded to his place in th at structure. T h ere seems, therefore,
to be some informal groupings th at members of the football culture
can recognise, even if they are invisible to outsiders. Football cer­
tainly produces a num ber of cultural artefacts such as mascots,
colours, fanzines, pin-ups and m atch programmes. But while these
artefacts may exist in different forms for all clubs, the difference in
attitudes, in ‘the way we do things around here’, the particular
myths an d stories of each club, add u p to a culture which is subtly
unique for each one.
   T he im portant consequence of this uniqueness is that cultural
differences will extend to the way that the problems now associated
with football are realised at each club, to the ways clubs will think
appropriate to deal with these problems and to the solutions which
 best fit with the existing social and physical environm ent at that
 club. I f we w ant to do anything about these problems we must
 answ er three questions: W h at does organisational culture consist
 of? W here does it come from? C an it be changed?
    Craig Lundberg6, Professor of M anagem ent and O rganisation
 at the University of Southern California, proposes four levels of
 organisational culture: Artefacts, which are the tangible aspect of the
 culture shared by members of an organisation, e.g. stories about
 past matches or events, rituals, chants, symbols and club regalia;
 Perspectives, the socially shared rules and norms applicable to a given
 context, e.g. common agreem ents on appropriate behaviour in a
 given situation; Values, the evaluative basis used to pass judg m ent
 on situations, acts, objects and people, e.g. a feeling within a club
 about w hat is good football; Assumptions, which are the tacit beliefs
 that members hold about themselves and others, and which form
 the underpinning for the other three levels, e.g. some may believe


                                       81
                      F O O T B A L L   IN   IT S   P L A C E




that their club is a family club, while others are rough and
disorderly.


                     Where does culture come from?
A large part of the spirit of a club lies in its past: the roll-call of
star players and m anagers, the history of glorious victories and
ignominious defeats. M any teams have a traditional arch-rival,
quite often a neighbouring team, bu t usually a well-matched
adversary.
    Artefacts are the most obviously historical of L undberg’s four
levels of culture. T he word ‘artefact’ conjures up images of museums
and of archaeological digs. Archaeologists use the physical traces
of past civilisations to come to conclusions about their culture.
These traces include buildings, such as temples, theatres, stadia
and homes, books, paintings and sculptures, cooking utensils and
storage ja rs, jewellery, clothes and toys. Artefacts are equally
im portant to modern football clubs. Indeed the choice of colours,
emblems and nam e are the first acts of a new club. T here can even
be an attem pt to set a tone for the club by a choice of a particular
anim al as the symbol. A proud rooster or a ram p an t lion are m uch
more likely choices than chickens or kittens. T he team colours can
offer a second identification through a nickname such as the Blues
or the Lilywhites. O th er artefacts, such as stories and myths, grow
over time. Some myths are as old as the club b u t some are only as
old as the last match. These can include descriptions of the game,
the one perfect goal, a bad refereeing decision, the supporters’ day,
a witty new chant, an am using incident th at caught everyone’s
attention, or the clobbering given to rivals.
    O ne of the most im portant physical symbols of a club is the
ground itself. T he social history of the club is em bedded in and
complemented by the grounds. T he home tu rf is the ultim ate symbol
of a team and the style of the buildings often reflects not only the
history of times of success an d failure b u t also the hopes and aspir­
ations of each of those who commission new stands. Because build­
ing work is carried out w hen the team is doing well and revenues
are high, the stadium buildings provide an account of the club’s
life story. A ground like Preston’s, which was a showpiece in its
day, speaks of a once proud club fallen on hard times. T h e top clubs
of today, like Spurs, can spend money on producing impressive 80s


                                        82
                           C L U B   C U L T U R E S




style stands and, the new status symbol, executive boxes. Conse­
quently, some grounds are small and friendly, some merely small.
O thers are flamboyant m onum ents to First Division success and
modern engineering.
   W ithin the stadium different areas belong to different groups and
can have very strong symbolic significances for them. T he best-
known territories within grounds are the ‘ends’, the terraces behind
the goal-posts, which is traditionally the dom ain o f the young sup­
porters. Some ‘ends’, for example the Spion K op at Anfield, have
names which are known throughout the football culture. O th e r
territories such as the family enclosure are being developed. This
is the only place in the stadium where children have priority. It
will be interesting to see w hether future generations o f football fans
see the family enclosure as a symbol of safety and o f their first taste
of the excitement o f going to football.
    I t is more difficult to speculate about the effect that a club’s
history an d heritage may have on the perspectives, values and
assum ptions o f the club as a whole and on the behaviour of the
supporters in particular. Some links are quite straightforward. At
one time Liverpool’s fans were called the Red Army, both because
of their colours and because of the num bers in which they travelled
to away matches. They gained a reputation for violence and d isru p­
tion, which became p a rt of Liverpool’s continuing history. A past
reputation for m ayhem and, from some young m en’s point of view,
good fun, can have two effects on fans’ behaviour. First, as we have
said before, a club’s rough reputation will attract those interested
in roughness and repel those who are not, thus changing the balance
of opinion am ong supporters in terms of w hat is considered accept­
able behaviour. Second, the supporters feel th at they have a repu­
 tation to live up to and may go out of their way to do so. Among
adolescents and young people it can be especially im portant to
 prove th at they are as tough as they believe their peer group to be.
 T h a t they may base their assessment of their peers on third-hand
 knowledge, rum ours and new spaper reports may only make the
 situation worse.
    Similarly, long-lasting feuds between two teams may build up an
 expectation of trouble whenever they meet. Each team ’s supporters
 may then feel th at they should do something about this, either to
 get in the first move or because the m atch is on their turf, or because
 they ‘owe one’ to their rivals since their last meeting.


                                       83
                      F O O T B A L L   IN   IT S   P L A C E




   O n the other hand, clubs which have always been quiet, friendly
or sometimes even boring, should have less trouble because these
expectations and beliefs arc not p a rt of their culture. In this way
heritage can be an advantage or a disadvantage to a club, often
depending on which aspects of that history are emphasised. In the
final chapter we will look more closely a t the positive use of club
heritage. It does seem that the social rules and expectations for a
club m ay grow from its historical background. This leads us to ask
w hether they can be changed, or w hether they m ust be left to evolve
naturally.


                         Can culture be changed?
T here is some disagreem ent about w hether culture is m anipulable.
However, there have been successful attem pts to change at least
some aspects such as attitudes, values and myths.
   Lundberg suggests th at given the right conditions when the
environm ent both within and external to an organisation is receptive
to change, a triggering event may lead to the culture being con­
sciously re-examined. I f a rew , preferred culture can be imagined
then interventions on all four levels in com bination can result in
the reformulation of the culture. W ithout any do ubt disasters can
contribute to such changes in a d ram atic way, although in the
period of initial shock this may not be apparent. O th e r triggering
events could be a financial crisis or relegation.
   This suggests that culture can best be m anaged not by trying to
thrust a new style on an organisation but by steering in new direc­
tions w hen change is appropriate. I f a situation is ripe for change
then it can be revised so th a t aspects formerly taken for granted
can be questioned and reformulated.
   I f culture can be m anipulated, then who should be the m an ip u ­
lator? T he example of L uton suggests th at this can be a task for
club m anagem ent. Indeed, we would argue that it is m anagem ent’s
responsibility. M anagers must, however, be guided by the mood of
the club and be aware of its readiness for change. A lesson can be
learnt from Coventry, where Jim m y Hill tried to bring about
changes in the face of opposition from the supporters. A change
may be intended to move the club forward and to improve the lot
of the spectators but may fail because the complex and partly
unconscious nature of club culture is ignored.


                                        84
                         C L U B   C U L T U R E S




   M anagers m ust also take account of all their club members in
ihe sense th at we m ean here. M any m anagers draw a distinction
between ‘real’ supporters and those young men who tu rn up on a
regular basis and then cause trouble. As it appears that these
supporters are the most constant and loyal supporters, to dismiss
ihem as not being real supporters at all is facile. I f their form of
support is not w hat the m anagem ent wants, then the m anagem ent
should take some action to change it, rather than disassociating
itself from the problem.


                         C O N C L U S IO N S
W e have shown how the differences between clubs build into a
pattern of attitudes and behaviour which characterises each club.
W e have called this pattern the club’s culture. T he idea that each
club may have its own unique culture suggests th at any blanket
solutions to football’s present predicam ent may fail because they
are not tailored to the situation and the particular difficulties at
each club. I f we reject single simple solutions, w hat do we propose
to p ut in their place? Before we can answer this question there are
two other im portant aspects of football to be considered. These are
the handling of crowds and emergencies and dealing with violence.
T he following two chapters cover these, after which we will turn to
solutions.




                                      85
                           Chapter Four


 CROWDS AND EMERGENCIES




                     T H E FRENCH CROW D

Ever since the French sociologists Le Bon and T ard e wrote about
rioting of large crowds during the French Revolution,1 there has
been a popular notion th at the crowd is a special type of creature.
T he crowd is seen as something more than a group of individuals:
a violent and dangerous creature which m ust be controlled if it is
not to do dam age to others or to itself.
   Since those revolutionary i iots several people have tried to defend
the view th a t large num bers of people gathered together are more
likely to behave in a primitive way, responding to events or to
leaders in irrational or child-like ways. T he individuals who com­
pose the crowd would never behave like this in ordinary day-to-day
circumstances. It m ight be suggested that there is almost a fear of
the crowd, or of its worst manifestation - the mob - am ongst all
people in authority. It m ust be tamed, restrained and regulated in
order that it does not get out of control. Certainly political leaders
- particularly in totalitarian regimes - have seen the crowd as
an im portant vehicle for harnessing mass support that might not
otherwise be so readily expressed.
   It is no accident that when a government is trying to control an
unruly population, the first thing it will do is b an any gatherings
in public places. As Peter Brook points o ut,2 when political censor­
ship is lifted from the w ritten word and from film, it is often still
left with the live theatre. Because of the power o f dram atic action,
live performance before a large num ber of people is potentially one
of the most volatile situations th at most societies can create.
   W hy is it that large num bers of people brought together require


                                  86
                    C R O W D S   A N D   E M E R G E N C IE S




careful adm inistration and control, almost independently of the
context? W h at is it in particular that makes the large num bers at
football matches require such an intensive system of crowd m anage­
ment, so m any regulations and such intensive police activity.
   T he debate about w hether a person in a crowd behaves more
irrationally than he or she would on their own, or whether a crowd
simply has possibilities for action not available to individuals, has
not been resolved. But it is clearly the case th a t large num bers of
people gathered into one place with their objectives and attention
locused on a relatively narrow range of events have the potential
lor doing things that any individual would not normally be able to
do. I t is helpful to find the reasons for these differences, at a fairly
objective level, w ithout being draw n into discussions on irrationality
or more exotic notions like th at of the ‘crowd m ind’.


                             Focus o f attention
This heightened awareness o f being p art of a group with similar
interests and com m itm ents is greatly increased by the physical
structure o f the sports stad 'u m whereby not only can most people
see most other people present but also everybody can see the same
central action. T here is therefore a focus to attention th at can
cncourage each of the individuals within a crowd to feel a height­
ened awareness th at they share something significant.
   This similarity of interest and shared focus of attention may, of
course, be concerned with the activity on the field of play in a
football m atch, or it might be with the business of getting out of
the ground at the end of a m atch or in an emergency. As we shall
have cause to emphasise later when we explore the problem of
emergencies in more detail, the assum ption th at everyone knows
what everybody else is doing is often m ade but is not always valid.
Com m unications moving from person to person around a crowd
take time to be transm itted and can get distorted along the way.


                          When things go wrong
T he excitement of a crowd is, of course, one of its great attractions.
O ne of the great contributions that football makes to our com m uni­
ties is the opportunity it provides for people to be together with
large num bers of others enjoying a similar understanding of the skill


                                          87
                       F O O T B A L L   IN   IT S   P L A C E




and d ram a unfolding before them. Since the days of the gladiators,
bringing people together to enjoy sporting activities has always been
a recognised p art of a civilised society. T he problem is th at when
things go w rong the consequences can be on the same scale as the
crowd.

(A) Rare events
I f a person stumbles at home they may hurt themselves and even
one or two other people who happen to be in their way. I f a person
stumbles at the bottom of a flight of steps at the end of a football
m atch, w hen there are hundreds of people coming out of the grounds
behind them , the results can be m uch more serious. O ne person
fell at the exit of a moving walkway at the 1970 Jap an ese Exhibition
causing a pile-up which resulted in 42 injuries.3
    Rare events have a greater probability of happening in crowds.
T h e more people there are, the more likely it is that one of them
may stumble. These incidents have the potential of being magnified
into something far more significant because of the sheer density,
focus and scale of the num bers of people present.

(B) W eight of num bers
In 1979 some 18,000 rock fans rushed to get through the only two
open doors of the Cincinnati Coliseum before a ‘W ho’ concert.
Eleven people were asphyxiated in the crush. In the Heysel Stadium
39 football fans were asphyxiated or crushed to death as the crowd
tried to escape from approaching Liverpool fans. I t J jsj>noti(siijjgJy
the.w dghL-oLthese crowds in pounds th at causes,crushes b u t the
com m unicative a nd behavioural inertia, which means th a t once a.
cS>wd starts on one course of action it is slow to react to circum-
S an ces 7 p a rfly la ecause_ot_tjie difficulty ol' passing information all
ffTe^vvay from the site ot the danger to the fringes. Typically, those
at the back of such a crowd never realise how dangerous conditions
have become at the front.

(C) M ovement
At all football matches, large num bers of people have to be brought
into the ground in the same short period and let out of the ground
in an even shorter period. W e take for granted the assignment of
tickets and the search for different entrances, w hether it be to the
theatre, bull rings, wrestling matches or football grounds. In many
                    C R O W D S   A N D    E M E R G E N C IE S




ways the design of all these facilities is really the design of ways
into and out of them. They are one vast complex of corridors leading
to a circle o f seats.
   M ovem ent in these corridors m ust be free and unidirectional.
T he disaster at Ibrox in 1971 was caused when spectators who had
started to leave early from a New Year local derby m atch turned
back at the sound o f cheering from the stands. In the crush which
resulted between those leaving and those returning, 66 people died
and 140 were injured. Steel barriers were bent in the crush, which
suggests th a t a force of at least 4,450 newtons was exerted a t that
point.
   T he m anagem ent of crowds is mainly a problem of the m anage­
ment of the movement of large num bers of people on foot. These
people, moreover, are free agents, not drilled to m arch in step. It
is no accident th at the first lesson a soldier learns is how to move
in unison with his troupe and to follow strict orders directly. This
discipline means that soldiers can be moved by foot with superior
speed, as they can m arch as quickly as directed w ithout ever worry­
ing about stepping on the pair of heels in front of them. Football
supporters, however, do not m arch in step getting into or out of a
football ground. T he design of the grounds and the m anagem ent of
the crowds therefore m ust in a sensitive way guide and discipline
people to enable the movement to be feasible. Given the possibility
of those rare events being so significant, as mentioned earlier, the
problem of the m anagem ent o f movement can be seen to be even
more significant. T his problem becomes even more acute during
emergencies.
   As has been mentioned, some emergencies can be the product of
m inor rare events th a t take on a special significance simply because
of the large num ber of people together in a closed space. O ther
aspects of emergencies can be seen as being more directly a product
of the crowd phenom ena. A bom b scare, a fight, or a fire, the
collapse of a wall, the pressures of large num bers o f people in one
spot are all very special kinds of problems in places such as football
grounds which, although open to the air, are enclosed. They have
to be dealt with in rath er different ways from the way they would
be dealt with in an open field or a private house.
   T he owner o f a private house, or even the m anager of a small
office building, may be able to live his life effectively without ever
considering precisely how any of the emergencies indicated above


                                          89
                      F O O T B A L L   IN   IT S   P L A C E




would be dealt with. This is not true for people who are responsible
for the m anagem ent of football grounds and other large public
facilities. T he potential calamity of any emergency, however small,
is so great that an effective m anagem ent may hope it will not occur
b u t cannot only think about dealing with the problem if it arises.


                    T H E P O L IC E M A N ’S L O T
H ow do you know if a football m atch is going to take place? W hat
are the tell-tale signs th at this great event of public interest, sport
or entertainm ent, is about to happen? Anybody who lives within a
mile or so radius of a m ajor football ground can tell you im m edi­
ately. T he answer is simply: police.
   H ours before the m atch is due to start, squads of policemen
begin to arrive. Streets are closed off. Parking is forbidden. Various
pathw ays th at on a norm al day would be open to the general public
are controlled. As the time for the start of the game draws closer
so the num ber of police and the am ount of visible police activity
increases.
   W h a t is not seen by the ordinary shopper or pedestrian redirected
by an unfam iliar young constable, or the local motorist who dis­
covers th a t he can no longer park where he usually does, is the
even larger am ount of activity that takes place off the streets and,
indeed, on other days of the week. Police forces in areas with large
First Division grounds will often have a small team of senior officers
who are employed virtually full time on all the preparations and
m anagem ent of football matches. In the London M etropolitan
Police area every single m em ber of the police force spends on aver­
age two working days a year helping to police football matches.
The size of the small arm y o f police inside the football ground can
best be appreciated when they fill one section of the stands on
being briefed before the match. O n one day in M arch 1985, 4446
policemen were deployed at 40 football matches, an average of 111
per match. T he most policed m atch had 357 officers (Oxford) and
the least had 6 (W rexham ). T he extent of police presence was not
strictly related to the size o f the gate, or to the Division, though
these factors played some role.
   O nly 841 of these officers were paid for by the clubs involved. A
total of 123 arrests were made, with the highest num ber for one
m atch coinciding with the largest police presence.


                                        90
                    C R O W D S   A N D   E M E R G E N C IE S




   It would be easy to make the mistake o f believing th at this
enormous police activity is simply because of the rowdy criminal
element th at is being gathered together to w atch two groups of
Krown men kick a leather ball around a field. W hatever the beliefs
of the public about the potential violence associated with football
this is not the m ajor reason for the police presence. T he num ber of
police involved bears some relationship to the num ber who will be
found at other large public events. Political dem onstrations, or even
the New Y ear’s Eve celebrations in T rafalgar Square, for example,
will involve large num bers of police in a circle of half a mile or even
a mile radius around the event.
   T he sheer scale then of a num ber o f people brought together for
a football m atch can, of itself, create a whole variety of requirem ents
lor crowd m anagem ent and control. In G reat Britain over the last
century we have increasingly assigned responsibility for th at control
lo the police authorities. T he public, politicians and the m edia are
so concerned about the potential for disaster and so distressed
by any disaster that does occur th at a p araphernalia of control
mechanisms, from design guidelines onwards, has been created. Let
us now consider some of the implications of these processes that
bring so m any policemen on to our streets around football grounds
on a Saturday afternoon.


                    L E G IS L A T IO N BY C R IS IS
Given the great public concern an d the potential threat provided
by large viewing facilities, it is not surprising that a great m any
controls have developed. T he m anagem ent of these facilities is
required to obey a num ber of laws concerning their design and
planning of these facilities. Regular inspections are compulsory and
the fire brigades and the police, as well as the local authority
safety officers, m ust approve the physical soundness as well as the
emergency procedures before the facilities can be opened to the
public. All this control is not surprising and although some may
find it irksome few would disagree with the overall value of this
type of protection of the public. W h at does come as a surprise,
though, is the way in which the actual guidelines and rules on
which this legislation draws have grown up over the years as a
result of one crisis after another. Each time there is a m ajor disaster
(and they have occurred about every ten years or so this century


                                          91
                       F O O T B A L L   IN   IT S   P L A C E




 in football grounds), an inquiry is set up which makes recommen­
 dations. There may then be a modification o f the rules governing
 sports facilities. It was only after the disaster at Bolton W anderers
 in 1946 th at the capacity of grounds, i.e. the m axim um num ber of
 people who were to be allowed in on any occasion, was specified
by law. But these capacities were not enforced throughout football
clubs until very m uch later. It was only after the collapse of the
barriers at the Ibrox stadium 4 th at legislation was eventually intro­
duced that gave guidelines on the strength o f barriers and provided
the legal m echanism by which the strengths could be regularly
checked, and sub-standard areas of grounds closed. Although the
banning of alcohol at football matches was first suggested in reports
to the government in the 1930s it was only after the deaths at Heysel
th a t legislation was introduced throughout G reat Britain to control
the sale o f alcohol around football matches.
   There is one fundam ental difficulty with the process of legislation
by crisis: it has all the quality of closing the stable door after the
horse has bolted. An accretion of legislation adds in a piecemeal
fashion to previous controls. As a consequence there is never any
possibility of examining the system of legislation as a whole, of
seeing the directions in which it is accum ulating or of developing
radical solutions th a t will deal with fundam ental problems. A fur­
ther problem is th at rules and principles get built into the legislation
in the early years and, provided it cannot be dem onstrated that
somebody has been injured because of these rules, there is a power­
ful inertia in the system of controls operating against changing the
rules.
   A very good example o f this is provided by the rules th a t relate
to crowd movement, speeds an d widths of passageways. After the
Ibrox disaster in 1971 a quick study was commissioned from a
firm of consultants, Scicon 40. T heir report became the technical
appendix to the 1972 Wheatley Report.5
   Scicon themselves say quite categorically in the opening com­
ments of their study th at ‘until the results are corroborated by
further m easurem ents they should be used with caution’. Yet their
figures have been built into all subsequent consideration of widths
of exit stairways and m ethods of calculation for the num ber of
people that get out of a sports facility in emergency conditions.
Since the early Scicon report there has been some further research
looking at crowd movement and especially looking a t hum an behav­


                                         92
T                        C R O W D S   A N D    E M E R G E N C IE S




    iour in fires and emergencies. This work throws considerable doubt
    on some of the figures and principles proposed by Scicon. W e shall
    consider some of these issues in a m om ent but the im portant point
    to realise is th at because the Wheatley Report figures were enshrined
    in guidelines and recommendations, no substantial changes have
    been m ade in the light Of later findings.
       From the psychologist’s point of view the problem is th at there
    has never been an attem pt to develop an organised, theoretically
    rich account of w hat actually happens to people in large crowds
    and emergencies and from this a full understanding of the optim um
    approach to dealing with these situations. Instead, a set of ground
    rules has accum ulated th at is based first of all on police control and
    second on the addition of ever more sophisticated and solid h a rd ­
    ware. O nce you decide that it is the police’s problem to control
    individuals and groups in crowds, then it is understandable that
    the police ask for appropriate laws to be passed to give them more
    control. O nce the laws are introduced it is also n atural for the police
    and others to begin to argue th at more police are necessary to help
    act on these laws and carry out the controls th at they are required
    to operate. In this way an increasing cycle of police involvement is
    produced that is very difficult to break into.
       In a similar way, once it is decided to keep people in small
    separated spaces and to guide them along enclosed channels to
    enter and exit from those spaces, then it is natural to hear argum ents
    about making those spaces more protected or effectively segregated.
    T he question as to why the designs need to be handled in this
    particular way, or w hether there is any other way o f effectively and
    safely m anaging crowds w ithout the need for the hardw are of con­
    trol, can no longer be easily raised. T he question becomes increas­
    ingly one o f how can we get more effective hardw are rath er than
    the question o f why did we need the hardw are in the first place and
    is there some other way o f operating w ithout it. This ‘technical fix’
    as it is sometimes called, whereby the solution to a problem is seen
    in technical terms and thereafter the problem is defined in such
    a way th at only technical solutions are possible, permeates the
    engineering approach to crowd safety.




                                               93
                     F O O T B A L L   IN   IT S   P L A C E




                   C O N F L IC T O F IN T E R E S T

T he problems of the technical fix and the accretion of legislation
w ithout any overall objectives or particular philosophy come to a
head when it is suddenly realised that two very different objectives
have been aimed at and are now clearly in conflict. This realisation
happened most directly as a result of the fire a t Bradford City
football ground in 1985. While most legislation has been geared to
ensuring ready egress from football grounds in an emergency, there
has also been a growing desire to try and keep football crowds
under control by the increasing use of barriers and other forms of
m echanical hardw are. W hen th a t fatal fire burst out in the stands
m any people were only able to escape by climbing on to the football
pitch. In m any other grounds in Britain this would not have been
possible because of the barriers th at had been erected to keep the
spectators from getting on to the pitch. So there was a conflict
between the objectives of control and easy egress.
   For a time the government inquiry did consider w hether some
special type of fence could be constructed to solve this problem but,
partly because of the advice received from people knowledgeable
on crowd behaviour in emergencies, a small step was taken away
from yet another technological, hardw are solution: it was insisted
that the problem lay in giving appropriate information to the crowds
and this was a problem of m anagem ent not of fence design. None
the less, segregation of supporters from different football teams and
the introduction of ever more electronic surveillance and control
systems is still seen as the way forward. These add-on and bolt-to
approaches can be handled within the current framework of think­
ing. T hey do not require very m uch more in the way o f com m itm ent
or understanding from the people who operate the systems. T hey
push the problem back into the concern of the designers and the
police rather than the m anagem ent.


                      P E D E S T R IA N F L O W

O ne very clear example o f the way in whit 1 later research has been
ignored is the work on the flow of pedestrians out of sports grounds.
T o understand the significance of the figures involved it should be
appreciated th at the only basis on which to plan for emergencies at
the present time is to consider how long the m axim um time should
¥

                         C R O W D S   A N D   E M E R G E N C IE S




    be for people to get from their viewing positions out into a safe
    location outside the grounds, should there be an emergency. This
    time is usually given at two and a h alf m inutes for a situation
    where a fire could develop very rapidly. T he calculation then runs
    som ething as follows. T h e narrow est widths along the exit routes
    are exam ined and the locations from which people would come to
    go through these exits are considered. T h e nu m b er of people who
    could get through these exits in two and a h alf m inutes is then
    considered and this provides an indication of how m any people
    should be allowed to be in spectator positions th at would feed
    through these exits. T his nu m b er of people is in effect the m axim um
    capacity th at the ground is allowed to hold.
       Now, in order to calculate the nu m b er of people who could go
    through the exits the m anager, designer, or fire officer needs to have an
    indication of the rates of flow of the people. T he problem is th a t people
    do not flow along exit routes like particles of pow der or liquids
    being pum ped along pipes. They come in m any different shapes
    and sizes, they’re moved by their own unaided efforts an d most
    im portantly they move as an undisciplined group intermingling
    with one another. Such untidiness is, of course, an an ath em a to an
    engineer. M any years ago u was therefore decided th at people would
    be considered in term s of a single unit width. This was derived by
    m easurem ents taken across people’s shoulders. It used to be consid­
    ered to be som ething like 22 inches b u t this got metricised to 550 mm.
    T h e assum ption was then m ade th at people in effect move through
    doors shoulder to shoulder in discrete chunks o f 550 mm each. Some­
    where along the line some calculations were also m ade o f the speeds
    o f people moving in free groups on the London U nderground and
    from this a calculation was m ade in the region o f 40-60 persons per
    m inute per unit of exit width. T hese figures have been enshrined
    as the flow rates in all regulations and guidelines ever since:

      Recom m ended flow rates
      para 233 from stands and stairways a flow rate o f 40 persons
                per m inute per unit exit width (i.e. 550 mm) should
                be used.
      para 234 from terraces (including covered terraces) an d the
                ground generally a flow rate of 60 persons per
                m inute per unit exit w idth should be used.
                                                       White Guide,6 p. 70


                                               95
                       F O O T B A L L    IN   IT S   P L A C E




    U nfortunately, the engineering simplicity of these calculations
 does not bear psychological examination. A very simple observation
 would show th at people do not move along corridors shoulder to
 shoulder. T h e idea therefore th at the same num ber of people would
 flow out of a doorway th at is two unit widths (1,100 mm) as would
 flow out o f a doorway th at was, say, two and a half unit widths
 would seem to be unlikely. O f course, because the guidelines are
 based on unit widths people norm ally build in discrete components
 of this magic unit, so there is not m uch evidence to show exactly
 how widths operate. A second point is th at people move, quite
 obviously, at different speeds depending on the density o f the crowd.
 As people get closer together, so it is difficult for them to take larger
 steps and the shuffling motion th at results greatly slows down the
 speeds at which people actually move. A third complicating factor
 to which some N orth A m erican researchers have draw n attention
 is th at people do not norm ally completely fill exit routes w ith their
 shoulders touching walls on either side. Instead they find for a
 variety o f reasons that it is m ore suitable to keep some distance
from the walls, further reducing the effective widths through which
 they can move.7
    T here is one other very simple flaw in the engineering consider­
ations. T h e calculation of the use o f a set of exits is m ade by
identifying all the exit widths available to people in particular spec­
tating positions and dividing the total n u m b er of unit widths by the
total nu m b er o f people. T his is an elem entary averaging exercise.
But anybody who has looked around in a theatre, or at any other
public place o f entertainm ent at the end of the performance, will
have noticed th a t unlike engineers’ num bers people do not divide
themselves evenly between the different exits available. People will
tend to go to the exits they know or to the ones th at lead in
directions th a t they wish to take.
    W e carried out a simple study o f this process by observing people
leaving the stands at Chelsea football ground by one of the m ain
staircases. T he stairs had a balustrade down the centre and a
separating rail at the top. T h e crowds using this stairway consist­
ently preferred the right-hand side of the stairs rather than distribut­
ing themselves evenly across both sides. T here is no evidence that
they behave any differently in emergency situations. Furtherm ore,
observations have shown th at people tend to join a queue for an
exit th at seems close, even though another out-of-sight exit may be


                                         96
T
                        C R O W D S   A N D   E M E R G E N C IE S




    closer and have no queue waiting to go through it. Indeed this
    problem of differential egress would seem to be one th a t would
    reveal m any patterns th a t have been com m ented on by behavioural
    scientists b u t which engineers have ignored. For example, there
    would ap p e a r to be a tendency to change level first in a complex
    pedestrian system and then to move along on the final level even
    when it m ight be less crowded to move along the first level and
    then change level at a later stage. T here m ay well also be tendencies
    to go to the right rath er than to the left and so on. Given these
    problems in calculating and predicting flow rates based on simple
    engineering principles it is not surprising to discover th at
    researchers in the USA and C an ad a have actually m easured flow
    rates th a t are consistently lower than the rates recom m ended in
    governm ent regulations.8
       In principle this m ight seem to be a potentially disastrous state
    of affairs. C ertainly if the very low figure of 20 people per m inute
    per unit w idth were contrasted w ith the m axim um assum ption in
    British guidelines o f 60 people per m inute per unit width then it
    would suggest th a t m any of o ur grounds are three times over
    capacity. T he counter to this view is th at there is no evidence, even
    in m ajor emergencies, th at the capacities have been inappropriately
    high. T h e reasons for this could well be th a t it is rare these days


    [
    for grounds to be filled to capacity and we are fortunate th a t major
    disasters have never occurred when grounds have been filled to
    absolute capacity. Even the dreadful happenings in Heysel occurred
    some tim e before the m atch started and before the ground had
    filled. I t is also likely th at the two an d a half m inutes required
    egress time is m uch shorter th an is essential for m any types of
    emergency. This m eans th a t overall the p attern of num bers works
    out w ithin a safe range. Given this situation, legislative authorities
    are not very prone to m aking changes ju s t because the scientific
    principles and research evidence to support these principles appears
    to contradict the way they are doing their calculations at present.
        However, the consequence of these types o f controls, especially
    when taken together w ith other considerations to be discussed, is
    that there is considerable inflexibility in the way in which grounds
    can be designed. Both the provision o f spectator seats or standing
    positions and the routes into and out of grounds are now so severely
    controlled by the rigid application o f a few key num bers th at inno­
    vation and variety are very difficult indeed. T here is no point in


                                              97
                        F O O T B A L L   IN   IT S   P L A C E




changing the size and shape o f doorways, or o f introducing a variety
of interesting and different spaces along exit routes, when these will
all be added together in some very simple calculation of capacity
and may well end up indicating th a t the ground can hold far
fewer people than would a conventional design. W hen the added
complications of segregation and other forms of crowd control are
p u t into the picture as well it is understandable th at there is so
little variety in the way o ur football grounds are designed for crowd
movement.



             W H A T H A P PE N S IN AN E M E R G E N C Y

H u m a n behaviour in emergencies has been studied by a n u m b er of
people around the world and it is interesting and valuable to note
th at their studies do show rem arkable consistencies. T hey indicate
th a t there is a definite set o f stages th a t people go through in all
the emergencies th at have been studied. W h at is m ore im portant is
th at these stages do not fit in with the public and m uch publicised
view of wild uncontrolled oanic. I t is im portant to establish this
difference because m any regulations are based upon the assum p­
tions of this notional ‘p anic’. I f som ething rath er different is h ap pen­
ing, it may be th a t once again o ur regulations derive from a com­
monly accepted mythology rath er from a carefully understood set
of psychological processes.
   A good example of a situation where this held true was the fire
at Bradford City football ground on 11 M ay 1985. T h e W est Stand,
where the fire started, held ju s t over 2,000 people. T he stand itself
was wooden and had wooden seating at the back, with polypropy­
lene seating on concrete in front o f this and concrete terracing
nearest to the pitch. Because the stand was built on a n atu ral slope,
there was a void un d er the stand o f between 9 and 30 inches.
Com bustible rubbish, such as sweet papers, cigarette butts and
dead m atches had accum ulated in this space for some time and was
probably about 12 inches deep. T h e fire was most probably started
by an accidentally dropped match. T h e sequence of events which
took place was fairly typical for a fire in a public building. T he
timings are given in T able 4.1.
   T he first thing to happen is th at there are some am biguous clues
th a t som ething - possibly life-threatening - m ay be going on. This


                                          98
                               C R O W D S   A N D   E M E R G E N C IE S



Table 4.1           Sequence of events a t Bradford City football ground fire

M in u te s          F ire                           B rig a d e !P o lic e Smoke          Escape
                                                     a n d other events


15.40         0 -    Ignition o f rubbish            Smell of
                                                     burning
15.41         1 -
                     Serious waste fire - 0.1
                     MW
                     Burning o f timbers beneath
15.42         2 -    floor
15.43         3 -    Flames above floor          Call to                                   Serious local
                                                 brigade                                   escape
15.44         4 -    Flame above floor (several T V                       Serious          M ain escape
                     m2)                         commences                problems in      precipitated
                                                                          back corridor
15.45         5 -    Flame under roof (fire at                            Substantial
                     floor level about 10 m2)                             parts o f back
                                                                          corridor
                                                                          blocked and
                                                                          lethal
15.46         6 -    Serious spread under roof Fire Brigade
                     and involving roof        arrives
15.47         7 -    Stand completely alight


is an aspect of emergency events such as fires th a t is frequently
m isunderstood. In the early stages it is not exactly clear w hat the
n atu re of the problem m ay be. All th a t people know is th a t there
is some possible danger or perhaps only th a t som ething unusual is
happening. T h e first sign of trouble a t Bradford was w hen two
spectators noticed th a t their feet and legs were getting w arm . They
both then looked down an d saw the glow of a small fire through
gaps in the floor o f the stand. This was at 15.40. In these early
stages people need to find out w hat is happening. In a crowd they
will ask the people near them or they will listen carefully to any
suggestions from figures of authority. T h e critical point is th at some
type o f initial questioning o r search for other inform ation occurs in
these early ambiguous stages.
   T he im portance of this early am biguity cannot be over-empha-
sised. T hese quests for further information, checking with each other
or looking around, are of critical im portance for two particular
reasons. First, they take some time to carry out and, second, they
lead to a set o f expectations as to w hat is happening and w hat is
the appropriate way of dealing w ith it.
   In the early stages of the Bradford fire it was clear th at m any


                                                     99
                       F O O T B A L L   IN    IT S   P L A C E




people did not take the event very seriously. Spectators close to the
fire moved away b u t then they stood and turned to w atch it. In
evidence to the Com m ittee of Inquiry, PC Lyes said, ‘W e did not
get m uch reaction from people in the stand. Obviously they were
w atching the m atch and, in fairness, the fire did not look m uch
from where they were sitting. A few of them moved out into the
aisles towards the top o f the steps.’9 W hile one m an went to fetch
a fire extinguisher, another poured h alf a cup of Coffee on the fire
- an action which had no effect. T h e police were alerted by the
spectator searching for a fire extinguisher and they, in turn, went
to look before radioing for help.
   In the initial stages people in authority m ay be equally unlikely
to treat an incident as serious and so delay taking appropriate
action. T he police in particular may need time to assess w hat is
going on. In the Bradford fire a senior police officer walked the
length of the football pitch in order to examine the fire before he
started giving orders for people to leave over the front of the stands
on to the football pitch. In Brussels it would ap p ear th at the police
never got properly organised to deal with the rushing rowdy young
men who were chasing around. T hey appeared to have no clear
way o f recognising the likely consequences o f the actions.
   Once some recognition of the early stages has been achieved,
people have to start selecting the actions th at they will take. This
again m ay require checking w ith others and will certainly rely upon
the knowledge people have o f w hat actions are possible. In certain
cases, people m ay well decide to help others or to go for help.
   This then leads on to the third stage in which people actively try
to cope with the situation or to leave it. This is w hen the timing in
relation to escape routes, exit widths and the other aspects of egress
become critical. I t is here th at you have a large n um b er o f people
all trying to leave a t once. T h eir leaving is, o f course, under con­
siderable pressure o f time, and small accidents can m ake this into
a very dangerous stage.
   Because the tem po o f a fire increases all the time, the situation
can go from being potentially dangerous to extremely dangerous
w ithin m inutes. In the case o f the Bradford fire, there was still time
to leave while the flames were growing upw ards, but as soon as
they hit the roof, the fire could only get oxygen from the open ends
of the stand and so spread ‘faster th an a m an can ru n ’, sending


                                         100
                    C R O W D S   A N D   E M E R G E N C IE S




black smoke ahead o f the flames and into the exit passageways
behind the stand.
   T he sam e time pressure exists in crowd surges and crushes.
Pressure can build up slowly but, w hen critical density is reached,
the situation becomes dangerous alm ost immediately.
   I t is im portant to draw attention, however, to the fact th a t the
length of time to evacuate once the decision has been m ade, is
planned to be in the region of no more than two and a h alf minutes.
T his is the time it can take any person to get from their position
as a spectator out to a safe location. But as has been considered
already, the time to recognise th at there is som ething serious going
on and then the time to come to a decision as to w hat to do may
be considerable - in the Bradford case, three minutes. Even under
norm al ideal circumstances, or a situation where the hazard is
clearly visible as in the Bradford fire, it can easily take a m inute
before people decide to act. In more hidden fires, say a fire which
originates in a locked room or store cupboard, it can take fifteen or
twenty minutes. T h e im portance of these time differences can be
assessed by the fact th at at Bradford the time from the fire first
being barely visible on the television film to its being a total inferno
was in the region of from four to five minutes.
   It can be seen, therefore, th at the early planning for potential
accidents, the quick and effective com m unication and the ready
recognition of potential danger and how to cope w ith it, can all be
far m ore im portant than having precisely the right nu m ber o f exits.
   U nfortunately, we live in an age in which the technical solution
is seen as being more m anageable, and possibly of more commercial
value th a n the m anagem ent or the social science solution. It will
therefore come as no surprise that the scientific research which
revealed this p attern of behaviour and drew attention to the im port­
ance of early recognition an d w arning has been interpreted to be a
reason for developing more complex and sophisticated com puter
controlled informative fire-warning system s.10 I t is hoped th at by
producing some clever piece o f com puting it will be possible to give
people inform ation in a way th at will greatly speed up their initial
reaction and their desire to leave a building in an emergency. In
o ur view, this is introducing ju s t another piece o f technology into
the chain, with all its likelihood of error and m isinterpretation.
M ore im portantly, yet again, it inhibits the recognition o f where
                       F O O T B A L L   IN    IT S   P L A C E




the seat of the problem is: lack o f effective m anagem ent procedures,
good training and efficient com munication.


                    W H O S E P R O B L E M IS IT?

In this chapter we have looked a t the particular problem s o f crow d­
ing and the difficulties th a t can be caused by emergencies. W e have
seen th at throughout the consideration of the m ovem ent of people
in large num bers and planning for their safety there has been an
increasing tendency to rely on very simple technical calculations
built around the idea o f the provision o f specific architectural means.
W here this is not the whole story a disciplined force, in the form of
the police, has been draw n on to exert the type of directive control
th at the steel and concrete cannot achieve.
   T h ere has been some change in this mood, th at we strongly
endorse. This is the move tow ards recognising th a t the whole issue
is actually one of m anagem ent and training an d the effective com­
m unication between various people, football grounds and the public
who use them . T h e more people know about w hat is being prepared
on their behalf, the m ore active they are in taking p a rt in these
preparations, and the more th at stewards and club mem bers them ­
selves can do to m ake this p art of their spectator activity, the less
likely is it th at these preparations for emergencies will ever be called
on to be used. A significant consequence of this is th a t by being
p a rt of this overall sharing o f responsibilities the physical am bience
as well as the social atm osphere o f the clubs could well change for
the better.




                                         102
                             Chapter Five


     COPING WITH VIOLENCE




                  O T H E R T IM E S A N D PLACES

 If the British m edia is to be believed, there seems to be a feeling
am ongst the public, exacerbated by the Heysel riot, th a t violence is
inextricably linked w ith football and, in particular, English football.
 Furtherm ore, this violence is seen as a phenom enon of the last
 twenty years. This is a myth. But like most myths, it is firmly
 lodged w ithin contem porary culture and is extremely difficult to
 dispel despite num erous attem pts by W illiams, D unning and
 M urphy in Hooligans Abroad1 and Peter M arsh in Aggro: The Illusion
 o f Violence,2 Indeed, in his excellent and highly readable account,
 Hooligan: A History o f Respectable Fears,2, Geoffrey Pearson has shown
 how long-standing are m any o f the detailed fears often mistakenly
 thought of as uniquely characteristic o f the present day.
    All these and m any other writers show th at spectator violence is
jio t new, is not particular to foothall and occurs th.tftiwhniit the.
 v^grld. W e sEall look a t this evidence o f the num erous examples of
 spectator violence in other sports, in other countries and in other
 times in order to p u t soccer’s problem in context. I f football hooli­
 ganism is seen to be a recent phenom enon, then it is not surprising
 that the governm ent and the public believe th a t im m ediate solutions
 of the short, sharp shock kind are practical, desirable and likely
 to be successful. A t present, the problem is seen to be solely a
 contem porary one and limited to football and therefore am enable
  to direct and im m ediate action. But, if it can be understood that
  football hooliganism is not particular to British culture, th a t it has
 occurred as long as football has been played and is not confined to
  football, then this surely m eans we m ust look to explanations and


                                    103
                      F O O T B A L L   IN    IT S   P L A C E




solutions beyond those which emphasise the particularities of
today’s troublem akers.
   Violence associated w ith sport has been docum ented since the
R om an era. T he R om ans had two m ain forms of public sport
spectacle, the gladiatorial games and the chariot races. W hile in
the games violence was prom oted and sanctioned, inter-com petitor
violence was prohibited in the chariot races. I t was the races,
however, which had the highest levels o f spectator violence associ­
ated w ith them. P art o f the reason for the higher level o f rioting
m ay have been th at the races were by far the m ore popular sport.
T he circus maximus in Rome had a capacity o f a q u arter o f a million,
far greater than the largest stadium anyw here today. T hese events
were also an occasion for the people to let their rulers know their
feelings about the state of the nation. Because the seating was
designated according to social class, this gave the rulers an instant
public opinion poll as the crowd would shout praise o r condem ­
nation for current social policy. So the races were popular, noisy
and highly emotionally charged events.
   T he chariot races were contested by four teams - red, white,
green and blue. O ver time the first two colours were absorbed by
the second two and so most accounts of spectator unrest refer
only to the greens and blues. T h e rioting which occurred among
spectators is unparalleled by even the w orst violence today and
continued into the fifth and sixth centuries in the Byzantine empire.
T h e wooden stadium in C onstantinople was burned by crowds in
AD 491, 498, 507 and 532. T he E m peror Ju stin ia n was then forced
to build a m arble stadium . T h e crowds did not stop at dam age to
the stadia. After a green victory in 507, fans ran riot in the city
and burned the local synagogue. T he greens and blues, dressed
outlandishly and frighteningly, roam ed the streets and attacked
either mem bers of the opposite faction, or innocent passers-by.
H owever, the w orst rioting occurred w hen both factions co-operated
in AD 532.

  Prisoners about to be executed were rescued by the m ob which
  ignored Ju stin ia n ’s attem pts to appease them w ith the promise
  o f additional games . . . the E m peror acceded to dem ands that
  he dismiss Jo h n of C appodicia and other u npopular
  officials . . . the m ob proclaim ed a new em peror . . . and a
  n u m b er o f senators paid hom age to the new ruler. Fortunately


                                        104
                      C O P IN G   W I T H   V IO L E N C E




  for Ju stin ia n , his most skilful general, Belisarius, arrived in time
  to save the day - at the cost o f an estim ated 30,000 deaths.4

 There are some parallels w ith football hooliganism. For example,
the two factions dressed so th at they were immediately recognisable
and looked fierce. However, C am eron suggests th at the supporters
of the blues and greens were la jeunesse doree — well-off young men
with a great deal of free time and so possibly rattjei; unlike present-
d ay hooligans, either in England or anywhere else.
   Reports o f sports-related violence continue from then to the pre­
sent day. In o ur introductory chapter we noted the wish to ban
football in mediaeval times because it was too violent. In recounting
the life of Cromwell, A ntonia F raser5 reports th at in 1655 in the
M idlands, football m atches and race meetings were banned in order
to preserve order. Also from the earliest days of professional football
there were difficulties in controlling the crowds. In 1890, at a m atch
between Burnley and Blackburn, the referee was attacked and p u r­
sued by a ‘howling stone-throw ing m ob’, and the police could not
clear the field of supporters. In 1909 at H am pd en Park ‘some 6,000
spectators pulled up goalposts, fences and pay-boxes, set fire to
them and danced round them in the middle of the pitch. Police,
firemen and am bulancem en were stoned, fire engines dam aged and
hoses slashed.’ Some 54 constables and 60 other people were
injured.
    O n the day the Popplewell In q u iry ’s final report was presented
to the H ouse of Com m ons, M r Toby Jessel, M P for Tw ickenham ,
asked w hether the H om e Secretary, M r Douglas H u rd , would ‘take
note o f the contrast between the rath er better stan d ard o f conduct
th at one might find a t a rugby football ground such as Tw ickenham
and the rath er lower stand ard of behaviour at some soccer
g rounds’.6 This illustrates quite sincerely the common misconcep­
 tion th at soccer has hooligans and other sports have spectators.
 This is untrue. Even rugby football - noted for its aggression on
 the pitch - has its share of spectato r violence.
    Scenes o f sports violence aTe certainly not limited to England.
 W illiams, D unning and M u rp h y quote a survey carried out in
 America which found th a t 312 riots at sports events (involving 17
 deaths) had been reported between 1960 and 1972. T he sports
 involved were: baseball, 97; Am erican football, 66; basketball, 54;
 ice hockey, 39; boxing, 19; horse racing, 11; motorcycle and car
                       F O O T B A L L   IN   IT S   P L A C E




racing, 10; golf, 4; soccer, 3; wrestling, 3; athletics, 2; tennis, 2; and
air sports, 2. No definition of w hat constitutes a riot is given by
W illiams et al., m aking it difficult to ju d g e ju s t how severe these
incidents were. However, other sources quote details o f incidents
which give some idea, not only of the am ount o f dam age caused
b u t also o f the height o f emotion of the crowds.
   T h ere was a riot at Roosevelt Raceway in New York in 1963.
W hen officials m ade w hat the punters felt was an unfair decision,
the spectators storm ed the track, attacked the ju d g es’ booth, injured
one judge, sm ashed the tote board, broke windows and dam aged
cars. Fifteen people required hospital treatm ent. In 1955 a riot
occurred outside a stadium where the M ontreal C anadians had
been playing the D etroit Red Wings. T h e stadium had been cleared
because of disruptive behaviour inside when fans had throw n fruit,
galoshes and smoke bom bs at a Hockey League official. O utside
the stadium fifteen blocks o f stores were looted, windows smashed,
cars dam aged and news-stands an d kiosks burned down. Violence
has broken out at cricket matches in both Georgetown, British
G uyana and Q u een ’s Park, Port of Spain, when bottles and any­
thing else th at cam e to h and were throw n on to the field towards
the players.
   I t sometimes seems th a t football hooliganism is peculiar to the
British. O nce again the m yth evaporates before the evidence. At a
m atch in Lim a in 1964, 318 people were killed in a riot and more
th an 500 were injured. Seventy-four people died in a football riot
in A rgentina in 1968, 69 in Moscow in 1982 and 29 in Colum bia
in the same year. T here has been hooliganism in Yugoslavia and
in Turkey, where rival fans used pistols, knives and broken bottles.
T he riot continued for days and 600 spectators were injured and
44 killed. A D utch player was h u rt by a Molotov cocktail in 1981.
Some Ju v en tas supporters were arm ed w ith flare guns a t the Heysel
stadium in 1985. Blame is still laid at the door of the English fans
who supposedly encouraged violence by their presence or example.
Williams et al. describe how English fans were targets for neo-
fascist groups in Greece in 1982, who threatened to use pistols and
to take hostages if the English fans caused trouble, and reports of
hockey hooliganism in Czechoslovakia say th at youngsters ‘found
their idol in Liverpool rowdies’.
   T he catalogue could roll on. W herever large groups of people get
together there is always some potential for anti-social behaviour.
                      C O P IN G   W I T H   V IO L E N C E




News reports of m ajor dem onstrations almost invariably end, as
standard practice, with a com m ent on the num ber o f arrests or the
lack of them.
   W here does the origin of football hooliganism lie? Some have
suggested th at it is the product of individual deviant behaviour.
T aken to an extreme, this view proposes th a t hooligans are innately
bad or evil individuals. At the other end of the scale, some sociol­
ogists would argue th a t one needs to look to society to account for
hooliganism largely as an outw ard expression of cultural and su b ­
cultural norm s and mores. Between these two views, a n u m b er of
theories has been p u t forward to explain football hooliganism. In
the rem ainder of this chapter, we will review these theories and
discuss the significance o f these explanations for developing strateg­
ies for dealing w ith spectator violence. O f course, theorising about
hooliganism is not solely an academ ic pursuit. Those who stand on
the terraces are as likely to have theories themselves about soccer
violence. I t is instructive to consider the full range o f possibilities
that have been suggested.


            W H A T IS F O O T B A L L H O O L IG A N IS M ?
U ntil now, we have been talking about football hooliganism w ithout
ever explicitly stating w hat it is. T h e kinds o f disturbances m en­
tioned range from throw ing galoshes to burning buildings. W h at
counts as football hooliganism varies from person to person. I t has
been found in the past th a t people often associated hooliganism
with vandalism . M ore recently, there have been incidents of fights
and stabbings involving football fans which were counted as football
hooliganism even though they took place at some distance from any
soccer ground, such as the E m bankm ent tube station in London.
Recent violent attacks at cricket m atches have even been referred
to as ‘football’ hooliganism!
   Although a definition such as anti-social behaviour m ight seem
appropriate, therefore, it would be difficult to be precise about w hat
behaviour is anti-social. M ore problem atic still is defining how
m uch a social problem is football hooliganism an d how m uch is, say,
 rugby hooliganism. Football has suffered from guilt by association.
   T o some extent incidents are thought of as football hooliganism
 because o f the way those involved are labelled as football supporters.
T hus an attack m ay be considered as hooliganism because the
                       F O O T B A L L    IN   IT S   P L A C E




  attackers are called ‘W est H am supporters’ rath er than ‘regulars of
  “ the T h ree Stars’” , for example. Any o f these labels might be
  equally valid. A t a time w hen football’s troubles are newsworthy,
  attention may be draw n to m em bership o f some groups and not of
  others. At present, football is seen as a suitable scapegoat.
     Definitions of anti-social behaviour can also vary a good deal. It
  is probably fair to say th a t most people think o f hooliganism as
  fights, pitch invasions, missile-throwing, drunkenness and the dis­
  ruption of cross-Channel ferries. Looking at figures for arrests, how­
 ever, Trivizas found th at 67 per cent o f arrests were for ‘the use of
 threatening, abusive or insulting words or behaviour, w ith intent to
 cause a breach o f the peace or w hereby a breach of the peace may
 be occasioned’.7 T hese offences generally come un der the heading
 of bawling, shouting, cursing, and swearing and consist of rival
 supporters shouting sexual jibes at each other w ith accom panying
 gestures. Arrests for assaults only am ounted to 0.3 per cent o f his
 sample. T his disparity between behaviour and arrests stems partly
 from the difficulties in arresting people in the m iddle o f a crowd.
 T he police are also m ore likely to charge offenders w ith offences for
 which they know they have enough evidence to obtain a conviction.
 A study in Scotland found th a t the charges brought varied consider­
 ably between police authorities.8 Even taking all o f this into account,
 incidents of serious violence are relatively rare.
     H ooliganism can take place before, during or after the match.
 Because rival fans are segregated more an d m ore effectively within
stadia, face-to-face confrontation is only possible outside the ground.
T o minim ise clashes before and after m atches, fans may be segre­
gated both on entering and leaving the ground and in some cases
the home supporters are forced to rem ain inside the ground while
away supporters are escorted to their own or the nearest public
transport. W hile one form o f hooliganism is thus discouraged,
another comes forward to take its place. Fans who are physically
separated w ithin the ground can throw missiles, coins or even seats
at each other, and D unning et al. report th a t ‘fighting crews’ from
some clubs make special forays to find rival fans in places or at
times not subject to m atch-day policing.
    Football hooliganism, then, is a term which covers m any behav­
iours, both simple and complex. Although it often refers to the
activities of young m en found in the vicinity of football stadia on


                                         108
                      C O P IN G   W I T H   V IO L E N C E




Saturday afternoons this is too narrow a definition to encompass
all th a t the public associates with the term.
   J u s t as the concept of hooliganism is more complex than it
initially appears, then so are the theories p ut forward to explain
why this particular form of aggression occurs and why it should be
linked to a popular sport.
    Explanations of football hooligans derive from m any sources,
some treating it like any other kind of aggression involving groups
of young m en, some concentrating on its attachm en t to the game
itself an d to the extent th a t the two are linked. Some explanations
are quite crude and based on public feeling, rum our and media
reporting o f incidents, whereas some are based on careful exam in­
ation o f w hat actually happens.


                    T H E Y ’R E J U S T A N IM A L S
T he m ost crude explanation for football hooliganism is th a t hooli­
gans are anim als and th at the obvious remedy is to lock them up
in cages. T his explanation is very interesting b u t tells us more about
the people who believe it than about the causes o f the problem. For
one thing, saying th at hooligans are anim als is intended to m ean
in this context th at they are sub-hum an or b arb arian and not that
they have behaviour or m otivations in common w ith other species,
which is an entirely different explanation which we will come to
later. T he behaviour of hooligans is referred to as bestial and not
only in this country. After the Heysel riot, an Italian new spaper
carried reports of Liverpool fans urinating on the corpses, reports
which were almost certainly untrue bu t which illustrate how some
people believe th a t soccer fans, once on the ram page, lose all attri­
butes of civilisation and hum anity.9
   By way o f a footnote, the term ‘anim als’ was introduced into
football by Sir A lf Ramsey. Interestingly, it was applied not to
spectators b u t rath er to the players of the A rgentinian national side
after England had beaten them 1-0 in an ill-tempered 1966 W orld
C u p m atch in which one A rgentinian player was sent off.
   Although proffered as a type of explanation, claiming th at hooli­
gans are anim als is in fact simply an insult referring to the perceived
uncivilised, irrational, meaningless violence which m any see taking
 place on the terraces. I t also suggests th a t we - civilised hum ans -
d o n ’t need to try to und erstan d w hat lies behind football hooligan­


                                        109
                      F O O T B A L L   IN   IT S   P L A C E




ism, or th at we could not even if we tried. W hile a sense o f outrage
a t w hat is happening to soccer may be justified, it is not of itself
constructive. Any real explanation of w hat football hooliganism is
m ust be based, first, on observation o f the phenom enon in question
so th at we know w hat soccer violence actually consists of and,
second, explanations which can give us some insight into its causes.


                ‘A G G R O ’ A N D T H E M A L E B O N D
Peter M arsh and his colleagues10 - through studies o f the crowds
on terraces and detailed analysis of video recordings o f incidents of
fighting - came to the conclusion th at a great deal o f w hat seems
incom prehensible and irrational to an uninitiated outsider makes
perfect sense and is highly structured w hen viewed from the point
o f view of fans ‘in the know ’.
    M arsh et al. pu t forward the idea (which initially seems rather
strange) th at football hooliganism doesn’t involve violence so m uch
as w hat they call ‘aggro’: non-violent ritualised displays of
aggression. T h eir argum ent is th at if observed closely, violence at
football matches is more evident th an real. Gangs rush a t each
other b ut never actually meet. Fans who have seemingly been b ru t­
ally kicked get up, dust themselves off, and walk away. T he violence
seems to be of the ‘hold me back or I ’ll kill h im ’ variety. T h a t is,
it depends a great deal on looking as if you are willing to do injury,
looking hard, carrying knives, b u t th a t there are in-built barriers
to the occurrence of serious violence - somebody is always there to
hold the aggressor back. A t worst, a tactical retreat can be effected
— i.e., one side runs away.
    W h at is all this aggro for? T h e suggestion is th at aggro is a way
o f dealing with real aggression, turning it into ritual rath er than
reality. M arsh et al. say th a t aggression has always been necessary
to m an for survival of the species. M a n was originally a h un ter and
aggression was needed to ensure th at each tribe or clan had the
resources necessary to survive. T he existence of all-male hunting
groups caused the genesis of male bonding, a sense o f attraction
and attach m ent between m en in groups. M arsh et al. suggest that
this aggression is still p a rt of m a n ’s make-up, although they are
careful to say th a t it is not necessary to speculate on w hether
aggression is inherited biologically. Instead, aggression is so m uch
a p a rt o f hum an culture th at it reaches us through socialisation


                                        110
                             C O P IN G   W I T H   V IO L E N C E




ge     rather th an through genes. A nother author, Tiger, on the other
elf    hand thinks th a t the propensity for male bonding is genetically
 is    linked an d th at all men inherit it to some degree.
on        So, aggression is seen as being particularly associated w ith groups
d,     of men. Because hunting was an all-male activity and needed strong
:s.    co-operative bonds between m en to be successful, it is argued that
       male bonding is now inextricably bound up with aggression. T he
       major difference between men is in how this aggression is m ade
       manifest. For m ost people the aggression is constrained by the rules
ds     and expectations o f society and it shows up in o ur culture mainly
of     in competitiveness, so we talk of ‘aggressive business tactics’. In
ns     any case it is harmful for a culture to allow aggression to be directed
xs     towards others w ithout any checks. M uch tribal w arfare consists of
nt     displays of aggression where injury to either side is considered to
       be a disaster and these ‘w ars’ are seen as one m ethod which prim i­
ler    tive cultures have developed to m anage aggression.
ch        In the sam e way M arsh et al. see soccer’s ‘tribal w ars’ as one of
 of    this culture’s ways of allowing men to come to blows w ithout coming
 at    to real injury. Y oung m en who are ad u lt enough to be beyond their
ch     p aren ts’ control, perhaps bv being financially independent, w ithout
ut-    having taken on the responsibilities o f raising a family on their own,
lce    are tem porarily unconstrained. T hey can show their aggression in
 is,   more obvious ways th an m ost ‘respectable’ m em bers o f society
rY>    would choose. T ig e r11 also suggests th a t young men are particularly
ers    aggressive because of their need to seek ‘self-validation’. This need
 to    for validation, taken w ith the attachm en t to m ale peers, means that
ted    proof of maleness is a prerequisite to group membership:
         the com bination o f the process o f attachm en t and the need for
'ay
         validation leads to a cumulative group ‘feeling’ which -
 an
         particularly un d er the stim ulus of external th reat or the
iry
         perception of a possible advantage - tends to increasingly bold
 nd
         and effective activity. T h e latter characteristic, as m uch as
the
         m isinformation, prejudice, inertia, etc., may lead to ‘escalation’
mg
         o f conflicts between groups of males for whom conciliation
ion
         w ithout triu m ph m eans invaluation of their maleness — ‘honour
bat
         m ust be served’.
are
her       All o f this refers as m uch to the arm y, politicians an d freemasons
ich    as it does to soccer fans. In fact, Tiger suggests th a t male bonding
ion    is a cause of m any wars. T h e difference between the terraces and


                                              111
                       F O O T B A L L   IN   IT S   P L A C E




W hitehall lies partly in the structures w ithin which this self-vali­
dation occurs. M arsh et al. in The Rules o f Disorder describe a study
of the social structure o f football fans and describe it in term s o f a
career structure. Desm ond Morris, draw ing on the same research
for his book Soccer Tribe,12 gives a m anw atcher’s guide to seventeen
identifiable types of soccer fan. T he most interesting point about
this classification is that it describes a career path from the ‘tiddlers’,
who are ju s t old enough to attend m atches on their own, through
‘novices’, ‘fans’ and ‘leaders’ (of chants, aggro or travel arrange­
ments) until graduation as hard-drinking, well-respected, old hands.
W ithin this general structure there are jo b slots for ‘hooligans’,
‘toughs’ and ‘n u tters’. T his ‘career p a th ’ gives a structure, not only
for self-validation b u t also for the passing on of traditions and
changes, for creating an ethos o f w hat is or is not acceptable behav­
iour. This research, then, portrays young supporters as belonging
more to a loosely defined m en ’s club th an to a rabble.


                          T E R R IT O R IA L IT Y

Some theories focus on w hat are seen as similarities between the
behaviour o f hooligans and animals. Some animals, robins for
instance, have a territory which they will protect from intrusion by
other males of the same species. T hus a robin will sometimes attack
red objects within its territory, m istaking them for trespassers. It
has often been suggested th at m an is a territorial anim al and the
fact th a t soccer fans feel some sort of strong attach m en t to their
‘ends’ and try to capture the other side’s ‘en d’ if at all possible
seems to add weight to this hypothesis. However, the territory
fought over at soccer grounds is completely unlike an an im al’s
territory in th at it is not valued as a resource for food or mates but
as a symbol o f the group who ‘ow n’ it. According to the M arsh-
M orris approach the territories are socially produced as an aid in
the aggression-m anagem ent process. T he fact th a t some violent fans
will support their actions by quoting ‘territoriality’ theories simply
serves to show how pervasive social science ideas can become!
   W hile the recognition of claims over ends was m ade easier by
segregation o f opposing fans, the division of football grounds into
territories can be seen as a way o f giving rivals an issue to fight about
and an atten dan t m an n er of fighting which need not necessarily be
violent. In a well-fenced and segregated stadium , small groups of


                                         112
                      C O P IN G   W I T H   V IO L E N C E




fans may infiltrate the opposing end, disguised as supporters of that
side. T hey can then haul out their own scarves and start to cheer
on their team an d draw attention to themselves and their feat. O n
unfenced terracing fans m ay storm the rival end by force, running
towards it in a concerted charge. T h e two sides may never meet -
as the invaders get closer they slow dow n and a gap is left between
the two sides. Some punches may be throw n across the gap b u t
often nothing m ore serious.
   It is obvious, however, th a t no m atter how ritualised the
aggression at soccer m atches is, real injuries can occur, if not all
the time then at least regularly enough to worry both the football
world and the public. T h e ‘aggro’ theory covers this by saying th at
if the patterns o f the ritual are disrupted by those not involved, for
exam ple the police, then the controls which stop aggression tipping
over into violence will no longer function. I t is argued th at by
introducing segregation and by moving in to try to stop fights, the
police are getting involved in a gam e w ithout knowing the rules.
   A second reason th at injury occurs is because even ritualised
aggression can be dangerous. W hen opposing fans rushed at each
other in the Heysel S tadium they m ay not have intended to inflict
injury on each other, b u t the consequences for some of those caught
on the sidelines of the action were fatal. Even if we accept the aggro
explanation w ith the proviso th at interfering w ith hooligans can
inadvertently increase the level of violence, this theory really says
nothing about how to solve the problem. Simply leaving ‘the soccer
tribes’ to fight out their ritualised battles will not remove the possi­
bility o f more disasters on the edge of the action.
    T h e theories of m ale bonding an d ritualised aggression m ake no
attem p t to explain why so m uch of m ale aggression is seen to be
centred on football, a p a rt from the fact that, because it is normally
supported by large num bers o f young men, it provides a good arena
for their tribal displays. T hey are really aim ed at accounting for
m ale aggression. A second set of theories focuses more closely on
football, its tradition an d values an d in particu lar on the changes
in these values over the years.


       F O O T B A L L ’S W O R K IN G -C L A S S T R A D IT IO N S
Association football is traditionally a game supported by the work­
ing class. O riginally team s belonged to their locality in a m uch
                         F O O T B A L L   IN   IT S   P L A C E




  stronger way th an they do now, and the locals who built up these
  team s and supported them could feel th at they were really m embers
  of the club. T h eir support was im portant and they had a voice in
  the running of the club. Football heroes were working-class heroes
  and were presum ed at least to hold the same values as their fans.
  Since the 1930s, however, soccer has turned into big business and
  although m anagers will say th a t w hat the fans think counts, in fact
  the directors and shareholders have more influence. W hile clubs
  hang on to their local names, their players m ay not even come from
  this country, let alone the club home town. T he W orld C up can
  seem at times a show case for potential exports! I t is not uncom m on
  for players who do well in those games, playing for their country,
   to move to bigger rewards playing in one of the countries they
   helped to beat.
       Football is a profession an d the chance to have a good career
   both financially an d in term s of scope for using their skills becomes
   m ore im portant for players th an supporting their home town for
   the sake of pride. Instead of being a participating m em ber o f a local
   club the supporter is now largely a spectator at a m anaged event.
   W hile Chelsea supporters may regard the Shed as p art of their
   inviolable territory, the stands are not even owned by the club,
   m uch less by the supporters. In the sum m er of 1986, it appeared
   for a while th at Chelsea would be evicted from Stam ford Bridge
   and sent to play at C raven Cottage. A lthough the move was averted,
    it is a good example of how far removed a supporter is from the
    running o f the club.
        In his analysis of these m atters, T ay lo r13 pointed out th a t another
    effect of soccer changing into big business was th a t the gam e itself
    changed, w ith more em phasis on defensive play. An exciting,
    aggressive gam e gives the spectator m ore scope for the expression
    of feelings o f excitement, aggression an d general arousal. T ake this
    away and, T aylor says, the result is a revolt. T h e descendants of
    those working-class m en who started the clubs are expressing, in
    the only way left open to them, their anger a t the ‘bourgeoisification’
    of their game. T h e only other, non-violent, option available is to
^ w ith d r a w support, which would be one explanation for the con-
  •stantlyfalling^gfttes.
         I his argum ent is taken a stage further by Clarke: he suggests
     th at it is the young fan(atic) rath er than the m ature spectator who
     is most alienated from the game, as his attem pts to display his


                                            114
                      C O P IN G   W I T H   V IO L E N C E




emotional attachm ent and loyalty to the team (such as spraying its
nam e on walls and defending its honour against insults), are rejected
by club officialdom. C larke14 argues th at skinheads were attem pting
to reassert ‘old’ working-class values, such as physical hardness,
and dressed in a stylised version of working clothes to em phasise
this.


               T H E ‘R O U G H ’ W O R K IN G CLASS
A nother explanation which emphasises class differences proposes
th a t p a rt of the reason football hooliganism is so m uch abhorred is
a clash between middle-class attitudes to violence and the attitudes
of m any football supporters who are m embers of w hat has been
called the ‘rough working class’. Eric D unning and his colleagues15
write ‘at the risk of simplification o ur finding is th at the majority
of football hooligans come from a background where there is a
p articular conception of masculinity - in term s o f ability to fight
and loyalty to a narrowly defined comm unity, one where there is
extreme male dom inance’. This background is w hat has been
referred to as the ‘rough’ working class, i.e. those at or near the
bottom of the social scale. These are the people most often badly
hit by recession or depression. D unning et al. say th a t men from
the rough working class display a particularly aggressive masculine
style.
    Aggression plays an im portant role in these m en ’s self-esteem,
and young m en try to project an image of toughness or hardness
by, for example, wearing conspicuously lightweight clothes in
winter. Hence the story th a t ‘Millwall fans d o n ’t bleed’. H arking
back to M arsh and Tiger, D unning et al. point out th at the lower
working class cannot gain status and esteem in the ways open to
the m iddle classes, through education and work. Instead they get
excitement, meaning and status from ‘gambling, street “ sm artness” ,
and exploitative forms of sex . . . heavy drinking [and] fighting’.16
This, then, is the sort of bravery seen in cowboy films, where men
were men and willing to prove it.
    Along w ith this tough masculinity is a fierce loyalty to com m unity
 and an antipathy towards any outsiders. T h e com m unity in ques­
 tion does seem to change, however. In w hat Paul H arrison referred
 to as ‘the Bedouin effect’, people from different housing estates who
 are ‘deadly enemies’ all week can be allies on Saturdays in the face


                                        115
                      F O O T B A L L   IN    IT S   P L A C E




of outsiders from another town. O r at a national level, local sup­
porters will bury their m utual antagonism in support of a national
team. This loyalty is p u t at the service o f the fan’s chosen football
club, which will be praised and have its good nam e defended with
chants and, if necessary, with aggression.


       S O C IA L B O N D IN G A ND V IO L E N C E IN S P O R T
This is a simplification of quite a complex theory, which claims th at
attitudes tow ards violence and its use are tied into the structures of
the society we live in. This theory contrasts segmental bonding,
where people are linked by ties of kinship and functional proximity,
with functional bonding, where relationships are based on work and
arise from the division of labour. T h e length of interdependency
chains is seen as being p a rt of the grow th of civilisation. While
interdependence is based on family groups these chains are kept
quite short. Such a segmentally bonded society, held together by
com m itm ent to family an d locality, is seen as being conducive to
physical violence in a num b er o f m utually reinforcing ways.
   O ne im portant aspect o f the society th at does not have the
extended functional links to hold it together is th a t the government
cannot control the use o f violence by the people. T h e state itself
probably has to rely upon the use o f force to deal w ith enemies both
w ithout and w ithin b u t is too weak to claim sole right to the
legitimate use of violence, which is therefore more prevalent than
is common now. For the mass of the populace work is centred on
the local area and there is not a great deal o f interaction between
different communities. This leads to strong in-group ties, and o u t­
siders, even though they may be ostensibly sim ilar to the in-group,
are treated with suspicion. As group attach m en t is strong, conflict
between groups when they do meet is alm ost inevitable. Each
m em ber o f a group stands in place of th a t group, so th at an insult
to one is felt by all, an d may be avenged on any m em ber of the
insulting group. T h e stage is set for vendettas.
   M ustafa Sherif and his colleagues17 would say th at all th at is
needed for this intergroup rivalry is to nam e two groups and set
them in com petition against each other, which is w hat he did in an
A m erican boys’ sum m er cam p. O th er psychologists, such as Henri
Tajfel and his colleagues,18 have produced feelings of in-group soli­
darity and out-group hostility merely by dividing people into two


                                        116
                      C O P IN G   W I T H   V IO L E N C E




nam ed groups. Producing conditions conducive to vendettas may,
therefore, be as simple as saying ‘us’ and ‘th em ’.
   In a society characterised by segmental bonding, relations within
the home are also conducive to physical violence. W ork tends to be
segregated by sex, so th a t child-rearing is done by m others w ith the
fathers absent for relatively long periods of time. Large families and
the lack of adequate supervision m ean that children spend more
time solely in the com pany of other children. T hey will then develop
hierarchies based on age and strength and may be quick to use
violence am ongst themselves. Punishm ent from parents, when it
does come, is usually physical, thus legitim ating the use of violence.
W hile adolescent girls are encouraged to stay at home, boys are
not, and the childhood gangs they have formed may persist into
late adolescence and adulthood.
   In contrast, a society typified by functional bonding tends to have
strong central governm ent which appropriates the use of force to
itself and makes its use by the populace illegal. T h e stability of
central governm ent makes the division of labour possible and this
in tu rn makes the structure of the society more complex. Chains of
interdependence lengthen, ’■equiring those involved to exercise self-
restraint in order th at the structure does not collapse. T h e division
of labour also leads to competitiveness because it is based prim arily
on achievem ent an d allocates status on th at basis.
   T h e use of physical violence is forbidden by the state, competition
is manifested by the use of foresight and planning tow ards goal
achievement. T h e injunction against violence is internalised, leading
to a greater repugnance for either com m itting or witnessing acts of
violence. Instead of violence being m ost commonly affective, or
associated with emotions, it is now reserved to be used instrum ent-
ally, towards some end, such as terrorism.
   T he social structures are more fluid as people move from area to
area following their work rath er than their extended family. There
is equality of the sexes an d m ore supervision of children, who are
discouraged from the use o f violence and are given fewer examples
of its use by adults.
   D unning et al. suggest th a t o ur society has been changing from
 segmental to functional bonding. Changes of this n atu re occur more
 or less from the top down in a society, so while most of today’s
 society leans towards functional bonding, the rough working class,


                                       117
 c             ^       k +a .                    *4 j ^ ^ M      .   i^>
     V ?   ,          •   — ’ FO O T BA L L IN IT S PLACE

w<fcS6 » ?
       a t the bottom of the heap, are still struggling w ith segmental
       bonding.
          Therefore, the reason that football hooliganism is so abhorrent
       to society is not th a t it is new, or th at the violence is a m arked
       increase on the levels o f violence in the past, b u t th at the majority
       of society is simply less tolerant of these displays of aggression.


                          PL A N N IN G AND P O L IT IC S

       T hus far we have seen th a t soccer hooliganism can be seen as a
       way for young men to m anage their inherent aggression, which is
       consistent w ith the values of their class and which may be a form
       o f protest from a disenfranchised section of society. As such the,
       problem is at least understandable and at best can be dealt with,
       even if not through short-term solutions. T here have, however, been
       developm ents on the football scene which call into question the
       relevance of these theories for the hooligans of today.
          T here is m ounting evidence th at hooliganism is no longer a spon­
       taneous expression of emotion or even of pent-up aggression b u t a
       purposeful activity, planned in advance. T he planning is said to be
       done either by extreme right-wing political parties who w ant to
       gain supporters an d to destabilise society, or by groups of hooligans
       themselves who organise small arm ies and plan their engagements
       in advance. I f it is true th at the aggressive climate at matches is
       being m anipulated or at least taken advantage of, then this is more
       worrying in the long term than relatively disorganised crowd
       disturbances.


                            The influence o f political groups

       T here is a widely accepted idea th a t extreme right-wing parties
       have a strong influence on terrace violence and some would go so
       far as to claim th at violence is instigated by cells am ong supporters.
       T he evidence for these views comes from a variety of sources. Racist
       chanting and Nazi salutes are common enough on the terraces.
       Black players are booed, even by their own team ’s supporters.
          T h ere was some evidence th at m em bers o f extreme right-wing
       parties were at the Heysel stadium in Brussels. T he M ayor of
       Brussels saw both English an d Italian fans w earing insignia of such


                                           118
                      C O P IN G   W I T H   V IO L E N C E




parties. T h e ground outside the stadium was reported to have been
littered w ith their literature.
   However, there was no h ard evidence th at extreme right-wing
parties caused any of the violence.19 I t seems m ost likely that, while
these groups may be popular am ong some groups o f supporters,
they cash in on violence rath er th an being its instigators.
   T here is a danger th at the effects of racism an d the influence of
political groups may be confused. It is often assum ed th a t those
who support extrem e political parties of either right or left are aware
of and agree w ith most, if not all, of their chosen parties’ policies.
In fact, Billig and Cochrane, in a study o f fifth formers, found that
supporters o f fascist parties knew very little about their policies and
often could not recognise any of their leaders. They supported these
parties simply because they advocated the expulsion of non-whites
from G reat Britain. Billig an d C ochrane20 call this phenom enon
‘symbolic politics’ because the appeal of such parties to these school
students was a symbol of racism. Now, according to W illiams et al.
the typical football hooligan is given to xenophobia and views with
suspicion anyone who does not come from his own com munity.
From this point of view, racism is simply an extension of this
attitude to those who ‘d o n ’t come from this country’ even though
they may have been born here. By this reasoning football hooligans
may be likely to support extreme political parties. I t does not mean,
however, th a t such parties control the actions o f football hooligans.
   T o search for further evidence on this im portant m atter we asked
those in o ur survey the question, ‘Do you think th a t organised
political groups are involved?’ b u t this percentage varied from 11
per cent at S underland to 65 per cent a t Chelsea. T h e party most
often m entioned was the N ational Front, or other extreme right-
wing groups, b u t in Glasgow the IR A was also m entioned. I f inter­
viewees thought th a t there was political involvement they were then
questioned about the reasons for their belief. W h at we w anted to
find out was w hether anyone had any evidence based on first-hand
rxperience. 162 respondents said th at they had such direct evidence.
It transpired th a t some o f those people had ‘seen’ this evidence in
the media. T he interview w ent on to ask w hat mem bers of groups
had actually been seen to be doing. I t seems th a t the most common
activity was distributing literature, w ith very few instances of
involvement in fighting.
   So, although quite a n u m b er of people believe th a t political


                                      119
                       F O O T B A L L   IN    IT S   P L A C E




groups are involved in football hooliganism, this belief m ust be
based mostly on hearsay and m edia reports. In some clubs, such
as Sunderland where only 1 person out of 100 had seen such a
group m em ber fighting, we can safely conclude th a t political
involvement is not an issue.
   All this does not, of course, rule out the possibility th a t hooligan­
ism is in some way organised, even if not by political groups. T here
is some evidence th at the n ature of hooligans and hooliganism is
changing. B ut the view th a t they are now organised groups of
youths, with identifiable leaders and specific objectives, is certainly
not new. Pearson, for example, points out th at throughout the last
century and before there was a constant stream of com plaints about
hooligan leaders and the way these organised groups were wreaking
havoc. Certainly it is true today, as we have learnt from discussions
we had w ith the police th at fans may sometimes be am bushed away
from the grounds. This implies th at attacks are not im petuous ‘heat
of the m om ent’ affairs, b u t prem editated actions planned with an
alm ost military-style strategy.


                     T H E ‘F E W ’ H O O L IG A N
M r Ju stice Popplewell, in his final report, m ade particular m ention
o f a certain type of troublem aker, the ‘new’ hooligan. W hile the
popular image of football hooligans was still of tough, badly-dressed
yobbos or skinheads, football fans and the hooligans am ong them
had been developing a more sophisticated style, both in their clothes
and in their warfare. And warfare it seemed to have become. Leslie
M uranyi, a C am bridge supporter who was sentenced to five years
for leading attacks on visiting Chelsea fans, was nicknam ed ‘the
G eneral’ and his followers were called soldiers, at least by the press.
F urtherm ore, the m ain attack on the Chelsea supporters involved
them being trapped by a pincer movem ent so th at they had no
escape. I t certainly seemed th a t hooliganism was not limited to
unorganised charges on the terraces.
   T here are several interesting differences between the ‘new ’ hooli­
gan and the rough working-class type. T he first is the obvious
presence of money. Steve Redhead and Eugene M cL aughlin21 in an
article entitled ‘Soccer’s Style W ars’, chart the progression of fans’
style from Fred Perry T -shirts to A rm ani jum pers. T h e clothes m ust
not only look good, they m ust also be obviously expensive. In the


                                         120
                       C O P IN G   W I T H   V IO L E N C E




same way, fans buy tickets for seats and then ju m p up and down
waving at the less conspicuously wealthy friends on the terraces.
Southerners ta u n t N ortherners about their poverty and Merseyside
seems to be taunted by everyone. Redhead an d M cLaughlin say,
for example, th a t ‘London casuals have flashed £5 and £10 notes
in the sam e m anner as the M etropolitan police did on the Yorkshire
coalfield during the M iners’ strike’ and sing,
            ‘Sign on, sign on w ith a hope in your heart
            and you’ll never get a jo b ’
or
            ‘O n e jo b between you,
            Y ou’ve only got one jo b between you’
   Further, these fans are willing to spend money to escape the
attentions of the police. For example, having season tickets means
that they d o n ’t have to stand in queues outside the ground, where
the police have a good chance to look them over. However, the
best-known tactic is the use o f norm al bus and train services to go
to away m atches, rath er than ‘football specials’. Some o f the most
famous ‘fighting crews’ are nam ed after their use of public transport
- W est H a m ’s ‘Inter-C ity F irm ’, for example. (The fighting crew
is a more or less loosely defined group of fans who come together
before matches simply to plan aggro.) So these new hooligans travel
in comfort and anonym ity, sometimes first class, and arrive refre­
shed and certainly not drunk. Nor does their ingenuity stop there.
T he Portsm outh ‘6.57 crew ’ travelled unchecked to C ardiffby hiring
morning suits an d pretending th at they were going to a wedding.
   A nother interesting difference is th a t there is some evidence th at
the leaders of the gangs are in their mid- to late twenties and, recent
arrests show, some of them have relatively skilled jobs, such as
solicitors’ clerks. G ang warfare and displays of aggression in general
are usually associated w ith younger m en or even adolescents, the
idea being th a t as they grow older they grow more m ature and take
on social responsibilities which tie them more into ‘acceptable’
society. M arsh et al. for example, identified a group who were
respected by younger fans for their hardness an d past deeds but
who did not take p a rt in the aggro themselves.
   T aken together, these differences suggest th at the ‘new ’ hooligan
is not ju s t the ‘old’ hooligan dressed up: an entirely different type
of person may be getting involved in football violence and possibly
                       F O O T B A L L   IN   IT S   P L A C E




for entirely different reasons. W hy should they w ant to? Terrence
M orris22 suggests th a t being involved in a fighting crew, particularly
in the leadership of it, is an opportunity for the kind of recognition
and status th at is difficult or even impossible to come by in a norm al
working life.
    Although there is some evidence for the ‘superhooligan’, it is not
completely convincing as a general explanation. First, although
m uch is m ade of the wealth and supposed middle-class origins of
these new hooligans, Leslie M uranyi was a window cleaner and
others arrested have not had highly-skilled or professional jobs.
People should not need rem inding th at you can look neat an d well-
dressed w ithout being m iddle class. Even if they cannot save or
borrow the money, youngsters w ith crim inal tendencies can get
expensive ‘casual’ gear by w hat is known as ‘taxing’ those young
enough to be intim idated. Taxing simply m eans taking a buyer’s
purchases as he leaves a shop. Girlfriends can often be persuaded
 to tu rn hard-earned cash into Pringle sweaters as proof of true love.
 Second, ju s t because someone is nicknam ed ‘the G eneral’ does not
 necessarily m ean th at he leads an army. T h ere is little hard evidence
 th a t fighting crews are organised to the extent th a t one m ight expect
 from labels like army. I t is also im portant to recognise w hat m ight
 be term ed the ‘psychological benefit’ of any explanation. For
 instance, being able to dismiss hooliganism as the work of a few
 determ ined crim inals allows clubs to define the problem as one
 which the police m ust solve. Suggesting it is endemic to a whole
 approach to football is m uch more threatening to club m anagem ent.
     T he strongest test o f any theory is w hether it allows us to make
 predictions about the phenom enon in question. So, while expla­
 nations of football hooliganism have an intrinsic curiosity value,
  their only practical value is th at they m ay give clues as to how
  hooliganism can be coped with or discouraged. O n the other hand,
  all the measures taken so far to deal w ith the problem are based
  on theories, w hether or not these are ever m ade explicit. A ttem pts
  at coping w ith hooliganism can be grouped loosely u nd er two head­
  ings, prevention and cure. ‘Prevention’ refers to attem pts to prevent
  or contain violence in the short term, and ‘cure’ to m ore radical
  attem pts to change the n ature either of football or of the hooligans
  themselves.




                                         122
                     C O P IN G   W I T H   V IO L E N C E




                           P R E V E N T IO N

Theories o f hooliganism as purely barbaric, anti-social behaviour
lead to the use of strong-arm tactics by way of prevention — for
instance, physical segregation and heavy policing. T he idea is that
rival fans cannot fight if they cannot get a t each other, so fences
are erected around the pitch and across terraces. W here physical
barriers do not exist the police are used to form hum an barriers.
This is only a stop-gap solution to the problem. Every preventative
m easure can be com bated by the hooligans. Missile-throwing takes
the place of face-to-face confrontation, segregation within the
ground displaces the aggression to outside the ground, a police
presence forces anyone looking for trouble to plan ahead. Therefore
the symptoms change b ut the illness remains the same. T hese pre­
ventative measures can also have unexpected side-effects. M arsh et
al. discuss how segregation gives sides a m uch more recognisable
territory to defend and has facilitated the emergence of the ‘ends’
as physical symbols of the club’s honour.
   A more sophisticated m easure is the issuing of m em bership cards
which can be w ithdraw n if the holder transgresses. T h e underlying
assum ption here is th at there are identifiable trouble makers at
work and th a t if they could be excluded normal, decent fans would
be free to carry on w atching the game in peace. T h e introduction
of closed circuit television is encouraged on the sam e basis. But
w hatever is said about the existence of ‘superhooligans’ or of gangs
with obvious leaders, D unning et al. would dispute the idea of
hooliganism as being instigated by a few ringleaders, as they see
the roots of hooliganism as being buried in the inequalities o f the
social system.


                                  CURE

A ttem pts at a cure have taken a shorter or longer perspective. Like
preventative measures they can take either a physical or a more
social form. U nder the heading of physical would come the all-
seater stadium . It is well known th at trouble usually flares up on
the terraces while the seated areas are quieter and safer. T here
seemed to be two reasons for this. First, the differences in physical
layout means th at individuals rem ain individual in seats as sup­
porters cannot bunch up as on the terraces; furtherm ore, crowd
                      F O O T B A L L   IN   IT S   P L A C E




movement is cut down to a minim um . These factors make a seated
crowd potentially more manageable. Second, attitudes are different
for those who sit, as shown by our survey results in C h ap te r 2.
Therefore more seats, combined perhaps with a discrim inating pric­
ing policy, should encourage more respectable supporters, particu­
larly women and families, and discourage the less respectable.
    W hen Coventry created their all-seater stadium , it was this
second assum ption which alienated their supporters. People who
had previously w atched from the terraces felt that they had been
branded as hooligans by the club and naturally resented this. T he
Coventry experim ent went down in history as a failure but this
ju d g m e n t is unjust because as an experiment it did have some
 interesting findings. W e will return to the question of all-seater
 stadia in C hapter 6.
    A similar initiative is the introduction of family enclosures. Again,
 the physical environm ent is being altered with a view to attracting
 a more ‘peaceful class’ of supporter, but at least in this case families
 can be encouraged w ithout others feeling insulted. Family enclos­
 ures are not designed to keep families in, as the nam e might suggest,
 b ut to keep the rougher elements of the crowd out so th a t some
 level of safety can be guaranteed for families in the m atch ground.
 As mentioned in C h ap ter 2 we asked the clubs whose supporters
 took p a rt in the survey w hether they had m ade improvements since
 that time. M anchester U nited, Sunderland and Millwall replied
 and all had introduced family enclosures. Sunderland had also
 started a club for younger club members called the ‘Roker Rookies’.
 This initiative is an obvious next step from prom oting soccer as a
 family entertainm ent and could lead into stronger com m unity links,
 a topic also taken up in C h ap ter 6.


                             C O N C L U S IO N

Nobody can offer a complete explanation of football hooliganism
nor a magic solution. W h at is most striking about the theories
discussed here is th at they all seem to have some tru th for some
aspects of the problem. T h e psychological theory of M arsh et al.
suggests that w hat we are concerned with is an essentially non­
violent, rule-bound ritual now w arped by external pressures into
bloody battles. T h e more recent sociological theorists concentrate
on the stratum of society from which the core of football hooliganism


                                        124
                      C O P IN G   W I T H   V IO L E N C E




is drawn. W hile they reject the M arsh theory, partly because of the
obvious violence in hooliganism today, their theory is based on the
idea that a sub-culture exists - ‘the rough working class’ - th at has
different rules for guiding their behaviour th an does the rest of
society. By taking the D unning idea that one section of society has
a different structure and therefore different values and priorities
from the rest, we can explain why some young men do their bonding
in politics, m en’s clubs or the army, while some do it on the terraces.
Thus, the two theories do complement each other quite well.
   Both theories, however, have problems of their own. First, it is
now difficult to distinguish between acts of violence and disrupted
ritual aggression. I f someone has a broken glass thrust in his face
it is simpler to explain this as a violent act than as an aggressive
act where the constraints placed on the violent display o f aggression
have broken down. T his does not necessarily m ean th at the theory
does not hold true, but that it is almost impossible to imagine a
situation where it could be disproven, usually a bad sign in any
theory.
   Second, D unning et al. say that not all hooligans are from the
rough working class, nor do they all come from specific areas that
have closely-knit communities. W e are therefore left w ithout any
explanation as to why these others turn to football hooliganism. Are
they simply attracted to the violence or do they w ant to be involved
in some aspects of its camaraderie?
   T hird, neither theory can explain why football became the focus
of this aggression. M arsh et al. consider football as only one possible
arena for aggro and do not seem to feel th a t it offers anything that
any one of a num ber of other arenas has not offered in the past or
will not offer in the future. D unning et al. see the football club as
an extension of the local community, as a symbol of the locality.
T here are other working-class traditional pastimes that do not
attract the sam e protective interest.
   Finally, neither theory offers any im plem entable solution to the
problem. Now it is true that there are not always simple solutions
to every problem and th a t football has suffered from having ‘easy’
solutions foisted on it. It seems though that if we attem p t to explain
w hat causes football hooliganism or to describe w hat it actually is,
we should be in a better position to say how or whether it can be
stopped. T h e solutions need not be short term, or even medium
term, and they need not be simple or neat, but they should be there.
                     F O O T B A L L   IN   IT S   P L A C E




M arsh et al. simply suggest th at the problem will eventually go
away of its own accord, that young men will move their arena of
conflict on to a different site, thus giving us the sam e problems in
a different context. D unning et al. in a more constructive but, given
the state of the world, less hopeful vein, suggest that the ultim ate
solution is a more egalitarian society.
   H aving said this, we m ust ourselves offer some ideas for a way
forward. W e will do this in C h ap ter 6. These suggestions will be
based on three perspectives:
  (1) that football hooliganism is only one of football’s problems,
  (2) th a t the environm ent which is its focus plays a role,
  (3) that there cannot be one solution for all clubs.




                                       126
                              Chapter 6


              THE FINAL SCORE




Being present in the stands or on the terraces is often described as
enabling a person to feel the ‘atm osphere’. This includes the experi­
ence of being in a crowd, being able to feel th at you can encourage
your team on the field by your proximity. I t enables you to be
aware of the weather and other local factors th a t cannot be readily
gleaned from some secondhand account; to see all the action and
the crowd response to it. Furtherm ore, to have ‘been there’ is a
reason for going.
   I f ‘being there’ were not a crucial factor, there would not be the
scramble for FA C up Final tickets each year. Tickets are sold
perhaps at ten times their face value even though the m atch can be
seen live on television. It bears no comparison with being seated at
home, where you cannot taste the m oment. You cannot feel at one
with so m any others, appreciating the skill and strategy on the
bright green turf, holding your breath with thousands of others or
cheering on the players as their moves succeed.
   W h at is being described here is the experience that derives from
visiting a place of entertainm ent. I t is surprisingly rare for football
grounds to be discussed in these terms so there is really very little
information about how successful football grounds actually are as
recreation or entertainm ent facilities. T h e investigations that we
undertook and reported earlier did look at this directly but there is
only a handful of other studies with which we could com pare our
results. W e believe th at it is essential to think of the recreational
experience of football grounds because the experience we have
described m ay be destroyed by the way grounds are designed,
m anaged and policed.
   T h ere remains little direct examination of football as p art o f the


                                   127
                       F O O T B A L L   IN    IT S   P L A C E




entertainm ent industry. A few British football clubs have attem pted
to examine their activities like effective commercial enterprises,
including commissioning m arket research studies, but as far as we
can find out these studies have rarely been acted on or taken
seriously as p a rt of a long-term plan. Theatres, cinemas, hospitals,
shopping centres, schools, offices, hotels, m useum s and even prisons
have all been studied in order to take account of the experiences of
the people who actually use and m anage those facilities in their
adm inistration and design. T his book has sought to do the same
for football grounds.
   Such studies are often referred to as studies in ‘environmental
psychology’. T h e ‘environm ent’ studied is the physical, architec­
tural, urb an and n atural environm ent - those aspects of the inani­
m ate world that are shaped to hum an ends. T h e ‘psychology’ comes
from the systematic, scientific study of hum an transactions with
th at environment. For example, psychologists have explored the
ways in which prisons can be designed to produce less destructive
places of incarceration; psychologists have been involved in m anag­
ing and planning national parks and forests in order to ensure that
people can enjoy and understand them w ithout destroying th em .1
Banks have been redesigned i n the basis of psychological research,
trying to see the bank layout as criminals would, thereby reducing
the feasibility of a successful raid and ensuring, for instance, that
the im portant lines of sight and clear escape routes a robber would
use are not provided. T h e stresses people suffer th at are associated
with aircraft and traffic noise have been extensively examined by
psychologists as has the im pact on a community of the introduction
of a m ajor new road through its midst.
   These studies use a great variety of methods and draw upon many
different types of psychological theory. T hey have been carried out
all over the world. W e have tried to begin to apply this type of
thinking to the m anagem ent of football and the design of the stadia
it uses.


                           T H E PROBLEM
T he special quality o f football and the place in which it occurs
would be o f little public interest if it were not for the fact that, for
a n um ber of years now, football and the places that make it a
professional sport have been un der threat so m uch so that the media


                                         128
                                 T H E   F IN A L   S C O R E




i    have sometimes referred to this as a problem of ‘crisis’ proportions.
 ,   Any serious consideration of our national game suggests that if there
e    are not radical changes it will soon slip into a minority spectator
n    sport.
 ,      T h e problem is captured very directly in the falling attendances
s    at football matches. In th e early 1960s around 30 million a ttend-
f    ances were recorded a t English Football League m atches each~yearT
r    “T w en ty ^ e a r s Iater*attendances were tess"tfian 20 million. A simple
e     extrapolation of these h g u r c s ^ ’c monstratcs th at by the turn of the
      century football may well have ceased to be a spectator sport in the
1    U K . T h e simplicity of the calculation hides the fact th a t the
      decrease in the last ten years has been m uch more rapid th an the
      decrease in earlier years, indicating that the demise could be sooner
s    rather than later.
ti      Direct appeals to the competition from television or the general
e    decline in active participation in sports is not borne out by the facts,
e    In the m ain the decrease in attendance at football continued after
      television was widely and well-established in British homes. T h e
t    evidence th at can be gleaned is th at showing football on television
1    actually increases the num ber of those who wish to see it ‘for real’,
,    as is the case for m any othei television activities. While, for example,
g    attendances at football matches have declined, attendances a t tennis
t    matches, notably W imbledon, or at m ajor snooker tournam ents,
d    have continued to grow. It would seem that this is because of,
d    rather than in spite of, television coverage. T h e Lords test m atch
y    can a ttract nearly 100,000 people (over five days) and W im bledon
n    more than 400,000 (over its fortnight).
         Certainly the figures on recreational participation, from dram atic
y    societies to aerobics an d m ountaineering, do not indicate a popu-
t    lation th at is settling unthinkingly into its arm chairs in front of the
>f   television. In the G eneral Household Survey nearly half of those
a    questioned had actively taken p a rt in some sport in the previous
      month. Even the cinema and theatre have been able to fight back,,
      to some extent, against the more direct inroads of television. In a
      country where more an d more people have more leisure time the
      one industry that is consistently growing is the recreation an d leisure
s    industry. Yet against this background football is consistently losing
r    its attraction.
a       Despite the fact th a t attendances at football matches have been
a    falling over the years, the game of football is still one of the regular


                                             129
                       F O O T B A L L   IN   IT S   P L A C E




 situations in which a very large num ber o f people are brought
 together. Figures ranging from 20,000 to 50,000 are still not uncom ­
 mon for weekly First Division football games. So football has some
 particular interest because of the consequences of the large crowds
 that exist there.
    As we discussed in C h ap ter 4, since the latter part of the nine­
 teenth century there has been consideration of the particular proper­
 ties of crowds. A num ber of social scientists have argued th at crowds
 are a rule and law unto themselves whereby people behave very
 differently simply by virtue of being with m any thousands of other
 people. W hether this is true or not, it is not p a rt of our normal
 experience to be together with so m any other people.
    T he focus that requires everybody to be able to see all aspects of
 the game gives rise to a design in which large num bers of people
 have to be channelled into particular locations at which they can
either sit or stand to w atch the game. T h ere is a build-up and
concentration of people, and at the end of a game a dispersal, which
gives the stands and terraces a p art to play in the overall experience
of the crowd th a t is not present in m any other large gatherings.
T h ere is a very real sense, therefore, in which the stadium itself is
p a rt of the experience of the crowd in th a t it encloses the crowd in
a particular area with its own very special orientation.
    T h e contrast with a race meeting or golf cham pionship is helpful.
Although the crowd sizes may be very big at these gatherings (more
than 140,000, for example, at the British O pen G olf Cham pionship)
the concentration of the crowd in one particular enclosed space is
not as great as is the case at football grounds. T his means that the
movement of people in and out of the golf course and their distri­
bution around it is a m uch more relaxed and long-term experience,
far less tied to the particularities o f the architectural structure than
is the case with a football ground.


                  M E C H A N IC S O F C O N T R O L
O ver the last few years the experience of a football m atch has also
been strongly influenced by a variety of control processes. In Bri­
tain, at least, supporters of different teams are separated and
assigned to different parts of the ground. M ovem ent around the
ground during a m atch is severely restricted. T h e presence of the
local police force is very apparent. InSeed, m any police forces have
                           T H E   F IN A L   S C O R E




a senior officer who is employed virtually full time in order to
prepare for and supervise the regularly occurring football matches
in the district. As is a pparent from an exam ination of any m ajor
incident at a football m atch, it is the actions of the police th at are
the dom inant influences on how the incident is m anaged. T he
police are, of course, responsible for crowd control in m any other
circumstances, but at the football m atch their influence is virtually
total. T hey will give instructions as to when gates ought to be
opened or closed, when matches ought to be cancelled or postponed
and will try to have an influence on the way in which tickets are
bought and sold. Increasingly sophisticated police intelligence is
also focused on football supporters and football matches. T h e recent
arrest and charging of a num ber of people believed to be planning
m ajor disturbances at football matches was the result of intensive
police intelligence work targeted directly at football supporters.
Bomb scares and other threats now associated with airport ter­
minals and other m ajor public gatherings are not unknow n at foot­
ball matches as well.
   T h e present attem pts to m anage the problems football currently
faces are difficult for those outside the game to appreciate. As many
as 55,000 police days were probably accounted for in London last
season at football matches. T h e num b er of police typically involved
in any m ajor game runs into the hundreds. T he friendly spirit of
sporting competition, supposedly as a way of harnessing minor
rivalries to support a game of skill, is accom panied by police escorts
and ground segregation th a t would do justice to a military
manoeuvre. Police preparation for any given m atch begins days in
advance, starts with great intensity hours before a m atch and often
finishes hours later. T h e football authorities, supporters and poli­
ticians alike see this police involvement as necessary and inevitable.
   Every governm ent report on football crowds this century has
added to the police burden and increased their powers. O ne major
consequence of this is th a t the problems of violence, and the other
less frequent hazards and discomforts associated with football, tend
to be seen as a problem in policing. T w o approaches or models
have been followed with regard to recognising and dealing with
football’s ‘off the field’ problems. T h e first strategy is that of denial.
A parallel can be d raw n here with the behaviour of mental patients,
whereby a painful and difficult problem is dealt with by denying its
existence. T h e second strategy is ‘displacem ent’, whereby attention
                         F O O T B A L L   IN    IT S   P L A C E




   focuses on either the sym ptom or on another part of the system. It
   is hoped th at by tinkering with the symptoms or suggesting that it
   is someone else’s problem, the ‘illness’ will either go away or can
   be ignored by those who have direct responsibility for finding a
   cure.
      We are not denying that there are quasi-criminal, rival gangs
   that cause chaos from time to time in our cities. Knowledge of such
   fights between factions can be traced back at least as far as the
   tragic confrontations between Shakespeare’s M ontagues and Capu-
   lets. A lthough the same groups may or may not be involved within
   the stadia as outside, there is a difference between violence and
   aggression within a privately-owned place of entertainm ent and
   gang fights in the streets. T h e police are rightly involved in all
   attem pts a t the control of these incidents in public places.
\     O ne of the causes of this state of affairs has been w hat is some­
   times referred to as ‘legislation by disaster’. Instead of keeping a
  watching brief on the state of British football, successive govern­
  ments have waited until some m ajor incident has occurred. T hey
  have then introduced controls that would have limited th at disaster
  if they had been in place before the disaster occurred. T h e most
I recent disaster in Bradford has already given rise to a new Act of
  Parliam ent covering ‘Fire and Safety at Places of Sport’. This will
  m ean th at any covered stand th at seats more than 500 people will
  require a certificate from the local authority before it can be used.
      Legislation by disaster ghoulishly waits for some other disaster
  to occur in some other way for that particular problem to be dealt
  with. O ne sign of this approach to legislation has been the series of
  official reports throughout this century. V irtually every decade there
  has been a m ajor governm ent inquiry into some aspect of football.
  T hese reports m ake fascinating reading not least because of the way
  in which the same themes are picked up by the reporting groups
  again and again along the way. For example, the recently intro­
  duced legislation that bans alcohol at football grounds and on the
  coaches and trains that carry people to football matches and which
  is now hailed by the H om e Secretary as such a strong contribution
  to the reduction in crowd violence, was first recom m ended in an
  official report at least thirty years ago. It was mentioned in two
  subsequent government reports before it was eventually acted upon.
     No other sport has generated such debate and legislation, or is
  calling out so clearly for a radical change in its approach to its


                                           132
                          T H E   F IN A L   S C O R E




supporters. W hat is it, then, th at makes football so special? T he
answer lies in the fact that besides the problems that football faces,
it also brings together a unique com bination of factors. For although
football crowds, football stadia, football violence, football disasters,
the excitement o f football, the pleasure and despair of watching
football all share m uch with other events and incidents, the combi­
nation o f them all together is rare. A crowd watching a pop concert
may be as large, if not larger, than a crowd w atching a football
m atch. T h e excitement which an audience feels from a speech by
Billy G raham may be similar to the excitement that the home crowd
feels when Everton scores. T h e violence of a gang of teenagers
fighting in the streets with another gang is ju s t as distasteful and
horrifying w hether the gangs are wearing football supporter scarves
or H ell’s Angels jackets. T he problems of crowd control for people
going to W embley Stadium for a C u p Final are very similar to the
problems o f people going to the same stadium for a rock concert,
or people going to T rafalgar Square for a peace cam paign dem on­
stration. But people only associate all these different activities and
experiences with one event: football. Football, then, brings together
an intriguing com bination of special circumstances.



                         W A ST E D ASSETS

A nother aspect of this problem is the fact th a t a m ajor investment
in the form of football grounds themselves is no longer being utilised
to the extent that it could within our towns and cities. These large
holes in the urban fabric could supply sorely-needed venues for a
great range o f public activities. Therefore, as a com m unity resource
they are under-utilised. Clubs like Arsenal have developed training
facilities such as the Sobell Centre, which is available to the local
com m unity when not required by the club. But in general, football
stadia comprise several acres of ironwork, concrete and grass used
for an average of one or two matches a week. A t m any matches the
terraces are only half full. Reserve matches o f First Division clubs
m ay attract less than 1,000 spectators. For the rest of the week the
terraces are empty and the pitch only occasionally used for training.
Surely, in any other situation, the com pany accountant would be
horrified th at so m uch investm ent was tied up in a capital asset
that was used so little and gave such a limited return. This situation
                      F O O T B A L L   IN    IT S   P L A C E




suggests th at grounds should be used more effectively so that they
are in productive use for more than ju s t a few hours a week.
   M ost industrialists who require ‘p lan t’ for a limited time would
hire it rath er than own it. Given this argum ent, it would make more
sense for football grounds to become com m unity assets owned by
local authorities, a local trust, or private entrepreneurs with wider
interests than ju st football. By these means they would become
com m unity assets in a psychological, social and economic sense. In
this way, grounds could be brought up to the sort of standard
expected of entertainm ent facilities in the 1980s.


                   O W N IN G T H E P R O B L E M
Consider the world o f popular music, th at attracts to a certain
extent a similar age range and social mix to that o f football. I f a
pop group attracted fans th at destroyed a concert hall, as has
happened, then the pop group would not be invited back again to
that hall. Indeed, they m ight not be invited to play anywhere else!
In the case of football, the problem is somewhat different. Football
clubs are limited liability companies, which are businesses as m uch
as objects of reverence. Clubs have little control over who gives
them support. W hile they can refuse entry into the stadium , they
have no control over their ‘supporters’ when on the streets. T he
problem is exacerbated by the fact th at the clubs cannot stop them
wearing the colours o f the football team and thereby inducing an
im m ediate association between their behaviour and the club. Again,
we have the phenom enon of guilt by association. O n these grounds
it seems absurd that the footballing authorities such as F IF A can
hold a British club responsible for the actions not of its employees
but of people who have no formal relationship with the club at all.
Such supporters do not represent the club, either de jure or de facto.
Therefore it is difficult to understand how the club can be held
responsible for their actions.
   W h at football clubs can be held responsible for, though, is a
failure to instil any sense of belonging, identification, and a sense
of responsibility towards the club. They should be encouraging their
supporters to believe that they do represent the club and are their
ambassadors.
   This identification already exists in embryo. O ne only has to
listen to the conversation of any group of football supporters and


                                        134
                          T H E   F IN A L   S C O R E




as a m atter of course they will talk about ‘we’ — ‘W e won the
m atch ’, ‘W e won the semi-final of the C u p ’ or ‘We were awful.’ For
some supporters though, it has got to be m ade more real than
apparent. M ore than 150 years ago Jean-Jacques Rousseau and
Jo h n Stu art Mill wrote about the im portance o f participation in
public affairs, the com m unity benefits of such participation and the
need to educate people to participate effectively.2 I f there was more
participation in football’s affairs, and supporters were educated to
participate, then this sense of belonging and responsibility might
well develop as Rousseau and Mill suggest.
    T he problems associated with football and its urban location have
not emerged suddenly. Because of the extent to which it is in the
public eye and the large num bers o f people who have been associ­
 ated with it in the past, m ajor incidents at football grounds have
 always been worthy of public note. T hroughout this century there
 has been a cum ulative series of highly publicised events th at have
 added to the disquiet now expressed with the state of British
 football.
    T he earliest incidents were partly a function of the lack of experi­
 ence in controlling very large crowds. In 1923, crowd disorder
 occurred at the first ever C u p Final at W embley Stadium . This and
 later disasters, such as that at Bolton W anderers when a barrier
 collapsed and 33 people were killed, were caused partly by too
 m any people being cram m ed into too small a space. Such densities
 are no longer possible because of the controls th at have long since
 been introduced. However, m uch of the experience and collective
 memory of football matches still draws on the sheer density and
 crush that is associated with large num bers of excited people in an
 enclosed space. T he ‘W hite horse’ incident at W embley Stadium
 captured in the famous photograph of the 1923 C up Final when a
 policeman on a white horse kept the crowds from spilling on to the
 pitch is p a rt o f the mythology of football.
    O n e of us recalls regularly attending a T h ird Division football
 ground where spectators arrived at the ground fairly early so they
 could lean against the crush barriers to w atch the m atch. This
 single piece o f terrace furniture was the one m inor concession to
  spectator comfort. O f course, it was realised th a t its real purpose
 was to stop crowds tum bling down the terrace. W h at was not
  appreciated on going to Anfield for the first time was th at its
  function was th at of protection for those in front of the barrier


                                       135
                      F O O T B A L L   IN    IT S   P L A C E




rath er than comfort to those leaning against it behind. And so the
first Liverpool attack on the K op end, when the crowd swayed
forwards dow n and then backwards up the terrace, served as a
painful lesson in m an-environm ent interaction.
    Although the num bers attending football matches after the
Second W orld W ar did not reach the peaks of the 1920s and 1930s,
because of crowd-control policies, there was still a num ber of inci­
dents in which people were killed because the pressure of numbers
led to the collapse of various parts of the stadia. T h e most disastrous
o f these was when the support railings at Ibrox Stadium in Glasgow
gave way when spectators who were leaving the ground fell on top
of each other, leaving 68 dead. O th er smaller incidents continued
to occur, only to be overshadowed by the horrific disasters which
took place in the space of a few weeks during the sum m er of 1985:
the fire at Bradford City football ground, the collapse of a wall at
Birm ingham City, and the collapse of a wall in the Heysel Stadium
in Brussels, with fatalities in each place.
    T h e collapse of a wall at Heysel was the result of a near riot
of rival spectators fighting each other. I t served to highlight the
association in the public m ind between football and hooliganism.
T he series of near riots a.'d general fracas th a t has occurred at
football matches over the past ten years throughout the world has
led to a link, in the m edia at least, between hooligans and football.
Indeed a word-association test with m any citizens would show that
the word football was typically associated with the word hooligan.
    W e have looked as objectively as we can at the figures collected
by m any other people and at the reactions we have obtained from
the ardent football supporters we have questioned. Furtherm ore,
we started with the hypothesis commonly expressed in the social
science literature that soccer violence is a m inor problem, m uch
exaggerated by the mass media. For example, the jo in t report of
the Sports Council and Social Science Research Council came to
the conclusion in 1978 that the scale of the problem was not large
enough to w arran t research attention.
    As we have indicated, more recent researchers, notably sociol­
ogists at Leicester University, have pointed at groups in w hat they
choose to call ‘the rough working class’ as the prime causes of
football-related violence. W e have no do ubt about the validity of
their claims. We also have no doubt th a t m any football clubs are
delighted with their findings because once again they help to exoner­


                                        136
                         T H E   F IN A L   S C O R E




ate the clubs and point a finger at some other agency - a good
example o f displacem ent theory in practice.
   W h a t has become clear to us in examining football violence in
the context o f emergencies within crowds is th at all those so closely
                                                                           v   \
involved - the police, researchers and football authorities - have
missed thg^west-obyious point. T he aggression we are talking about
is centred around football matches. O f course, social and psychopa-
thological processes play their part in these problems. However,
                                                                           V
football clubs can no more change the psychopathology of their
supporters th an they can change society. W hat they can change,
however, is themselves.


                    A D E S C E N D IN G SPIRA L

We have already m entioned th at we came to this conclusion from
our data, having started with hypotheses that placed the problem
in another context. T he most telling p art of these d a ta was the
com bination of:
  (a) steadily falling attendances
  (b) steadily increasing arrest rates, within football grounds
  (c) the relationship between arrest rates and casualties, and most
      im portantly
  (d) the frequency with which o ur respondents refer to the direct
      threat of violence as a reason for not going to matches more
      often.
   I t is im portant enough to repeat. W e recognise th a t violence
outside football grounds is a significant problem and that groups
with criminal intent m ay well wish to use large crowds as a cover
for their activities. Aggression and violence within stadia, though,
are p a rt of a distinct context. T o use an ecological analogy, the
context may be thought of as a h abitat in which certain species are
able to flourish because o f the existence of certain conditions. These
conditions are an interaction of individual, social, cultural and
environm ental factors. I f the situation is to change then either these
factors m ust be changed or their interrelationship.
   T he hab itat m etaphor alerts us to the poor condition of m any
football stadia, noticed and disliked by our respondents. Together
with a large police presence and the perception of possible trouble
the scene is set for a spiral o f decay.


                                      137
                      F O O T B A L L   IN   IT S   P L A C E




   T he perception of possible trouble contributes to this spiral prob­
ably more than actual incidents do. As we argued earlier, the
withdraw al of support by those who abhor the possibility of violence
leaves a setting more prone to aggression. W hen this perception is
given validity by direct experience then the spiral is given another
turn downwards.
   Unfortunately, a process of target-hardening occurs in which
groups become labelled and polarised. Police perceive a group of
visiting supporters as ‘troublem akers’ and react accordingly. The
group see this as a sign of aggression and respond in turn: the result
is an escalation in perceived and actual aggression. T hus police
strengthening which started out as an attem pt to stop the spiral
may only serve to lead to ever fiercer confrontations. M ost com m en­
tators, w hether from a social science or a law enforcement back­
ground, recognise that the segregation o f fans has led to a clearer
definition of opposing groups and has fed the distinctions out of
which enmity so often grows. T h e barricades between parts of the
ground, and separate ingress and egress routes, have provided fur­
ther targets and challenges for violent action when it does erupt.
Ironically, we have now reached such a position that any suggestion
to remove these ‘protection.:;’ is seen as a recipe for violence.


          S O C IA L R E P R E S E N T A T IO N AS T H E K EY

T he need to control crowds and the fear of crowd violence, have
led to a development in the already austere provision of football
facilities that makes them look anything other th an inviting places
for leisure and recreation. Fences, gates, high walls, empty ‘sterile’
zones, have all been added to the provisions of football grounds,
leading to a subtraction o f their amenities. Seats have given way to
concrete benches. Food containers, in which the meagre refresh­
ments are sold, have to be lightweight plastic, virtually indis­
tinguishable from m uch of the food th at they contain. These places
will soon only be attractive to the hardened enthusiast.
   A continued reliance on these measures can only lead to their
increase: stronger barriers, firmer segregation, the removal altoge­
ther o f opposing fans and so on, would appear to be inevitable steps
along a spiral of restraint. T he only limiting factor will be the
am ount o f constraint the majority of football supporters will tolerate
before they stay home. Football clubs m ust now exert themselves if
                          T H E   F IN A L   S C O R E




they are to attract a broader audience of interested spectators of all
ages, of all backgrounds and both sexes.
   I t is argued by some th at violence may be one reason why atten d ­
ances at football matches have declined. I t is probably a factor but
little serious research has been undertaken to assess its effect. I t is
of obvious im portance to distinguish between perceived and actual
violence.
    I f violence is only one factor, w hat are the other contributory
factors? I t has been argued th at more leisure time, increasing
mobility and access to private transport, greater disposable income
and family-orientated activities have led to a wider range of rec­
reational pursuits. Some have also wondered why people should
stand on a windy rain-swept terrace when they can w atch the game
on television in the comfort of their own homes? T h e C atch 22
corollary of this argum ent is the view th a t people have become
satiated with football as a consequence of coverage on television.
T here is little doubt that these have been contributory factors.
However, we would like to suggest two further reasons.
   T he first reason has received attention from writers such as
Ingh am 3*and is something which we have explored elsewhere in
this book. Football used to be anchored very firmly in the local
comm unity from w hence it secured its support. In m any cases,
p'laycrs used to come fY(ihV th“ t W>rMllmily” as did the supporters.
T hey identified with their local team. T here was a sense in which
the team represented (Heir town or city and it was this identification
and representation which contributed to the supporters’ sense of
place. T he relationship between the supporters’ social life, the activi­
ties they engaged in and where they engaged in them all contributed
to the fans’ self-identity. W ithin this framework there becomes a
strong link between self and place.
    In more recent years the communities around football clubs have
changed substantially. T h e streets around Fulham Football Club,
for example, used to be predom inantly working-class. O ver the last
ten years this has changed as the area has been ‘gentrified’ and the
houses become m ore up-market. M any of these new residents may
see the existence o f the club on their doorstep as a liability rather
than an asset.
    At the beginning of Alan Sillitoe’s ‘T he M atch ’4 the scene is set
at Notts C ounty football ground:


                                      139
                       F O O T B A L L    IN   IT S   P L A C E




   Tow ards the end of the match, when Bristol scored their winning
   goal, the players could only ju s t be seen, and the ball was a
   roll o f mist being kicked about the field. Advertising boards
   above the stands, telling of pork pies, ales, whisky, cigarettes and
   other delights of Saturday night, faded with the afternoon
   visibility.

    Sillitoe, writing in 1954, captures well the setting and local world
 of football. This has now changed. At Notts C ounty football ground
 today the advertising hoardings are now likely to pronounce the
 advantages of Italian truck companies, Jap a n ese cameras or an
 Am erican je a n company. It is ironic th at N otts C ounty are spon­
 sored by W ranglers, lying as they do at the centre of w hat was
 one of the m ajor textile areas in Britain, and now suffering from
 substantial unem ploym ent in the industry as a result of clothing
 imports from abroad.
    This is not a misty-eyed, rom antic and nostalgic longing for a
 world long since disappeared. It is simply an observation that the
 messages and meanings now being given in football grounds - by
 the grounds themselves - are very different to w hat they were thirty
or even twenty years ago. ^ h e spectator is now being spoken to as
a mass consumer, a m em ber of a worldwide m arket for consumer
goods. In some cases, the spectator may not even be an immediate
consum er of those goods, where they refer to items such as lorries,
as he was o f ‘pork pies and ale’. Indeed, the advertising hoardings
are not addressing him bu t the unseen millions o f television viewers
a t whom individual club sponsorship by commercial concerns is
directed. Sponsorship is probably essential these days but one of
the consequences is that the individuality and localness of clubs is
disappearing.
   Some might argue th at sponsorship has only become essential
because the pop-star ethos and culture which the entertainm ent
industry has created and prom oted am ongst footballers has m eant
that clubs are forced into massive wage bills - for some players at
least. Spectators see little evidence that the proceeds of sponsorship
are channelled into ground improvements and the upgrading o f
spectator facilities. As with so m uch else about football, the spec­
tato r seems to be the last person to be considered. T his may be a
harsh and unfair criticism but to the m an on the terrace who has
to pu t up with unattractive, unpleasant and possibly not very safe


                                         140
                          T H E   F IN A L   S C O R E




conditions, such conclusions are almost unavoidable. I f this is
unreasonable, then more accountability as to how the proceeds of
sponsorship deals are used by clubs would avoid this misperception.
   O ne explanation we would give for the regular attendance at
football matches by hundreds of thousands of loyal supporters, and
for their attraction to the game, is that supporters identify with and
have a pride in the team. T h e club’s success is the supporters’
success. Failure hurts. We would hypothesise th at w hen there was
a closer psychological and physical relationship between the football
club and the surrounding community, the identification of the com­
m unity with the club was strong. Supporters could bathe in the
reflected glory o f the club during times of success. In the world and
culture in which football then existed, the activities o f the local
football club were one of the few opportunities for the working-class
com m unity to experience a sense of success and pride.
   In the world in which we now live, individual success and am bition
is held up as a normatively and universally desirable value. Walvin,
perhaps quite rightly, criticises the notion th at the prosperity of
a few ‘sta r’ players has produced ‘an unbridgeable gulf between
footballers and their fans’ and that this has led to alienation and,
ultimately, hooliganism. W a i/in 5 asserts that:
  T he stars of today’s professional game m ay well be out of reach
  of the rank and file fans, unlike the period up to the 1960s,
  b ut it has to be stressed that the great majority of professional
  footballers do not fall into this category; they rem ain within
  the social experience, geographical reach and sym pathy of their
  supporters.

   Objectively, this may well be the case. However, it m ight be
argued th at subjectively in the eyes of m any football supporters this
is not so. T he popular image of footballers, one suspects, is that
they lead fast, exciting ‘pop-star’ lives. Add to this another ‘im age’
- th at of a club m anagem ent who are more concerned with money,
sponsorship and ‘big-nam e’ players than the feelings of and facilities
for their supporters. I f this is the case and it has led to a lack of
identification and a sense of alienation, it still remains to determine
w hat the consequences o f this are. O ne possible outcome for some
supporters is violence. For others, it is ju s t to stay away in their
thousands. The. r l n ^ k no longer seen as representative of) the
com m unity in the sense'll w ai hity years ago, and the consequent
                       F O O T B A L L    IN   IT S   P L A C E




 benefits of such identification are now absent for many. T here are              a
 m any alternative sources ot satisfaction and success, which are                 1
 orientated either towards the individual or the family. W hat sociol-            b
 ogists refer to as the embourgeoisement of society is no less apparent           n
 in sport th an other areas of our culture.                                       f
    A second im portant reason, we believe, for a decline in football             t
 attendance is also tied up with place. M ost football grounds are                p
 located in or near the centre of our cities, because th at is where              n
 they have always been. T here have been some attem pts to move                   a
 clubs out into greenfield sites where there is more space for other              a
 sports and social facilities b ut to date w ithout m uch success. W at-          s
ford Football Club have sought planning permission to move out                    b
of the town centre on a num ber of occasions and build a ground
which would provide a range of sports and social facilities for the               g
 town b ut they have been continually thw arted by the local auth-                v
ority. So frustrated at the lack of progress were the club, they went             f
to the expense (with financial assistance from the Football Trust)
of building a railway halt - the first in the country in recent history           v
- n ear the ground so that visiting supporters could be channelled                g
away from the town centre.                                                        i
   A nother recent case illusi.-ates well all th at is wrong with football.       a
In 1982 R obert Maxwell, C hairm an of Oxford U nited, announced                  I
th at he had plans to buy Reading Football Club. T he intention was               a
to merge the two clubs, renam e them the T ham es Valley Royals
and move the new club to a location between Oxford and Reading.                   i
Although Maxwell had discussed the m atter with the Reading board                 s
of directors, the Reading board had not discussed it with the m an-               (
ager, players and least of all the paying and travelling supporters.6
Some members of the board did oppose the m erger and sought a                     p
H igh C o urt injunction to suspend share dealings between Maxwell                t
and Frank W aller, the C hairm an of Reading Football Club. Con-                  a
siderable opposition to the merger by the majority of shareholders,               o
the supporters and some members o f the board staved off the take-                s
over, bu t not before Maxwell had m ade another attem pt to take                  d
over Reading in the following season by offering shareholders five                c
pounds for every fifty-pence share in an effort to secure a controlling           t
interest in the club. Football clubs, like the products they advertise            b
around the ground, are saleable commodities.                                      a
   T he Reading affair is not an isolated case. C harlton Athletic have           r
recently had to leave T h e Valley because the owners of the ground               g


                                         142




                                                                              u
                                 T H E   F IN A L   S C O R E




e     acquired planning permission to build a superm arket on the site,
e     T he site became more valuable for the selling of groceries than for
       being the home of a once proud football club. C harlton Athletic
t     now share a ground with C rystal Palace at Selhurst Park. M any
       former loyal C harlton Athletic supporters have refused to travel to
 1    the new ground and have ceased to support the club. Bristol Rovers
e     play on the ground o f Southern League team, Bath City, in the
e     neighbouring town! For the spectator this leads to disenchantm ent
e     and high travelling costs. Such moves might be more understand-
 r    able and acceptable if they led to improvements in the facilities for
[-    supporters. It is doubtful w hether this is the case, or w hether this
it    has even been a motivation.
d         T he debacle in early 1987 concerning the selling of F u lh am ’s
e     ground at C raven Cottage and the club’s proposed am algam ation
l-    with Q ueens Park Rangers clearly dem onstrated the strength of
it     feeling am ongst football supporters for a football team ’s home,
t)         In this particular case, the club and its ground were being sold
■y    w ithout any consultation with the supporters. T h e selling of the
d     ground was not in response to a dem and from supporters for
       improved facilities. It was simply a money-making exercise in which
 1.   a football club ju s t so happened to occupy valuable inner-city land,
 d    But there are cases where clubs w ant to move and so provide better
is    access and better facilities for staff and supporters.
Is        Clearly there is no easy solution, b u t whatever strategy is adopted
g.    it is im portant that change is driven by the needs and wishes of
•d    spectators, and that lessons from the R eading/O xford and F u lham /
n-    Q P R episodes are learnt.
 ,6       A nother aspect of place is the physical conditions to which sup-
  a   porters are subjected. Im agine the scene. T h e supporter has to park
;11   the car perhaps a mile from the football ground. As o ur supporter
n-     approaches the ground the police presence increases and the control
•s,    over where an d when he walks is increasingly limited. Given the
 e-   size of the crowds such m anagem ent is probably necessary and
ke    desirable. However, rath er than being seen as an exercise in crowd
ve     control for the benefit of the crowd, the spectator has the feeling
ag     th a t he is seen as a potential m iscreant and hooligan. T he stance
 se   by police may be latently hostile and distancing rather than friendly
       and welcoming, inevitably leading to an atm osphere of deteriorating
ve     relations. Does it have to be like this at every m atch at every football
id     ground?


                                             143
                        F O O T B A L L   IN    IT S   P L A C E




    T hus, the first experience for our supporter is one of control and
 hostility rather than a sense of welcome and value as a hum an
 being, let alone a consumer. Next, he pushes through a claustropho­
 bic turnstile where he has the feeling of being processed like cattle
 rath er th an being a person with needs, wishes and sensitivities. He
 then stands on a wind and rain-swept bleak open terrace of cracked
 and crum bling steps for a t least two hours. I f lavatory facilities are
 provided, this usually means a breeze-block bunker, probably foul
 smelling and awash. W om en are rarely catered for. T h e use of
 refreshment facilities will m ean battling his way a t half-time to a
 hut or hot-dog stand where tea is available. No culinary delights
 here.
    T he reader will have noticed that we have referred to the sup­
 porter as ‘he’. W e have pointedly m ade the same sexist assum ption
 that football clubs make - th at is, the football supporter is male.
 However, the proportion of females attending football matches is
 not insignificant. In a M O R I poll conducted in 1985 in which a
 random sample of 2,069 people were asked how often they go to
 w atch a football m atch at a League club, 4 per cent of females
 interviewed said they attended a m atch at least once a year, com­
 pared with 20 per cent o f males. I f this is an accurate reflection of
 the proportion of males and females who attend football m atches,
 this would suggest that on average up to one-fifth of the people
 attending a Football League m atch are women. T his is not greatly
 at variance with the 1983 General Household Survey which suggests
 that 1 person in 6 attending a Football League m atch is female.
    In w hat other recreational activity would people tolerate such
 conditions? T he surprising thing is that people are actually prepared
 to pay to be subjected to such an experience, although fewer and
 fewer supporters are now doing so. How m uch longer will football
 supporters tolerate this treatm ent before they stay a t home or choose
 to w atch other sports?


                     R E V E R S IN G T H E SPIRA L
  To reverse the spiral something radical is necessary and a num ber
( o f clubs are beginning to examine the possibilities. Tw o major
I objectives m ust be both to change the image o f football and to
| change the way football is currently experienced by the public. In
  the current social science jargon, it is the social representation that


                                          144
                          T H E   F IN A L   S C O R E




needs to be changed. Clearly, improving football ground facilities
is an im portant p art of this exercise. Such improvements can only
come about when something far more im portant and deep-rooted
is changed - attitudes: the attitudes o f football supporters as to w hat
they are prepared to tolerate in terms of the spectating conditions
at our national game; the attitudes o f club m anagem ent to their
responsibilities and the facilities which they should provide for their
customers; the attitudes o f all those involved in the club and those
in the com m unity in which the football stadium is located; and the
attitudes of the media, whose policy is often one of putting the bad
news about football on the front page o f newspapers and the good
news on the back page.
   This change can be achieved by means of both ‘h a rd ’ and ‘soft’
m anagem ent. ‘H a r d ’ m anagem ent focuses on improvements to the
physical fabric of football grounds, and the crowd control strategies
which are used by the police and ground officials. ‘Soft’ m anage­
m ent attem pts to change attitudes by means of an educational
process. H a rd and soft m anagem ent techniques necessarily interact
with each other. A ttitude change is not going to come about over­
night. Some of the proposals we put forward will need to be
implemented over a num ber of years, while others should and could
be addressed more immediately. L ater in this chapter we specify
the sort of action th a t needs to be undertaken by Football League
clubs, the football authorities, the H om e Office, the D epartm ent of
the Environm ent and the police in both the short and long term.
These proposals take the form of a checklist.
   In the rem ainder of this final chapter, we discuss six m ajor areas
of activity which comprise a positive strategy for dealing with the
current crisis in British football.
   T h e first is trying to change the n ature of a football m atch as it
is experienced by spectators. T h e second focuses on providing a
safe environm ent for spectators of all ages and physical abilities.
The third is the linking of the m anagem ent of the club m uch more
closely to its supporters. T he fourth is building stronger connections
between all those involved in the club and those in the community
in which the football stadium is located. T h e fifth, draw ing on the
previous issues, is to encourage the m edia to proclaim the success
and enjoyments of being a spectator as loudly as they proclaim the
discomforts. T he sixth is making the public in general and the
football supporter in particular more aw are of their football heritage.


                                      145
                      F O O T B A L L    IN   IT S   P L A C E




   W e provided a scenario of w hat it is currently like to attend a
football match. We would now like to describe an alternative scen­
ario - a strategy which has as its central tenet the notion of ‘caring
for the spectator’, whereby resources and effort are channelled into
providing the football-going spectator with a satisfactory series of
experiences. W hether we are talking about a trip to a theatre, the
circus or a tourist attraction, the consumer is looking for a pleasur­
able outing in attractive and comfortable surroundings. T hey are
looking to be entertained, to spend money on food, drink and
souvenirs of w hat should be a m em orable experience. T here is no
reason why football cannot adopt the same criteria and aspirations.
Furtherm ore, returning to our earlier propositions, a sense of ident­
ity and a sense of place m ust again become essential components
of the world of football.


 T H E F O O T B A L L E X P E R IE N C E A N D C A R IN G F O R T H E
                             SPECTATOR
 Clubs m ust be geared up to provide not only w hat the directors,
 shareholders, m anagem ent an d players want, and w hat they believe
 the spectator wants, but w hat the spectator actually wants. Football
 m anagem ent m ust p u t itself in the shoes'of the spectator and care
fo r then}. Football m anagem ent m ust strive to make it easy for~the
 spectator to get the most out of their visit to a football m atch from
 the time they make a decision to attend, to the m om ent they arrive
 at the turnstile. This ‘caring for the spectator’ does not come easy
- it m ust be a clearly thought-out strategy. At the centre of this
caring approach is a recognition th a t the spectator is a valued
custom er or client, who should be treated with respect and
consideration.
    T he first essential step is to know the spectator - who he and she
is, where he or she comes from, w hat he or she wants. It is not
enough for m anagem ent to assume they know. C onstant appraisal,
for example, by means of surveys is essential. T he image of the
football supporter as the middle-aged male in a flat cap (when it is
not a teenager with Doc M artin boots) is totally at variance with
all the research evidence. T he 1983 General Household Survey
examined the socioeconomic characteristics of spectators a t football
matches four weeks prior to the survey. T he largest proportion of
spectators was either in the professional, employers or m anagerial


                                        146
                          T H E   F IN A L   S C O R E




group (4 per cent) or the skilled m anual group (4 per cent). In te r­
mediate and ju n io r non-m anual (2 per cent) and semi-skilled and
unskilled m ade up the smaller proportions. In terms of age, 8 per
cent of 16-34 year olds attended a football m atch within the four
weeks prior to the interview com pared with 6 per cent of 35—59
year olds and 2 per cent of those over 60 years of age.
    Football m anagem ent m ust look after their paying spectators as
does any other high-quality visitor attraction. I f the football stadium
and the football experience were to be construed as p art of the
repertory o f leisure and recreation attractions available to the
public, very different standards of provision and service would be
expected and provided. I f going to a football m atch were to be seen
like attending the theatre or visiting a tourist attraction, certain
assumptions would be m ade about w hat the consumer requires
from the visit, w hat satisfactions need to be provided for and w hat
would be the consequences of the failure to meet these assumptions.
I t is p a rt of the everyday assessment of highly professional facilities
in the tourism and leisure business to ask questions such as what
sort o f visitors are we trying to attract? W h at sort of experience
should we be providing for visitors? W h at are their needs, wishes,
satisfactions? How do we attrac t the first-time visitor? How do we
encourage repeat visitation? Spectator can be substituted for visitor
in each case w ithout any difficulty. I f clubs are not prepared to
answ er these questions then they might as well play behind closed
gates as W est H am U nited had to do several seasons ago as a
consequence of crowd trouble.
    I f clubs start to respond to questions such as these (and their
response is backed up with investment), the quality of football
grounds and the quality of the football experience for the spectator
will undergo a radical transformation. Some clubs have started
along this road bu t there is still a long way to go. It is as if football
 m anagem ent are partially aw are of w hat needs to be done but are
 hidebound by tradition, inertia, financial constraints and a lack of
 appropriate skills and expertise. W h at will this m ean in practice?
 O ne option m ight be for clubs to sell off their valuable, congested
 and often decrepit inner-city grounds and move either to the out­
 skirts of our urb a n areas where more land is available for the
 development of sporting, social and community facilities, or to low-
 value, inner-city derelict land sites which need reclamation. Even


                                       147
                      F O O T B A L L   IN    IT S   P L A C E




within some of o ur larger cities and conurbations there are hundreds
of acres of derelict land which are looking for a positive use.
   T he visitor should arrive relaxed and looking forward to an enjoy­
able afternoon’s entertainm ent. Everything should be done to make
the spectator’s journey as easy as possible. O n arrival at key arrival
points - car parks, railway stations and bus stations - there should
be orientation panels which inform visiting spectators where the
ground is and where they can buy food an d drink. Given the
availability of land, car parks should be provided wherever possible
and m ust be clean, well surfaced and landscaped in an attractive
way. T his would then be supported by a comprehensive signing
system, perhaps in the club colours, to take spectators directly to
the ground while at the sam e time minimising disruption to the rest
o f the community. H aving arrived at the ground, there m ust be a
sense of welcome so that the spectator is m ade to feel a valued
consum er and a valued h um an being. T he entrance sign is im port­
ant and m ust clearly advertise w hat the football club offers its
spectators and why an afternoon at a football m atch is an exciting
event.
   T he environm ent is continually providing us with messages and
meanings: it says something about how those who own or m anage
places see those who use them. I f the environm ent is unattractive
and unwelcoming, it will stim ulate negative if not hostile responses.
A well-designed and m anaged environm ent which encourages a
positive response and attitude should not be seen as an optional
luxury b u t as an essential requirem ent of all sports and leisure
facilities. Perhaps the most im portant change of all th at can be
brought about involves increasing the am ount of face-to-face contact
with the club and ground staff. A personal welcome is im portant,
and it is remembered. This is most effectively done a t the entrance
point into the ground or at the turnstile. I t may seem absurd that
one could even contem plate welcoming 20,000 spectators individu­
ally to a football ground. However, clubs like W atford do try to
welcome everybody who comes through the turnstile. W hen the
spectator gets into the ground they are given a program m e or C up
m atch vouchers by a smiling steward: children entering the Sir
Stanley Rous Stand are given a packet of crisps. While this is
only a small and inexpensive gesture, its public relations value is
considerable.
    Staff training is fundam ental and often underrated. Investm ent


                                        148
                          T H E   F IN A L   S C O R E




in ‘facing the public’ can repay itself m any times over if it achieves
the right response from the spectator. It will also involve a change
in the relationship of the club staff and stewards to those who attend
matches or travel to other grounds to support their team. Stewards
should be trained in all aspects of people m anagem ent, not ju st
people movement. T hey should be able to deal not only with issues
such as crowd control, safety and first aid, bu t also all those aspects
of public relations which we call ‘caring for the spectator’.
   T he provision of food and drink, is im portant. It should not ju st
be a token gesture but a quality service. It should cater for all
m arkets from tea and sandwiches at half-time to more substantial
facilities such as restaurants. Chelsea is one club which is trying to
offer snack facilities on a more professional basis th an is typically
found at m any grounds. Some clubs such as Coventry City make
m axim um use of their investment in catering by offering ‘out of
hours’ evening catering as well. T he planning and economics of
catering are as specialised as football m anagem ent. Suffice it to say
that ‘value for m oney’ catering with good quality food, friendly staff
and attractive sales outlets in pleasant surroundings is essential.
   I t is ironic th at in the current political climate, it is the private
sector which is constantly held up as the pacesetter for the provision
of entrepreneurial facilities such as catering. Yet one has to turn to
the public sector for examples of innovation in this area. For exam­
ple, the provision o f restaurant and snack facilities at the South
Bank improved out of all recognition in recent years und er the
m anagem ent of the ‘late’ G reater London Council. British R ail’s
catering operation which used to be the stuff of music-hall jokes has
been transformed by their seeking the advice and expertise of Prue
Leith. British Rail now even offer regional menus on some o f their
trains. T here is no reason why football clubs cannot do the same.
   Clubs do not have to run catering facilities themselves. W ith a
captive audience of 20,000 or even 5,000 a m atch, there ought to
be a num ber of opportunities for offering catering as a concession.
This could be either to a local company or perhaps to a national
catering chain who could negotiate with the Football League a
contract to provide refreshments and catering at a num ber of
grounds. It would be in the interest o f the concessionaire to offer a
good service, and clubs could insist on quality control. By giving
clubs a percentage o f the profit, it would benefit clubs to promote
the facility (and thereby themselves) and m ake it a success.


                                      149
                      F O O T B A L L   IN    IT S   P L A C E




   Clubs are now developing their souvenir shops. For example, the
shop adjacent to M anchester U nited's stadium carries an extensive
stock. T here is, however, still scope for expansion. Leisure shopping
is a m ajor income generator. In m any tourist attractions, shop sales
can account for 20 per cent or more of the income. In 1981, shop
sales in historic houses accounted for approxim ately 23 per cent of
the total income, while a further 20 per cent was derived from
catering. Across tourism attractions as a whole, research on visitor
expenditure on day trips suggested th a t in 1982 over 60 per cent of
visitor expenditure on a day trip was spent on food and drink, while
this increased to 75 per cent when gifts and souvenirs are taken
into account. Ever since W alt Disney built Disneyland around a
parade of shops, the tourism and leisure industry has recognised
that ancillary sales are not only an im p ortan t source o f income but
also an essential p a rt of the day out for visitors.
   Football clubs have a lot to learn. O ne could imagine the club
shop selling not only souvenirs such as the club strip, towels and
knick-knacks related to the particular club, b u t leisure wear, sports
equipm ent, books on football, and it could even operate as a travel
agency. T here are considerations such as the cost of initial stocking
but arrangem ents can be m ade with local sports shops, bookshops
and others to provide goods on a sale or return basis. Equally, the
shop could be run as a concession. T hese arrangem ents are entered
into every day by other sectors of the tourism and leisure industry.
T he one distinct advantage th a t football clubs have, which m any
leisure facilities do not, is the great am ount of space in and around
the grounds. But they also have another distinct advantage - the
club culture we discussed in C h ap te r 3. T hey could be literally
cashing in on the uniqueness of their own particular club in terms
of the shops it has and the m erchandise it sells.
   We believe th a t there are m any opportunities for clubs to improve
the stan d ard of comfort an d the range o f services for spectators and
the community. As with issues discussed later concerning health
and safety, various bodies can respond to this need. O f course,
conditions of comfort necessarily interact with health and safety,
and should be seen in such a context.
   T he football authorities should bring together all those who are
responsible for promoting, playing and m anaging the sport (includ­
ing the Football Associations, the Football Leagues, the Professional
Footballers’ Association and others) in order to provide resources


                                        150
                          T H E   F IN A L   S C O R E




and practical advice on how to achieve the objectives we have
outlined in order to improve the experience of going to a football
m atch. We would envisage th at the football authorities will need to
draw on skills and advice from individuals and organisations not
currently involved in sport in general or football in particular.
   T he g e n e r a l ambience of football grounds n eeds to be upgraded
through internal im provem ents and by good m aintenance. This
includes the provision of better surfacing of terraces, steps and the
general fabric of football grounds, clean lavatories and wet w eather
protection at a m inim um . This involves an attitude of m ind as m uch
as a financial com m itm ent on the p a rt o f football m anagem ent. All
the facilities and services which are provided for the benefit of
spectators should receive the same careful planning and attention
to detail as pre-m atch preparation for the players. T hey all m ake
up the total football experience.
  T h e football authorities should not only recognise poor provision
of facilities an d punish disruptive behaviour by mem bers o f the
public bu t should also rew ard positive initiatives on the p a rt of
clubs and their supporters. T his has happened through the C anon
sponsorship of the Football League, b u t other m ethods and rew ards
could also be explored.


               SA FETY A N D C R O W D C O N T R O L

W e have been at pains to point out th at our interest in this m atter
is not ju s t a concern for the future o f our national sport. Safety and
crowd control were at the centre of our study’s terms of reference
for the Popplewell Inquiry. At present it appears th a t responsibility
for all aspects o f safety and related m atters o f crowd control at
football clubs is split between a num ber o f different people. O ne
person w ithin the club may have the jo b of going around w ith the
fire officer to check escape routes. A nother person m ay be respon­
sible for m atters of m aintenance relating to barriers and other
aspects o f the physical conditions. In practice, if not in theory, the
police are likely to have overall responsibility for crowd egress and
segregation.
   T he responsibility of stew ards and others who serve the spectators
(such as food franchises) whose activities m ay carry safety impli­
cations may be quite distinct from other responsibilities in relation
to safety. Indeed, in m any cases stewards ap p ear to see their role


                                      151
                       F O O T B A L L   IN   IT S   P L A C E




as guiding people to their places or opening or closing exit routes.
T hey are likely to be informed of the location of fire extinguishers
and have general instruction on their actions with regard to Opening
doors in an emergency. T h eir responsibility for taking an active role
in the prevention of dangerous incidents or reporting on possible
problems is often not so clear.
   As far as can be ascertained, few clubs have appointed a specifi­
cally designated safetu^affieer or m anager who is a senior m em ber
of the club, either a director or specifically responsible to a director.
Such a person would have the authority, recognised w ithin the club,
to liaise w ith all the people concerned noted above. T hey could
become a partisan voice w ithin the club for safety m atters. While
at present all senior individuals w ithin a club will support the
virtues of safety, they will be constrained by the other dem ands on
resources, o f which they are aware, w hen arguing for improved
safety. An individual who has the concern for safety as his prim e
responsibility is therefore likely to take a different approach to the
problem.
   A safety m anager could also em brace the consideration of com­
fort. Com fort and safety interconnect in m any im portant ways. An
exam ple of this is the provision o f ram ps instead of steps. A lthough
ram ps are often provided w ith w heelchair and disabled users in
m ind, they are often preferred by able-bodied people. I t would be
appropriate to build ram ps rath er th an steps in some parts of
football grounds. N ot only would these be preferred by the public
b u t they would also be safer, as there would be less chance of
people tripping up when moving up or down in a large crowd. T h e
dem onstration by clubs o f their direct concern for spectators would
go some way to alleviate the criticisms often directed at them . It
m ay even reduce m inor acts of vandalism or aggression th a t are the
product of dissatisfaction w ith the club.
   T here are a nu m b er o f detailed recom m endations in respect of
health and safety issues which we subm itted as p a rt of o ur evidence
to the Committee o f Inquiry into Crowd Safety and Control at Sports Grounds
for M r Ju stice Popplewell. Some of them have been enshrined in
governm ent guidelines or statute b ut it is w orth em phasising th at
these actions can be undertaken by the football clubs themselves,
the football authorities, the H om e Office, D epartm ent of the
E nvironm ent and the police.
   In the short term, Football League clubs should establish training
                          T H E   F IN A L   S C O R E




programmes. These should comprise training films, talks, demon-
TJfrations, role-playing exercises involving the police, medical ser­
vices, the fire brigade an d stewards. We also suggest th at a training
Kuide is written which covers issues such as safety, comfort, em erg­
ency action, staff training and the appointm ent o f a safety manager.
   W ith the sophisticated technology which is now available, crowd
m anagem ent should be easier. For example, segmented public
address systems could be installed throughout grounds, which
allows some or all loudspeakers to be operated at any one time
thus enabling the controlled m anagem ent of crowd movement. This
could be supported by the installation of closed-circuit television,
perm itting a centralised overview and m anagem ent o f crowd move­
ment. Chelsea Football C lub has been a t the forefront of this type
of initiative.
   T he football authorities need to provide guidance to football clubs
on all aspects of safety and comfort in football stadia, so that
there are m inim um standards and a nationally agreed procedure for
dealing with emergency and evacuation procedures. T hese pro­
cedures should be public an d available to supporters, so th at they
have prior knowledge o f them . T h e football authorities should also
sponsor and organise training program m es covering comfort and
safety in football stadia as outlined above, i.e. training films, talks,
dem onstrations, and the production of a training guide covering
safety, comfort and emergency action. T h e im provem ent of football
grounds - their physical fabric and standards of safety and comfort
- will require a massive injection of capital and revenue funding.
T he football authorities should provide advice to clubs, or seek the
assistance of others, on how to raise capital an d create an environ­
m ent in which private investm ent and sponsorship, tru st funding
and, where appropriate, public-sector funding become available to
projects. T h e Football T ru st has an essential role to play here.
   C entralised records should be established of all football matches,
listing crowd sizes and police deploym ent as well as incidents relat­
ing to football matches. These should include details of arrests,
convictions, ejections and casualties. T hey should also include
details of all fires and malicious dam age. This was one of the major
recom m endations of the 1978 jo in t SSR C/Sports Council report; the
need for this is still present. Any incidents should be followed by
an inquiry, the report of which is m ade public.
   I f training m anuals and films on crowd control are not already
                           F O O T B A L L   IN    IT S   P L A C E




    available they should be produced. Such training m aterial should
    take account of the growing social psychological m aterial on crowd
    behaviour un d er norm al and emergency conditions. Liaison with
    football clubs should be extended to cover regular briefings of stew­
    ards and other staff on duty at matches. W herever possible the
    police should encourage stew ards and other ground staff to take the
    prim ary responsibility for as m any aspects of crowd control as
    possible.
       T he H om e Office and the D ep artm en t of the Environm ent also
    have an im p o rtant role to play. For example, they should com­
    mission research on crowd movem ent and densities at football and
    other sports grounds and stadia. This should relate the physical
    param eters and conditions to the experiences of the crowds.
    Research needs to be undertaken on how crowds respond to different
    forms o f instruction and w arning und er different circumstances. We
    know com paratively little about the developm ent an d context of
    actual violent events. Such research could be modelled on the pro­
    ductive work th at has been conducted into behaviour in emergenc­
    ies . 7 This should include a consideration o f the different ethos or
    culture of each club.
       It is unreasonable to expect th at the m any people involved in a
    football ground will be able to perform all th a t m ight be dem anded
    of them in an emergency w ithout (a) having been informed in detail
    w hat could be required, and (b) having some opportunity to try
    out the appropriate actions as p a rt of an overall drill or practice.
    T he training of all staff is therefore essential. O ne m ight also add
    th at training in itself has all sorts of social and psychological value.
    It can create a sense o f belonging an d involvement, strengthen
    group loyalty and identity, instil cam araderie and generally improve
    interpersonal relations w ithin the organisation. M ost im portantly,
    the carrying out o f training exercises can show th a t m anagem ent is
    com m itted to safe practices and cares about spectators.


           T H E F O O T B A L L C L U B A N D IT S S U P P O R T E R S
    T he third com ponent involves full participation by supporters in
    the club’s activities. T here are advantages and disadvantages to
    instituting a m em bership scheme. O ne o f the key benefits is th at it
    would strengthen m em bers’ identification and even responsibility
    for the club’s affairs as well as providing rights to attend matches.


                                             154




t                                                                               L
                          T H E   F IN A L   S C O R E




T he term ‘club’ would then come closer to its dictionary definition
of an association of:'people with common aims and interests. T o tten ­
 ham H o tsp ur have taken this one stage further and m ade the club
a publicly quoted, limited com pany on the Stock Exchange, thereby
allowing supporters to readily buy and sell shares in the club. In this
way, the directors are m uch more accountable to their supporters if
those supporters are also shareholders. This does, at least theoret­
ically, give supporters some control over the future developm ent of
the club. O nly time will tell if this is anything more than tokenism.
 It is, however, an interesting experim ent which is w orth m onitoring.
    Traditionally, supporters’ clubs have attem pted to fulfil this role.
T he benefits of joining a supporters’ club, though, have often been
more psychological than practical. I t has enabled supporters to feel
a closer identity w ith their club. A supporters’ club m em ber is an
‘official’ supporter and m ay therefore feel somehow rath er better
th an the person who ju s t pays at the gate and is an otherwise
anonym ous m em ber o f the crowd. T o be fair m any supporters’
clubs have bars where supporters can have a drink before or after
the m atch, or during the week when there are no matches. They
have also offered discounted travel to away matches.
    In recent years, though, supporters’ clubs have also been seen as
a device for screening supporters. Sanctions are, however, limited.
I t is likely th at different groups of supporters will perceive the
supporters’ club differently. For some, it is a social club and an
additional m eans of expressing support. For others, especially those
who cause trouble at grounds, joining a supporters’ club would
probably be the last thing they would contem plate, seeing it as
representing the status quo an d an instrum ent of authority.
    T h e m em bership scheme being adopted by some clubs could be
seen as an extension of the supporters’ club idea, although the way
it has been presented by football clubs dem onstrates th at it is
more to do with control and containm ent rath er th an identity and
support. Even after all the criticism th a t has been levelled at the
m anagem ent o f football, it is rem arkable that even this exercise has
been poorly handled w ith an eye to public relations and image. To
be fair to football clubs, though, m em bership schemes have been
imposed on clubs by the governm ent with little regard to the con­
sequences or effectiveness of such actions. T here is m uch to
recom m end a m em bership scheme b u t people will only become
m em bers of a club if they have a strong sense of identity w ith it
                       F O O T B A L L   IN    IT S   P L A C E




and a feeling th at it is w orth while joining. In terms of w hat is on
offer at m any football grounds today this is surely questionable.
   T he kind o f improved conditions described in this chapter would
m ake it easier to attra c t a mem bership. Active pursuit o f a partici­
pating m em bership naturally establishes links w ith the community.
This in tu rn presents opportunities for clubs to offer a range of
facilities th a t m ight be attractive to such a m em bership and thereby
maximise the return on the financial investment. This could include
the provision of all-w eather playing and training surfaces, res­
taurants, entertaining an d meeting-room facilities, or even discos
under the stands, which is happening at O ld h am Athletic. An
involved m em bership provides a hum an and financial resource in
the context of which the ground conditions and associated facilities
can develop, an d thereby a ttract more members.


      T H E F O O T B A L L C L U B A ND T H E C O M M U N IT Y
M any different links between clubs and their local com m unity have
been encouraged by the Sports Council and other bodies and there
is little d o u bt th at some clubs are trying to forge such closer ties
with the com m unity. A thorough investigation o f the successes and
failures of the schemes supported by the Sports Council has been
conducted by Ingham o f Southam pton U niversity8. H is report does
indicate th a t these schemes have achieved some degree o f success
b u t th a t im provem ents in m onitoring them could result in even
more benefits.
   A few years ago the Wildfowl T ru st a t Slimbridge attracted
national publicity w hen it prom oted an ‘A dopt a duck’ scheme.
Visitors could adopt a duck for a small sum o f money, and the
T ru st would keep them informed about ‘their’ duck even to the
extent of receiving postcards from it! T h e principle behind this
scheme has been taken up in m any other places by a range of
organisations as a m eans of fund-raising. Football clubs, too, have
seen the potential: it is now possible to sponsor footballers, or rath er
their kit. At W atford Football Club, it currently costs £150 to
sponsor the complete kit, £40 for a pair o f m atch boots, £40 for a
m atch kit and so on. T here is no shortage of sponsors. Such an
activity not only encourages involvement and interest b ut is also
good for fund-raising and public relations.
   For younger supporters, W atford have initiated a ‘J u n io r H ornets


                                         156
                           T H E   F IN A L   S C O R E




 Sportsw orld’ scheme. In this, first team players hold coaching ses­
 sions on various aspects of the gam e such as goalkeeping and out­
 field play. T he scheme has been so successful th at W atford are
 extending the scheme to include other sports besides football.
    I f football grounds are to be recognised as a com m unity resource,
 and more im portantly, football clubs are seen as an im portant part
 of the social an d cultural life o f the com munity, then there is a
 strong case for encouraging more direct contact between schools and
          T here are opportunities for theln telligent study oFfootbalTas
 a social, cultural, economic and sporting activity. Furtherm ore,
 current educational initiatives do exist which football clubs could
 respond to and benefit from in tprms o f public relations and com­
 m unity involvement in the short term, and attitude changes and
 the enlistm ent of public support in the longer term. Football clubs
 could appoint an E ducation Officer and provide classroom /m eeting-
 room facilities, along with pupil and teacher resource m aterial and
 other resources. Such an innovatory formal and informal edu­
 cational program m e could also generate income. I t may be possible
 for the local education authority to second a teacher to the football
club, in which case the cost to the club would be minimal.
    Some clubs might not see education as their business: why should
they bear this unnecessary and unacceptable cost? I f clubs do not
look seriously at proposals such as these, then the costs of disaffec­
tion and loss of the next generation o f spectators could be much
greater. T h ere are a n u m b er of educational program m es which have
been launched in recent years which are relevant to the type of
initiative being proposed here. A brief sum m ary of these initiatives
will dem onstrate the opportunities for this potential gearing between
football, education and training and the ways in which football can
have vocational an d skill relevance.
   T he Technical, Vocational and Education Initiative (T V E I) is a
four-year project for 14-18 year olds which is run on a m odular basis
as an alternative to G G E and CSE examinations. T he objective is
to give increased practical technical and vocational training. W ith
its em phasis on technology and business studies, this has obvious
application to the m odern world of professional football. T he
courses are based on City and Guilds of London Institute 365,
which has a com pulsory social, economic and environm ent module,
and Business and Technical Education Council (BTEC)
Exam inations.


                                      157
                      F O O T B A L L   IN    IT S   P L A C E




    T he Certificate in Pre-Vocational Education (CPV E) is another        Pr
 initiative, launched in Septem ber 1985. I t is a one-year course,        es]
 em bracing a transition from generalised to vocational education          va
 and employment. W ork in core areas such as com m unications,             th
 science, knowledge about industrial society and personal and ere-         or
 ative development are com plem ented by vocational an d structured        Cc
 work experience. T h e C PV E is adm inistered by a Jo in t Board of      an
 the two principal validating bodies for pre-vocational education, the
 City and Guilds of London Institute an d the Business and Technical       wc
 Education Council (B TEC), and offers modules related to specific         at
 ‘occupational families’ o f which the environm ent and urb an studies,    ofl
 etc., is one. T here is a specific m odule on tourism , recreation and    is
 environm ental issues. T h e study o f all aspects of football would be   bu
 a worthwhile unit w ithin such a m odule, providing students w ith a      nc
 practical and meaningful case study.
    T he G eneral Certificate of Secondary Education (GCSE) is per-        in
 haps the most significant developm ent in education in recent years       ev
 bringing together G C E an d CSE and aims to capture the 40 per           an
 cent of pupils who are not at present caught in th at combined            Ti
 net. I t started in Septem ber 1986 and will incorporate a ‘project’      hi
 comprising 2 0 per cent of the marks for most o f the m ajor subjects     pa
 (biology, geography, history, craft design and technology). An            br
exam ple m ight be environm ental or social science work on some           le
 aspect of recreation planning or issue-based work very sim ilar to
 th at already undertaken at A level in the 16-19 geography project.
 Pupils are encouraged by teachers to tackle som ething local an d it
is not difficult to conceive o f classes of pupils examining the catch-    F<
m ent area from which a football club draw s support, the socioecon-       aj
omic characteristics of the football-going public, the economics of        vc
running a football club, or the logistics o f m anaging a large crowd      at
in order to ensure safety an d comfort. Pupils could approach the          ar
local planning departm ent, libraries, archivists, the police, and St      fo
J o h n ’s A m bulance Brigade, in order to collect inform ation and       ac
come to a closer understanding of football, its m anagem ent and           n(
organisation.                                                              sh
    T he most recent initiative which has relevance to developing the
educational role of football clubs in the com m unity is th a t of the     sp
proposed City Technology Colleges announced by the R t H on.               ps
K enneth Baker, Secretary o f State for E ducation in O ctober 1986.       m
T hese will offer a broad curriculum w ith a strong technical and          w


                                        158
                                  T H E   F IN A L   S C O R E




r      practical element. T hey will be set up exclusively in u rb an areas,
        especially inner cities and those areas experiencing social depri-
1      vation where there is already on-going governm ent support such as
        through the In n e r City Initiative. I t is noteworthy th at of the twenty
        or more possible locations already identified for City Technology
3      Colleges, all have at least one long-established local football team,
)f     and some have several.
e          I t is quite clear from the above th a t the environm ent an d the
        world o f work and leisure in its broadest sense is receiving more
c      attention in the school curriculum . In particular, these initiatives
5      offer the opportunity to study the local area and local issues. T here
d      is no reason why all aspects o f professional football - as a sport,
)e     business, recreational an d leisure activity, and its associated tech-
 a     nology - could not respond to these curricular developments.
           Football should be seen as p a rt of the leisure and recreation
r_     industry and of education in the way we have advocated. T h ere is
rs     every precedent for these types of initiatives. T h ere are m any tourist
er     and visitor attractions throughout the country which have extensive
;(j    T raining Agency schemes providing jo b opportunities in areas of
,t>    high unem ploym ent. O n - and off-the-job training can be an integral
 ts    p art o f m any o f these schemes. Football provides an opportunity to
         bring together education, training an d com m unity involvem ent with
np     leisure and recreational activities.
to
ct-                       F O O T B A L L A ND T H E M E D IA
 it
        Football is shy about its achievements. M ore football clubs need to
m_     appoint press and public relations officers, if only on a part-tim e/
 Gf    voluntary basis, to m ake the media m ore aw are o f the good things
wcj     about football and their contribution to the social, cultural, sporting
he      and economic life of the com m unity. Such an appointm ent would
 gt    force clubs to think about w hat they are doing and tu rn such
n(j    activities into positive news stories. I f clubs are not doing anything
n(j     newsworthy, it would encourage them to think about w hat they
        should be doing.
the        Football’s image has been tarnished for too long because its
the     spokesmen could only speak in cliches, expressing their current
on      psychological state as being either ‘as sick as a p a rro t’ or ‘over the
86.     m oon’. Football m ust present itself through the m edia in such a
in(j    way th a t its spokesmen (hopefully some spokeswomen) are articu-


                                               159
                       F O O T B A L L   IN   IT S   P L A C E




  late and provide an insight into the game w ith an intelligent com­
  m entary. T revor Brooking, Jim m y Hill, Ia n St J o h n and Jim m y
  Greaves have done m uch to redress the balance.
     Football needs more imaginative m arketing. Cricket has
  responded to a decline in interest an d increasing competition from
  other leisure and recreation pursuits by introducing first-class, one-
  day cricket matches which fit fairly comfortably w ithin television
  schedules. These not only receive massive television audiences but
  they also fill the grounds full of spectators. Football has tried five-
 a-side football and various m inor cup matches b u t w ithout m uch
 success. T here m ust be other types of matches which could capture
 the football-going and more im portantly the non-football-going pu b ­
 lic’s im agination. Some of the top football clubs have been discuss­
 ing for some time the notion o f a Super League. Perhaps a Super
 League at the end of the season featuring the top clubs in England,
 Scotland, Wales and N orthern Ireland to determ ine the British
 cham pions would meet the interests of clubs and the public. The
 interest generated by the League play-offs at the end o f the 1986-7
 season supports this notion. An international ‘Festival of Football’
 in which the top League clubs from Europe com pete in a European
 League would not only add sparkle to the league program m e but
 might go some way to persuade F IF A to allow English clubs to
play in European competitions again.
    T o m any people, football is selfish an d inw ard looking. At a time
of declining gates, flagging public interest and a poor m edia image,
introversion and retrenchm ent is not the solution. Football needs
to p ut across a strong message dem onstrating th a t it has m uch to
offer the com munity and society.
    T he m edia is increasingly influenced by photographic images and
w hat is visual and presentable in a simple direct way. I t is essential
th at the football clubs and the footballing institutions provide them
with new images th at replace those th at dom inate a t present. M any
of the proposals th at we are putting forward are newsworthy in
themselves.


                  T H E F O O T B A L L H E R IT A G E
T he present-day football supporter has inherited a footballing heri­
tage th at goes back more than 100 years. Indeed, the 1987-8 season
was the centenary of the form ation o f the Football League. Such


                                     160




                                                                            L
                         T H E   F IN A L   S C O R E




an event was a marvellous opportunity for the Football League to
launch a m ajor series of publicity and educational events telling the
story o f football’s heritage. T h e story of football from its earliest
days to its growth into the w orld’s most popular sport deserves to
be told: the history of the FA Cup; the developm ent of the first
British clubs like the W anderers (W olverham pton W anderers),
Small H e a th (Birm ingham City) an d Royal Arsenal (Arsenal); the
disappearance of clubs such as Accrington Stanley, W orkington
Town, and Southport. T h e decline in the industrial heartlands has
seen a new pattern o f successful clubs not based in the industrial
cities of the N orth an d W est M idlands b ut in the H om e Counties
(W atford, W im bledon, Luton), E ast Anglia (Ipswich, Norwich)
and the south coast (Southam pton, Portsm outh and Brighton). T he
changing geograiphy of football; the history of individual clubs;
the story of famous m anagers, players, referees, grounds, matches,
incidences, are all w orth recounting. T his all makes up the heritage
of football.
    At this point, it is perhaps w orth while rehearsing some o f the
argum ents which have been p u t forward for informing the public
about our rich national and cultural heritage. T h e conservation
m ovem ent has learnt that, if people are to appreciate and conserve
the heritage, they m ust be informed about it in interesting and
entertaining ways. I t is argued th at a w idespread understanding
and appreciation of the im portance of heritage is the m ost sound
insurance against insensitive and an tipathetic developments. I f mass
public support for conservation is not enlisted then we will lose our
heritage. T h e discussion about football in the context of heritage
conservation is not totally misplaced: the case for public education
applies no less to football th an it does to o ur castles and national
parks. Football has suffered enorm ously over the past few years
from a variety o f ills. W h at it needs now is mass public support for
 its resuscitation and developm ent — otherwise attending football
 m atches will be simply a memory.
    Football has a rich heritage which represents an asset not a
 liability. I t is an asset which could be built upon to enhance the
 experience of spectators who attend football m atches and to tackle
 some o f the problem s which are facing football in the light of an
 increasingly exasperated and intolerant society.
    T he professional activity which seeks to tell the story o f our
 heritage to the public w ith a view to informing them and changing


                                      161
                       F O O T B A L L    IN   IT S   P L A C E
                                                                  t
                                                                  J

  their attitudes and behaviours is called interpretation9. T h e objec­
  tives o f interpretation are to increase understanding, enhance enjoy­
  ment, and engender a sense of caring and respect for the environ­
  ment. In conservation terms, interpretation is seen as having a key
  role to play in minimising dam age caused by public access to fragile
  environm ents and ecologically sensitive areas. Freem an T ild en 10
  (1957) defined interpretation as ‘an educational activity which aims
  to reveal meanings and relationships through the use o f original
 objects, by first-hand experience, and by illustrative media, rather
 than to simply com m unicate factual inform ation’. This can be
 achieved by m eans o f exhibitions, trails, audio-visual shows,
 theatre, interpretive panels, events, leaflets and booklets a t heritage
 sites.
     T here is no reason why individual football clubs could not tell
 their story to their supporters by these means. Informative panels
 about the history of the club and its successes, its players and
 officials could be located around the ground. Leaflets and guides to
 the club and its organisation could be produced. A video or tape-
 slide program m e about the club could be taken around to com­
 m unity groups, interest groups and schools, thereby strengthening
 com m unity ties. A ‘guided w alk’ or trail around the ground could
 be available on non-m atch days. Theatres, such as the Barbican
 and the N ational T heatre, offer this service because they have
 recognised th at they have a resource which is under-utilised for
 large parts of the day. Furtherm ore, large num bers of people are
 interested in seeing ‘backstage’. In response, these theatres offer
 guided tours of all parts of the theatre, including ‘backstage’, props
 room, and stars’ dressing-rooms. This not only makes the theatre-
 going experience more interesting for the public b u t it also is good
 public relations and generates income. G uided tours are available
 at C ardiff Arm s Park (rugby) and Wembley, so there is clearly a
 d em and w ithin sport for such a development.
    M anchester U nited have recognised the opportunities in this area
 by opening a small museum, w ith a range o f interesting displays
 about the history o f the club and its achievements in domestic and
international competitions. These displays comprise various football
m em orabilia, including trophies and cups, England caps, football
jerseys, and program m es of famous matches. This m aterial is sup­
ported by exhibition panels of text and photographs which tell the
story of the club, with videos of famous players and matches. The


                                         162




                                                                            jL
                                T H E   F IN A L   S C O R E




      M unich air crash was such a traum atic event in the club’s history
      that there is a m ajor display about the disaster: it is almost a shrine,
i-   It includes photographs and copies of the newspapers o f the day
 y   which reported the tragedy. T h e M anchester U nited m useum will
le   attra c t anyone interested in football, and attem pts to interest those
10   who know little about the subject. A substantial num ber of school
is   parties visits the exhibition, dem onstrating the educational potential
11   of the m useum and the opportunity to achieve the type o f attitude
:r   and behaviour change advocated elsewhere in this chapter.
 e      T his is not an isolated example of a sport recognising th at people
3,   do have a thirst for inform ation and stim ulation, and th at with
e    im agination, effort an d investm ent it is possible to unlock the heri­
      tage of our world-famous national pastime. O th er sports which have
11   sought to tell their stories by means of m useum s and exhibitions
 s   are rugby (Cardiff Arms Park) horse racing (Newmarket) and tennis
d    (W imbledon).
0        T h ere is any num ber of opportunities for clubs to engage in these
      sorts of activities which would create positive links between the
      m anagem ent o f the club and the supporters, and the club and the
g    surrounding comm unity. T he history and heritage o f football is an
d    extremely valuable asset which can be used to restore pride, create
n    a sense of identity and belonging, enlist public support and enhance
e    the spectator’s appreciation and enjoyment o f the sport,
r

e      C H A N G IN G G R O U N D S AND C H A N G IN G A T T IT U D E S
r
s    Football is now facing competition from the entertainm ent and
      leisure industry to a degree it has never before experienced. Football
1    will eventually have to come to terms with this competition through
e    a change in attitude and the prom otion of an image which sees
a    football and its facilities as a recreational resource for the com­
      m unity, which has to be m anaged an d m arketed like any other
a    income-earning, private-sector visitor attraction. T h e concept offoot-
s    ball as an exciting spectator sport for all ages should be backed up
i    by products which reinforce the concept and image. W e have dis-
1    cussed above some of the types of product th at are possible.
1       Starting w ith the physical conditions of a ground has m any
      advantages. Football grounds carry symbolic as well as functional
:    implications. U nfortunately, tackling the physical conditions in
:    grounds has typically m eant stronger barriers, firmer segregation


                                            163
                       F O O T B A L L   IN    IT S   P L A C E




 and the creation o f w hat is called ‘sterile areas’. A t Luton this has
 been taken to such an extreme that supporters of opposing teams
 are now banned from the ground. Such a policy tied u p w ith a
 m em bership scheme has been actively prom oted by the government.
W hatever the motivations o f individuals for introducing such a
scheme, one has to question w hether such a decision is in the long­
 term interest of football clubs or their supporters, given w hat we
know about the football-going habits of the public reported
earlier.
    A continued reliance on measures such as these can only lead to
their increase, and an escalation in ‘h a rd ’ m anagem ent m ethods of
restraint. T h e only limiting factor will be the am ount o f constraint
the m ajority o f football supporters will tolerate before they stay at
home. K eeping the rain off the spectators, providing them with
seats and reasonable food are clearly acts of a club th a t cares about
its supporters. Furtherm ore, such modifications are highly visible
and there for all to see and photograph, publish and discuss.
A lthough m uch o f this book has concentrated on changing and
im proving the physical conditions a t football grounds, we argue
most strongly th at such im provem ents m ust be seen in the context
o f football clubs changing their image an d changing their percep­
tions an d attitudes tow ards the supporter. Likewise the public needs
to become more critical an d dem anding of the type of experience
football currently provides.
   T here will obviously be an im portant interaction between chang­
ing the physical facilities and changing attitudes. T h e measures
adopted so far by football clubs have either been piecemeal, ineffec­
tive or half-hearted and, we believe, fail to address the real issues
in any m eaningful way. T h e ‘solutions’ which are currently being
forced upon football sm ack of panic m easures which will ultim ately
do m ore h arm than good to football. W h at is being advocated here
does not necessarily require a m ajor injection o f finance, although
there will be a need to com pensate for the under-investm ent and
capitalisation th a t football has experienced over the last forty years.
M ore im portantly, we are talking about the use of skills, resources
and experience which are readily available in the local comm unity,
in the recreation industry and in education, to reverse w hat at
present seems like a term inal illness. T o repeat again the words of
Bill Shankley, ‘Some people think football is as im p o rtant as life


                                         164
r                          T H E   F IN A L   S C O R E




    and death. I can assure them th at it is m uch more serious than
    th a t.’




                                                                       1




I                                       165
                                NOTES




IN T R O D U C T I O N : B A C K G R O U N D A N D B E G IN N IN G S
 1 Public Disorder and Sporting Events, Sports Council/Social Science
   R esearch Council, 1978.
 2 Committee o f Inquiry into Crowd Safety and Control at Sports Grounds. Final
   Report, C hairm an: M r Ju stic e Popplewell, H M S O : London, 1986,
   C m nd 9710.


                      CHAPTER 1 FO U R THEM ES
1 Population Censuses a nd Surveys Office, The General Household Survey,
  H M S O : L ondon, 1983.
2 C anter, D. and Wools, R., ‘A T echnique for the Subjective Evaluation
  of Buildings’, Building Science, vol. 5, pp. 113-18, 1974.
3 Trivizas, E., ‘Sentencing the Football H ooligan’, British Journal o f
  Criminology, 21(4), pp. 342-9, 1981.
4 Ibid.


                  C H A P T E R 2 S P E C T A T O R S ’ V IE W S
1 F u rth er technical details are presented in D. C anter, et al.,
  ‘Psychological Aspects of C row d Safety a n d C ontrol a t Football
 G rounds. A R eport Presented to the C om m ittee o f In q u iry into Crowd
 Safety and C ontrol a t Sports G rounds. C hairm an: M r Ju stice
 Popplewell’, U niversity o f Surrey: Guildford, Septem ber 1985.


                    CH A PTER 3 CLUB CU LTU R ES
1 Inglis, B., The Football Grounds o f England and Wales, Willow Books:
  London, 1985.
2 C anter, D., Facet Theory, Springer: N ew York, 1985.
3 Duffield, B., ‘Crow d Behaviour: T he Scottish Experience’, in Football
  as a Focus fo r Disorder, C entre for C ontem porary Studies, 1984.
4 L undberg, C .C ., ‘O n the Feasibility of C u ltu ral Intervention in
                                    N O T E S




  O rganisations’, in P.J. Frost, L.F. Moore, M .R . Louis, C.C. L undberg
  and J . M artin, Organisational Culture, Sage: Beverly Hills, 1985.
5 M arsh, P., Aggro: The Illusion o f Violence, Dent: L ondon, 1978.
6 L undberg, op. cit.


             C H A P T E R 4 C R O W D S A N D E M E R G E N C IE S
 1 Moscovici, S., The Age o f the Crowd, C am bridge U niversity Press:
   London, 1985.
 2 Brook, P., The Empty Space, Penguin: H arm ondsw orth, 1986.
 3 Poyner, B., R obinson, D., H ughes, N ., Young, M. an d Ayles, P., Safety
   in Football Stadia: A Method o f Assessment, Scicon: L ondon, 1972.
 4 The Wheatley Report, H M S O : London, 1972, C m nd. 4952.
 5 Ibid.
 6 Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds, H M S O : L ondon, 1987.
 7 Pauls, J.L ., ‘Building Evacuations: R esearch Findings and
   R ecom m endations’, in D. C an te r (ed.), Fires and Human Behaviour, Wiley:
   C hichester, 1980.
 8 F ruin, J .J ., Pedestrian Planning and Design, M etropolitan Association of
   U rb a n Designers a nd E nvironm ental Planners: N ew York, 1971. See
   also Pauls, J .L ., Review o f Studies o f the Movement o f People, 1967-1985 by
   the National Research Council o f Canada, N ational R esearch Council of
   C anada: O tta w a, 1984.
 9 Committee o f Inquiry into Crowd Safety and Control at Sports Grounds.
   Chairman: M r Justice Popplewell, Interim Report, H M S O : London, 1985.
10 T ong, D. and C anter, D., ‘Inform ative W arnings: In situ Evaluations
   of Fire A larm s’, Fire Safety Journal, 9/3, pp. 267-79, Elsevier: Switzerland,
    1985.


                C H A P T E R 5 C O P IN G W IT H V IO L E N C E
 1 W illiams, J ., D unning, E.G. and M urphy, P.J., Hooligans Abroad,
   R outledge & K egan Paul: L ondon, 1984.
 2 M arsh, P., Aggro: The Illusion o f Violence, Dent: L ondon, 1978.
 3 Pearson, G., Hooligan: A History o f Respectable Fears, M acm illan:
   L ondon, 1983.
 4 G oldstein, J .H . (ed)., Sports Violence, Springer: N ew York, 1983.
 5 Fraser, A ., Cromwell: Our C hief o f Men, W eidenfeld & Nicolson:
   London, 1983.
 6 See Hansard, vol. 89, no. 37, p. 234 (16 J a n u a ry 1986), H M S O :
   L ondon, 1986.
 7 T rivizas, E., ‘Offences and Offenders in Football Crow d D isorders',
   British Journal o f Criminology, 20 (3), pp. 276-88, 1980.
 8 C entre for Leisure Research, Crowd Behaviour at Football Matchrs: .1
   Study in Scotland, D unferm line College o f Physical Education:
   E dinburgh, on behalf of the Football T ru st, 19XX.
 9 Selbourne, D., ‘T hrough Italian Eyes’, New Society, p. 395, I I J u n r
   1985.


                                         167
                                      N O T E S



 10 M arsh, P., Rosser, E. and H arre , R., The Rules o f Disorder, R outledge &
     K egan Paul: London, 1978.
 11 T iger, L., Men in Groups, Nelson: London, 1969.
 12 M orris, D., Soccer Tribe, C ape: L ondon, 1981.
 13 T aylor, I., in R. Ingham , (ed.) Football Hooliganism: The Wider Context,
     Inter-A ction: London, 1978.
 14 C larke, J ., ‘Football and W orking Class Fans: T ra d itio n and C h an g e’,
    in R. In g h am (ed.) op. cit.
 15 D unning, E., M urphy, P.J. and W illiams, J ., ‘S pectator Violence at
    Football matches: T ow ards a Sociological E xplanation’, British
    Journal o f Sociology, 37(2), 1986.
 16 Ibid.
 17 Sherif, M ., W hite, B.J. and H arvey, O .J., Experimental Study o f Positive
    and Negative Intergroup Attitudes Between Experimentally Produced Groups:
    Robbers Cave Study, U niversity o f O klahom a: N orm an, 1955.
18 Tajfel, H ., Billig, M .G . and Bundy, R .P., ‘Social C ategorisation and
    In tergroup B ehaviour’, European Journal o f Social Psychology, vol. 1, no
    2, pp. 149-78, 1971.
19 Committee o f Inquiry into Crowd Safety and Control at Sports Grounds Final
    Report. Chairman: M r Justice Popplewell, H M S O : L ondon, 1986 C m nd
    9710.
20 Billig, M. and C ochrane, R., ‘T h e N ational F ro n t a n d Y o u th ’, Patterns
    o f Prejudice, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 3-15, 1981.
21 R edhead, S. a nd M cL aughlin, E., ‘Soccer’s Style W ars’, N ew Society,
    16 A ugust 1985.
22 M orris, T ., ‘D eterring the H ooligan’, N ew Society, 30 M ay 1985.



                     C H A P T E R 6 T H E F IN A L S C O R E

 1 Lee, T .R . and Uzzell, D .L., The Educational Effectiveness o f the Farm
   Open Day, C ountryside Com m ission for Scotland: Battleby, Perth,
   1980. Prince, D., ‘C ountryside Interpretation: A Cognitive A p p ro ach ’,
   Museums Journal, vol. 82, no. 3, pp. 165-70, 1982.
2 P atem an, C., Participation and Democratic Theory, C am bridge U niversity
   Press: C am bridge, 1970.
3 In gham , R., Football and the Community: Monitoring Report, Sports
   Council: London, 1981.
4 Sillitoe, A., ‘T h e M a tc h ’, in The Loneliness o f the Long Distance Runner,
   W .H . Allen: London, 1954.
5 W alvin, J ., The People’s Game: A Social History o f British Football, Allen
   Lane: L ondon, 1975.
6 Downs, D., Biscuits and Royals: A History o f Reading F C 1871-1984,
  Fericon Press: R eading, 1984.
7 C anter, D. (ed.), Fires and Human Behaviour, Wiley: C hichester, 1980.
8 Ingham , R., op. cit.
9 Uzzell, D. L., Heritage Interpretation, Volume I: The Natural and Built
  Environment, Belhaven Press: London, 1989; Uzzell, D. L., Heritage


                                        168
                                    N O T E S



   Interpretation, Volume II: The Visitor Experience, Belhaven Press: London,
   1989.
10 T ilden, F., Interpreting Our Heritage, U niversity of N o rth C arolina Press:
   C hapel Hill, 1957.




                                       169
                                   INDEX




advertising 140                              club cultures 9-10, 57-85; attendance
aggression, as human trait 110-12               and commitment 58-63; attitudes
‘aggro’ 110-12                                  6 3-4, 74-9; changing 84-5; ‘ethos’ 57;
‘animals’ 109-10                                grounds 64-70; history 80-2; origins
arrests 14-15, 17, 37, 108                      82-4; racism and fascism 72-4;
Arsenal 133                                     shouting and swearing 70-2; style of
attendance 58-63; and conditions 143;           support 70-4; symbols 82
   drop in 14, 24, 31-48, 129; and           clubs: and community 139, 156-9;
   grounds 142—3; and identification            identification with 134-5, 141-2; and
   with club 141—2; and violence threat         supporters ( q .v .) 154-6
   14, 137                                   Cochrane, R. 119
attitudes 6 3 -4, 74—9; changing 163-5
                                             comfort, spectators’ views 24, 26, 6 5-6
                                             commitment o f supporters 58-63
Baker, Kenneth 159
Billig, M. 119                               community, and football clubs 139,
                                                156-9
Bolton disaster 40, 92
                                             conditions for spectators 24-30, 66,
bonding: male 110-12; social 116-18
                                                146-51, 163-5
Bradford City fire 94, 98-101, 132
Bristol Rovers 20, 143                       control 10-13; crowds 12-13, 89, 130-3,
B r it is h C rim e Survey 14
                                                151—4; segregation of supporters
                                                130, 138
Brook, Peter 86
Brooking, Trevor 160                         Coven try City 23; attitudes 77-9;
                                               conditions 66; safety 38; seating 56,
Cambridge 120                                  64, 124; support commitment 58;
Cameron, A. 105                                violence 38
casualties xviii                            cricket 129
catering 149                                crowds 2, 12—13, 86-102, 130; attention
Celtic 23; attitudes 77-9; conditions 26,      focus 87, 130; behaviour 86—7;
   66; support commitment 58                   conflict of interest 94; control 12-13,
chants 70-2                                    89, 130-3, 151-4; crisis legislation
Charlton Athletic 20, 142-3                    9 1 -3 , 132; emergencies 88-90,
Chelsea 23; attitudes 77-9; conditions         98-102; m anagement 12-13, 89;
   66; crowd management 153; racism            movement 88-90; numbers 88;
   72, 119; violence 38-40                     pedestrian flow 94-8; police presence
Cincinnati Coliseum 88                         90-1; rare events 88, 89; violence
Clarke, J . 114-15                             13-18
class, social 113-16                        crushing, spectators’ views 40-1
                                                 IN D E X



culture, football 1-2; club   (q .v .)   9-10,              ‘new ’ 120-2; other countries 105-6;
  57— 85                                                    other sports 105-6; see also violence
cursing 70-2
                                                       IRA 72, 119
data 4—5                                               Ibrox disaster 40, 89, 92, 136
Dunning, Eric 103—8, 115—17, 123—6                     identification o f supporters with clubs
                                                          134-5, 141-2
education 157-9                                        Ingham, R. 139, 156
Edward III, K ing xiii                                 Inglis, Brian 64
Ellis, W illiam W ebb xiv                              interpretation 162
emergencies 12—13, 88-90, 98-102
environmental psychology xv-xvii, 2-5,                 Japanese Exhibition 88
   128; different perspectives 6 -7 , 8;               Jessel, Toby, M P 105
   survey (q .v .) xviii, 6-7; symbolic                Justinian, Emperor 104—5
   significance 7-9                                    Juvenal xiii
‘ethos’ 57
experts 22-3
                                                       ‘lapsed’ supporters 24, 32
                                                       legislation 91—3, 132
families 30
                                                       Leicester University 136
fascism 72—4
                                                       Lundberg, Craig 81—2, 84
flow o f pedestrians 94—8
                                                       Luton 164
football: authorities 153; club cultures
   57-85; crowds 2, 12-13, 86-102;
   culture 1-2; experience 146-51;                     M cLaughlin, Eugene 120-1
   history xiii-xv, 105, 161-3;                        management: caring for supporters
   m anagement 146-53; marketing 160;                    146-51; and cultures 84-5; safety
   media im age 159-61; place o f 1—5;                   151-4
   popularity 18-19; spectators’ views                 Manchester U nited 23; attitudes 77-9;
   22—56; violence 2, 13-18, 103—26                      conditions 66; museum 162-3;
                                                         souvenirs 150
Fraser, Antonia 105                                    Manpower Services Commission
Fulham 23; attitudes 77-9; conditions                    (M SC) 157-9
  30, 66; ground 147                                   marketing football 160
                                                       Marsh, Peter 81, 103, 110-12, 121-6
G eneral H ousehold Survey 20, 129, 144, 146           masculinity 115
Greaves, Jim m y 160                                   M axwell, Robert 142
grounds 20-1; closed-circuit T V                       media image o f football 159-61
   monitoring 49, 153; and club                        membership schemes 155-6; spectators’
   cultures 64—70; comfort 24, 26; as                    views 48-51
   community resource 2 0-1, 133-4,                    ‘mickey-taking’ 32-3, 76-9
   157; improvements to conditions,                    Mill, John Stuart 135
   24—30, 66, 146-51, 163-5; ownership                 Millwall 23; attitudes 77-9; conditions
   o f 20; safer parts o f 4 1 -2, 48; seating           26, 66
   24, 30, 4 1-2, 48, 56; as symbols 82-3;             M O R I 14, 20, 144
   wasted assets 133—4                                 Morris, Desm ond 112
G uide to S a fety a t S p orts G rounds 95            Morris, Terrence 122
                                                       movement, crowds 88-90, 94—8
Harrison, Paul 115                                     Muranyi, Leslie 120, 122
Heysel Stadium disaster 88, 109,                       Murphy, P .J . 103-8, 115-17, 123-6
                                                       museums 163
   118-19, 136
H ill, Jim m y 84, 160
hooliganism 14—17; defining 107-9;                      National Front 72, 119
   explanations 109-18; history 104—5;                  newspapers 4—5; football image 159-61



                                                    171
                                         IN D E X



offences; charged 14-15, 17, 37, 108;             crushing 40-1; drop in attendance           107-9; e>
   sentencing 15                                  24, 31-48; experts 22-3;                    ‘new ’ hot
                                                  improvements to conditions 24, 26-30;       and plac
Pearson, Geoffrey 103, 120                        membership schemes 48-51; other             118-20; ]
pedestrian flow 94-8                              teams watched 52; safer parts of            bonding
Peru 41, 106                                      grounds 4 1-2, 48; safety 37-8;             2 4-5, 38-
police 7, 130-2; arrests 14-15, 17, 37,           supporters 25-6; violence 24-5,             also hooli
   108; and crushing 41; and                      38-40
  legislation, 9 2-3 , 132; presence 90-1      sponsorship 140                              Waller, Fra
political involvement 72, 118-20               stewards 148-9, 151-2
Popplewell Inquiry into Crowd Safety           Sunderland 23; attitudes 77-9;
  and Control xi-xii, xvi, 49, 51, 100,           conditions 66; racism 119-20; safety
  105, 120, 152                                   38
press 4—5; football image 159-61               supporters 25-6; attendance and
Preston North End 23; attitudes 77-9;             commitment 58-63; care for 146-51;
  conditions 66                                   clubs for 155; and football clubs
public relations 159-60                           154-6; identification with clubs
                                                  134—5, 141-2; segregation o f 130, 138;
racism 72-4, 119                                  style o f support 70-4; travel to
Ramsey, Sir A lf 109                              match 148; see also spectators
Reading 142                                    surroundings, symbolic significance of
records o f matches 153                           7-9
Redhead, Steve 120-1                           survey xviii, 6-7; clubs 23; interviews
‘regular’ supporters 24, 32                       24; spectators’ views 22-56;
riots 86, 105-6                                   supporters 25-6; violence 14
Rome, games 104—5                              swearing 70-2
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques 135                     symbols o f clubs 8 2-3
Rugby football xiv, 105
rule-systems 11                               Tajfel, Henri 116-17
                                              Taylor, I. 114
safety 151-4; m anagement 151-4;              Technical and Vocational Education
   spectators’ views 37-8, 41-2, 48; see         Initiative (TV EI) 157-8
   also crowds                                technology: crowd monitoring 49, 1.Y1,
St J o h n ,I a n 160                            and crowd safety 93, 101-2
Scicon 40, 9 2-3                              television 3, 19, 129; closed-circuit
science 5                                        monitoring 49, 153; football imaur
Scotland 80                                      159-61
seating 24, 30, 41-2, 48, 56                  tennis 129
segregation of supporters 130, 138            territoriality 112-13
self-fulfilling prophecy 11—12                Tiger, L. I l l
sentencing o f offenders 15                   Tilden, Freeman 162
Shankley, Bill 19, 164                        Tottenham Hotspur 23; attitudes 77 '*
Sherif, Mustafa 116                              conditions 66; shareholders 155;
shouting 70-2                                    support commitment 63
Sillitoe, Alan 139-40                         training, staff 148-9; crowd control
social representation 138-44                     153—4; safety 152—3
Southampton 23; attitudes 77-9;               travel to matches 148
   conditions 66                              Trivizas, Eugene 14—15, 108
souvenirs 150
spectators xiv; care for 146-51; conditions   violence 2, 13—18, 103—26; ‘aggro’
  for 24-30, 66, 146-51, 163-5; women            110-12; ‘animals’ 109-10; and
  20, 143—4; see also supporters                attendance 14, 137; and class ll:i l<
spectators’ views 22-56; comfort 24, 26;        cure 123-4; defining hooliganism
                                       IN D E X



  107-9; explanations 16-17, 109—18;         W alvin, J. 141
  ‘new’ hooligans 120-2; other times         Watford 142, 156-7
  and places 103-7; and politics             W heatley Report 92-3
  118-20; prevention 123; social             W h ite G uide 95
  bonding 116-18; spectators’ views          W illiams, J. 103-8, 115-17,
  24—5, 38-40; territoriality 112—13; see       123-6
  also hooliganism                           women spectators 20, 144

Waller, Frank 142                             Youth Training Scheme (YTS) 157




                                            173
Football is in a state of crisis. Falling attendances and a genuine unease
among potential spectators about going to live football matches suggest
that, without radical changes, the game will soon become a minority
spectator sport. Football in its Place presents a new approach to th
problem that concentrates on the spectators exp erience of football and on
 ie places where it is played.
    This approach recognizes four themes, wh ch relate directly to the
spec tators experience: spectator comfort; the need for effective crowd
cont     the problems of coping in emergencies; and variations in club
cultures. A special chapter on
needs to be understood in
problem in isolation,
rise to hooliganism.

emphasize that football is a recreational activity whose management should
be treated as part of the leisure industry. All aspects of the game, its
traditions, club variations and heritage, need to be harnessed if football is
again to be Britain's most popular spectator sport.


                                T h e A u th o r s
 David Canter is Professor and Head of the Department of Psychology at the
 University of Surrey. He is internationally known for his work in


 emergencies. He was appointed a technical adviser to the Popplewell
 Inquiry into Crowd Safety at Football Grounds, from which this book
 originates.
     David Uzzell and Miriam Comber are members of the Department of
 Psychology at the University of Surrey.

                                             Cover photograph:
                                             The Dell, Southampton, April 30th 1978.
                                             Press Association.


                                               IS B N     0 -4 1 5 -0 1 2 4 0 -ti



 R o u tle d g e
 11 New Fetter Lane
 London EC4P4EE

  29 West 35th Street
                                                            9     780415 012409
  New York NY 10001
