                                                                                             Royal Courts o f Justice
                                                                                             Strand
                                                                                             London WC2A 2LL

                                                                                                       V/-6^S-c--v^—,


                                                                                                                                    ^



                     '       i .          i   a         ijUX,                            „        Y r '
                T vaU ,                        _        ^               ^                t , w             ^        ^

fc       M :     ^                                                                               * '\          e W          ^ f * * 00




                             t            r u       w           .                                  r *

 (Vu^fc*         !Mv<- /U-e^UfjiW*'•                                                                                                    ^           ic©




 ( U w         ^ w                   ^             l« fc            w                ^                 1       £        L      ~

                         ^                 ( w      .                           ^                                       ^       ^               r       1^
                                 *            \rJLJbu ibfA~                         /IfJhA^-^-^'                        (JM>                        4
     U ^v-                               v                                                       ( ^       t c W / - «.
                       vT j’ \ /<h. ■ £/Co *V~                                                              ^
     t£ * >    yuC flr-A Jk 0 ^                                                                               .     <W ^C                   ^
                         ~    ? j-   Q lr& srC '                                                                            •


     ^          ^                    “2       ^                                                                                             ^

      ^        V ^-<tA A ^                     ^°               ' “'                                               (£ * ,   HMV' <1- 'J '
                                         Ia. Jr     ‘ fc'   9«              ^



          ^       ^                                                         u       ^        u         \   ^                ^
 their departure therefrom, or disorder in the neighbourhood or annoyance
 thereabouts ”.12

   8.7 Is there a need to supplement these special provisions, or do they, in
combination with the offences of general application relating to public
order, give adequate protection to Parliament against, for example, a maw
lobbying which threatens to get out of hand? Most of those commenting on
this issue, which we raised in the Working Paper without expressing any
conclusion of our own, thought that there was no need for any further pro­
vision : the powers of the police and the terms of existing or proposed legis­
lation were regarded as adequate. In this context we attach the greatest weight
to the vie^s of the Commissioner, whose duty it is to secure good order in
the vicinity of Parliament. Our understanding is that the Commissioner is
satisfied with his present powers in this respect, although the maximum penalty
for contravening his directions under section 52 of the Metropolitan Police
Act 1839 is thought to be too low.

   8.8 We have come to the conclusion that we need not recommend any
fresh legislation designed specifically for the protection of Parliament. We
have referred to the view that penalties under section 52 of the Metro­
politan Police Act 1839 may be too low ; if this is felt to be right, it is open
to Parliament to raise them, but we make no recommendation ourselves.13

C. Minor offences of “ threatening, abusive or inspiring ” behaviour
   8.9 Section 54(13) of the Metropolitan Police Act 1839 makes it an
offence for a person to—
     “ use any threatening, abusive or insulting words or behaviour with intent                  I
     to provoke a breach of the peace or whereby a breach of the peace may                       ;
      be occasioned.”
The conduct penalised must occur “ in any thoroughfare or public place ”
within the limits of the metropolitan police district. This summary offence
is now punishable with a maximum fine of £50 (level 2).1* Section 35(13)                         ,
of the City of London Police Act 1839 provides a similar offence for the
City of London police area. These provisions and many more like them
in local Acts and byelaws formed the basis of the offence in section 5 of the
Public Order Act 1936, the operative words of which are in very similar
terms.15 Prior to the enactment of that section, there was no comparable
national provision: conduct described in these terms was penalised in
some districts but not in others. Although the introduction of section 5
was seen as correcting this “ very curious ”16 situation, no steps were taken
at the time to repeal any of these provisions. However, by virtue of section                     ]
262 of the Local Government Act 1972,17 all of them, save for the two Acts

   12 jPapworth v. Coventry [1967] 1 W.L.R. 663, 671.
   13 We have considered whether s. 52 of the 1839 Act should be modernised, but have
concluded that it would not be right to undertake this in the context of reforms of the major
offences relating to public order applying nationally; it would be appropriate for the section
to be examined in the course of modernising the two Acts of 1839 applying to the Metropolitan
and City of London Police: see para. 8.9, below.
   14 Criminal Law Act 1977, s. 31 and Sched. 6 and Criminal Justice Act 1982, s. 46.
   15 See para. 5.3, n. 9, above.
   16 Hansard (H.C.), 16 November 1936, vol. 317, cols. 1362-3 (Sir John Simon, Home
Secretary).
   17 This sets out the procedure by which local legislation is to be rationalised in stages.
                                             88
    applying to London (to which section 262 does not apply),
    lapsed or been repealed before the end of 1986.“

    - 8-10 In our Working Paper13 we took the view that the overlap between
   fectlon 5 of fhe ,1936 Act and the two provisions applying in London could no
   longer be justified and that prosecutions for “ threatening, abusive or
 a M i P g words or behaviour ” likely to occasion a breach of the peace should
 JfltQUghout England and Wales be brought under section 5. Reservations
   have been expressed by the Metropolitan and City of London Police and
   the Police Federation, who have stressed their preference for using the
   provisions under the two Acts of local application to deal with minor
   disturbances which do not call for the heavier penalties available under
  section 5. Our attention has also been drawn to authorities21 which refer
  to the need to consider carefully whether particular behaviour is sufficiently
  serious to warant proceedings under section 5. It must be pointed out,
  however, that these cases date from a period when section 5 was triable
  both summarily and on indictment.22 The cases concerned charges tried
  on indictment, and the real question at issue was whether the conduct
  charged properly fell within the terms of section 5 as being “ threatening
  abusive or insulting behaviour ” likely to occasion a breach of the peace •
  and it was in that context that the courts reminded those instituting proceed­
  ings that they‘ should consider very carefully, before having recourse to section
    , ,      pubhc Order Act 1936, whether the facts reveal a state of affairs
  which justifies proceedings under that statute 23 The same consideration
 is relevant in the context of the two offences applying in London since, as we
 have pointed out, there is no material difference between the operative words
 of these offences and section 5. We are therefore not persuaded that the
 authorities quoted are relevant in the present context.

  'etention^f
retention                  ^ ^ are ^not persuasive.
           of the two offences            UPO“ princiPle’
                                                       If nothe  arguments
                                                              other         for
                                                                    city in the
 county now finds it necessary to have its own special provision, it does not
 seem to us that there is any strong reason for retention of such provisions in
 London alone. Where, as is the case under consideration, the terms of the
 offence of national application are in substance identical to those of local
 2 ® ' “ an(? both_are. ^ a b le only in magistrates’ courts, minor dis­
 turbances may be as effectively and properly dealt with by charges under the
         ° f less
reflect the  r ti°Da■ aPPf
                  senous    ati°n aDd
                         character     by conduct
                                   of the  the imP°sitio" of P^alties
                                                  in question ; the factwhich
                                                                         that
a disturbance is of a minor character does not, in our view argue for the
retention of minor offences with very low maximum penalties to deal with
ofThn !, u - ellI“ natl°n of the minor offences would avoid the possibility
of charges being brought under them in cases where it transpires, upon

  is Many already have: for example, s. 416 of the Liverpool Improvement Art iQ?i
repealed by the County of Merseyside Act 1980; s. 102 of the Mancheste^PoIW r I J 'L ¥
Act 1844 lapsed on 30 June 1981: see Greater Manchester Act 1981 flnHthprwatfl      !
(Local Statutory Provisions) Order 1980 S.I. 1980 No 1845                 eater Manchester
  19 See Working Paper No. 82, para. 7.22.
1                                        P°"“ *“ 1839 —                24
J    B«V
       ^ T & r a n Q,'hBe
                                s s5a;« i, z ,* Lni . ,risbte on,y ,um“ rily-   '
                                           89
    D
                                                                                208541
the evidence, that their maximum penalties are inadequate properly to punish
the conduct in question. This possibility is by no means academic. In one
case in 1977,21 where charges under the Metropolitan Police Act 1839 were
brought against eight youths who clashed with a rival gang, the stipendiary
magistrate, as reported, complained in forceful terms about the low maxi­
mum penalty available to him and asked: “ Why on earth are they not
charged under the Public Order Act? ”. Repeal of the London Acts would
eliminate the possibility of such situations recurring without in any way
affecting the ability of magistrates’ courts to impose light penalties under
section 5 where the facts warranted this course.

  8.12 For these reasons, we take the view that section 54(13) of the Metro­
politan Police Act 1839 and section 35(13) of the City of London Police
Act 1839 should be repealed. We recommend accordingly.25
D. Other offences
  8.13 The remaining offences may be dealt with more briefly. There are
only two of them, the Shipping Offences Act 1793 and the possession of
an offensive weapon under section 4 of the Vagrancy Act 1824.
   1. S h ip p in g O f f e n c e s A c t 1793
   8.14 Section 1 of this Act26 provides that—
       if any seamen, keelmen, casters, ship carpenters or other persons,
     riotously assembled together to the number of three or more, shall
     unlawfully and with force prevent hinder or obstruct the loading or
     unloading or the sailing or navigating of any ship, keel or other vessel,
     or shall unlawfully and with force board any ship, keel or other vessel
     with intent to prevent, hinder or obstruct the loading or unloading or
     the sailing or navigating of such ship, keel or other vessel,. . . ”
they are guilty of an indictable offence punishable with a maximum of 12
months’ imprisonment.27 The offence is no longer used. The conduct is
adequately covered by offences against the person and property and the
scheme of offences recommended in this Report.
   2. V agrancy A c t 1824, Se c t io n 4
   8.15 This penalises, inter alia, “ every person . . . being armed with any
gun, pistol, hanger, cutlass, bludgeon, or other offensive weapon, or having
upon him or her any instrument with intent to commit an arrestable
offence. . . . ”. There is a maximum penalty of three months’ imprisonment
or a fine of £200 (level 3).28 We have no evidence that this offence is now
used. It has been superseded by the Prevention of Crime Act 1953 (posses­
sion of offensive weapon), the Firearms Act 1968, the Theft Act 1968,23 the
Criminal Damage Act 1971,30 and the Criminal Law Act 1977.31
  24 R. v. Troke and others, The Times, 19 July 1977 (a news item).
  25 See Appendix A, cl. 9(1) and Schedule.
  26 Originally temporary but made permanent by the Merchant Shipping Act 1801.
  27 By s. 3, this is raised to 14 years for a second or subsequent offence. A prosecution
must be commenced within 12 months of the commission of the offence (s 8)
  28 Magistrates’ Courts Act 1980, s. 34(3) and Criminal Justice Act 1982, s. 46. Higher
penalties may be imposed by the Crown Court if the offences are repeated- s. 5 The text
of this offence is given as amended by the Criminal Law Act 1967, s. 10 and Sched 2
  29 See s. 25 (going equipped for stealing etc.).
  30 See s. 3 (possessing anything with intent to destroy or damage property).
  31 See s. 8 (trespassing with a weapon of offence).
                                           90
II




                                                 Criminal Disorder


     Interpretation.    8.—(1) In this Act—
                          “ statutory maximum”, in reference to the maximum fine on
                               summary conviction of an offence triable either way, has
     1982 c. 48.               the meaning given by section 74 of the Criminal Justice
                               Act 1982;
                          “ unlawful violence ” means violence not justified by law, for
                               example, the law relating to self-defence or the prevention
                               of crime or disorder;
                          “ violence ” means any violent conduct, so that—
                                     (a) except in the context of affray, it includes violent
                                   conduct towards property as well as violent conduct to­
                                   wards persons, and
                                     (b) it is not restricted to conduct causing or intended
                                | to cause injury or damage but includes any other violent
                                I conduct, for example!jthrowing[at or towards a person] a
                                I missile of a kind capable of causing injury which does not
                                 I hit or falls short;
                          “ words or behaviour” includes the distribution or display of
                                any written matter, sign or other visible representation.
                         (2) It is im m a te rial for the purposes of sections 1 to 3 whether any
                       person other than those directly involved in the acts necessary for
                       the commission of the offence is, or is likely to be, present at the
                       scene.
                         (3) The offences under this Act may be committed in private as
                       well as in public places.




                                                       112
                        EXPLANATORY NOTES

Clause 8
  1. This clause is the interpretation provision, defining andexplaining
certain terms used in clauses 1-4 creating the new “offences.

  2. In subsection (1)—
    (a) the statutory maximum, by virtue of section 74 of the Criminal
        Justice Act 1982 means “ the prescribed sum within the meaning of
        section 32 of the Magistrates’ Courts Act 1980 (£1,000 or another
        sum fixed by order under section 143 of that Act to take account
        of changes in the value of money) ” ;
    (b) the provision explaining “ unlawful violence ” gives effect to the
        policy described in paragraph 3.40 of the R eport;
    (c) the provision explaining “ violence ” gives effect to the policy des­
        cribed in paragraphs 5.30-5.33 of the R eport;
    (d) the provision explaining “ words or behaviour” is derived from
        section 5 of the Public Order Act 1936.

  3.    Subsection (2) provides that, for the purpose of the offences created
by clauses 1-3, there need be no person present or likely to be present, other
than the participants and their victims, at the scene where an offence takes
place. Thus it makes clear that the requisite standard of fear which is an
element of these offences is to be measured by reference to the reactions
of a hypothetical person of reasonable firmness present at the scene. This
gives effect to the recommendations of the Report, paragraphs 3.35-3.39,
5.35 and 6.26.

  4. Subsection (J) provides that for the purpose of the offences created
by clauses 1-4, an offence may take place anywhere, whether in public or in
private. This gives effect to the recommendations in the Report, para­
graphs 3.23-3.27, 5.34, 5.42 and 6.26.




                                     113
                       MINUTES OF A MEETING HET.T)
                          ON 11 OCTOBER 1985
                 AT CONQUEST HOUSE:   TO DISCUSS PUBLIC
            ORDER OFFENCES, WITH PARTICULAR REFERENCE TO
                        FOOTBALL/SPORTS GROUNDS


Present:   Mr. Justice Beldam               Mr. Justice Popplewell
           Mr. Davenport                    Mr. Goodson (Chief Constable
           Mr. Farmer                       of Leicester)
           Miss Gurney                      Mr. Kiloran (formerly Chief
           (taking minute)                  Fire Officer of Manchester)
                                            Mr. Hazell (F8 Division
                                            Home Office)




1*         Mr. Justice Popplewell said that his enquiry was primarily
concerned with disorder at football grounds.      The discussion that
followed fell under five headings:


           (a)   the throwing of missiles
           (b)   persons running onto the pitch
           (c)   racialist and obscene chanting
           (d)   the power to search persons entering     (orseeking    to
                 to enter) a football/sports ground
           (e) the power to arrest persons later identified ashaving
                 taken part in conduct within (a), (b) or (c) above.


           The possibility of a wide offence of disorderly conduct at
a football/sports ground was discussed in the context of (a), (b) and
(c).


(a)        The throwing of missiles


2.         Mr. Justice Popplewell said that they were concerned about
evidential problems.   If the police had a video or photograph showing
a person in the act of throwing a missile this ought to be capable of
forming the basis for a conviction, without the police having to show,
for example, that the missile was aimed "at or towards a person",


                                                        /C o n t'd
(clause 8 of the draft Bill, Law Com. No. 123).      Mr. Davenport
explained why the phrase "at or towards a person" had been included
in clause 8 .   It was only an example of violent conduct.    Throwing
"at or towards a person" would not necessarily have to be shown to
prove the conduct was violent.     Also,   the offence proposed by the
Commission would not have been limited to particular locations or
circumstances so some qualification had been necessary to exclude
harmless, albeit violent, behaviour.


3*        Mr. Justice Popplewell said that there      might also be
evidential difficulties in showing that behaviour"caused another         to
fear unlawful violence" (White Paper, page 14, proposed amendment to
section 5 of the Public Order Act 1936).


(b)       Persons running onto the pitch


4*    .    Mr. Justice Popplewell explained that there might bediffering
reasons for persons running onto the pitch.     It might be to stop the
game, to protest or to reach the opposing fans.      At the moment it
would seem that no criminal offence was committed, nor would the new
"disorderly conduct" offence (White Paper, page 19) as presently
defined cover the situation.     Running on the pitch would not usually
involve substantial "alarm, distress", etc., although it might be
covered if the new offence were extended to include causing annoyance.
Mr. Hazell said that this would make the new offence enormously wide,
However, the requirement of "substantial" alarm, distress etc., might
be reconsidered.


5.         Mr. Justice Popplewell said that, if they recommended an
offence of running onto the pitch, there would be included some exceptions,
for example, "without reasonable excuse" to cover running on in case of
fire and other disasters.


                                                   /Cont'd....



                                    2
6*          Mr- Goodson said that the main reason for making missile
throwing and running onto the pitch criminal would be that this would
enable the police to take action to stop events leading up to serious
disorder.     For this reason the offence/offences would have to be
arrestable.     Mr. Hazell said that the Home Office was still considering
whether or not to make the new "disorderly conduct" offence arrestable.


7*          Mr. Davenport asked whether what Mr. Justice Popplewell's
Committee was looking for was a general offence of disorderly conduct
at a football/sports ground, comparable to the use in Scotland of a
charge of breach of the peace (at football matches).          Mr. Justice
Popplewell said there was disorderly conduct that they did not wish to
cover, for example, jumping up and down and chanting on the terraces.
However, not having a requirement, for example, of distress caused or
likely to be caused might be justifiable if an offence was limited
to sports grounds.     The police would have to exercise discretion in
charging offenders (but this might make an offence difficult to get
through Parliament).     A general offence would cover not only throwing
missiles and running onto the pitch, but also flashing lights and
spitting. Mr. Hazell said spitting might anyway come within the new
disorderly conduct offence because it could cause distress.


8-            Mr. Hazell said that if a general offence were proposed then
defining conduct as "likely to lead to public disorder" or in a
similar way might lead to failed prosecutions because effective policing
made it unlikely such disorder would in fact result.          Mr. Davenport
said it might be useful in defining such an offence to have non-
exhaustip« examples.


(c)         Racialist and obscene chanting


9*          Mr. Justice Popplewell said that racialist chanting could
be a problem at football grounds, particularly where this was aimed at
players.    Obscenity was also a problem.    Mr. Goodson said an offence
would be useful in that it could be used to make "examples".



                                 3               /C o n t'd
10.         Mr. Davenport asked whether it was intended to include this
in the wide general offence of disorderly conduct at a football/
sports ground.    If so how would the new offence fit with the existing
hierachy of public order offences (including the new disorderly conduct
offence)?   Mr. Justice Popplewell said that the offence was aimed at
conduct that might lead up to the more serious offences, thus this was
"the bottom rung" of a ladder of offences.     However, penalties would
have to be realistic.    A fine of £50 for deliberately stopping a match
was inadequate and would bring the law into disrepute.       A sentence of
imprisonment might sometimes be appropriate.     Mr.    Hazell said that at
present it was contemplated that the new disorderly conduct offence
would only be punishable by a fine.     (As to discussion of a power of
arrest see para. 6 above).


11*         Mr. Justice Beldam said that if a wide offence including
chanting etc. and disruption at football matches was proposed, should
it not logically extend to other events, e.g. political meetings etc.,
especially where these were held in football/sports grounds.
Mr. Justice Popplewell    said these should be excluded from his
recommendations, (they were not within the scope of his enquiry).
The present restrictions on the sale of alcohol at grounds was based
on "designated" sports grounds and "designated" sporting events.       A
similar drafting technique could be used.


12.         Mr. Hazell said    that section 5 of the Public Order Act 1936,
if amended as proposed in the White Paper, was supposed to cover
"breach of the peace" situations.     Section 5 was appropriate and
already used; for example, 250 football fans had been prosecuted
under it after they had charged in a mass down the platform at
Euston Station.   Section 5 together with the new disorderly conduct
offence potentially covered most disruptive behaviour (including that
at football matches).    The   question was thus whether a       newoffence
limited to football grounds was needed - not    whether a        newgeneral
"bottom rung" offence should be introduced.



                               4               /C o n t'd
(d)         The power to search persons entering (or seeking to enter)
            football/sports grounds.


13.         Mr. Justice Popplewell raised two questions; would a person
under the age of 16 consent to being searched?   And, did the police
in fact have any power to search persons before they entered the
ground?   As a matter of practice the police regularly search a large
number of fans.


(e)         The power to arrest persons later identified as haying
            taken part in conduct within (a), (b) or (c) above.


14*         Mr. Goodson explained that a problem with section 5 of the
Public Order Act 1936 was that persons identified after a match as
having taken part in disorder could not be arrested as they were not
"found committing", nor did the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984
give a power of arrest as it would be practicable to serve a summons
in mast cases.    This deprived police of the useful technique of
inviting offenders to view a video, which often led to admissions etc.
Mr. Hazell said the Home Office had taken note of this problem.


            The meeting ended at 12.50.




                               5
