THEFOOTDflLL SUPPORTERS flSSOCIflTIOII
            P.O. Box 11 Liverpool L26 1XP




W ith Compliments
                  THE
              FOOTBALL
            SUPPORTERS
            ASSOCIATION


The Preservation of Standing Accommodation
            at Football Grounds
Foreword


The FSA submits that the enforced phasing out of standing
accommodation at football grounds was decided in haste and in
error, without a full or accurate consideration of the matter.
In urging the abandonment of this policy, we present the safe
alternative of stepped terracing as an important contribution to
the wholesale modernisation and civilisation of football grounds.
Our submission considers the issue of safety and terracing in far
more detail than the Taylor Report and from the knowledge and
experience of those who know the factors involved at first hand.
The ensuing recommendations represent the best chance we all have
of combining modernisation and safety with the continued
existence of professional football matches as open, public
entertainment accessible to the people in virtually every town
and city.
Contents


pg   1      Introduction



pg   2      I FSA Policy and Activity on Football Stadia



Pg      5     !! FSA critique of the Taylor Report's grounds for
            moving towards all—seater stadia



pg 14        III Further issues raised by Lord Justice Taylor


pg 16       IV Why terraces are popular


pg 18       V New safe terraces



pg 24       VI Tampering with the all-seater dogma



pg 25       VII Re-drawing Taylor's recommendation


pg 27       Summary of Submissidn
         The Preservation of Standing Accommodation at

                       Football Grounds

- a submission by the Football Supporters Association       (FSA) to
the Right Honourable Roy Hattersley, M.P.


                        RECOMMENDATIONS
The Football Supporters   Association     submits   that   the   next
government should
1.    Withdraw the standing instruction to the Football Licencing
      Authority (FLA) to see to it that Local Authorities withold
      licenses from any professional Football clubs which have
      not converted their grounds to seating-only accomodation by
      1994.

2.    Instruct the FLA to see to it that Local Authorities
      withold licenses from any professional Football club which
      does not agree and implement a binding agreement with the
      FLA on a ground development plan and a timetable for its1
      phased introduction.
3.    Instruct the FLA to draw up statutory guidelines on
      standing as well as seating accomodation at Football
      grounds.

INTRODUCTION

1.    We make this submission against a background in which, at
       long last since the publication of Lord Justice Taylor's
      Final Report into the Hillsborough disaster, voices apart
       from those of supporters are questioning in public the need
       for and desirability of all-seater stadia.

2.    We are also mindful of the imminent General Election and
       that adherence to the Taylor timetable for conversion to
      all-seater Football grounds has been insisted on by the
      present government, which uses the Football Licencing
      Authority as its' enforcement agency in this respect.
3.    The FSA has a consistent, record of involvement in crowd
       safety and crowd management issues. We were represented at
       the Hillsborough Inquiry at the invitation of Lord Justice
       Taylor, our then Chairman spoke at the televised
       commemeration service in Liverpool to mark the Hillsborough
       tragedy of 15 April 1989, we were involved in assisting the
      bereaved and in the establishment of a fund for them.     We
       have given written and oral evidence to the Home Affairs
       Committee on Policing Football Hooliganism, and contributed


                              1
      to several national conferences and seminars on crowd
      management and safety.    We feed into the Association of
      Chief Police Officers Public Order Sub-Committee via
      quarterly meetings with ACC Malcolm George, head of British
      police operations for the 1990 World Cup Finals and the
      1992 European Championship Finals.
      We have had a number of meetings with the Chairman of the
      Football Licencing Authority and the Chairman of the
      Football Stadia Advisory Design Council. Both bodies
      consult with us nationally and FLA Inspectors have held
      discussions with some of our branches on various ground
      development issues.   Some of our branches are represented
      on Local Authority Safety Committees, which consider
      Football stadia in each Authority.
4.    These activities are part of what the FSA was established
      for: to achieve representation for football supporters'
      views when decisions are mooted or made concerning the game
      we love, follow and sponsor.    Even so, as with the early
      trade unions in the mid 19th century, recognition of our
       legitimate place within Football's decision-making process
      has often been slow or grudging.     Ironically, in view of
      what follows, it was the Taylor report which marked the
       first major breach in the consensus that supporters should
      pay but not be heard; Lord Justice Taylor echoed many of
       the FSA's concerns and demands about the treatment of
       supporters and the conditions to which we have been
       subjected.  Crucially, he told Football that it should not
       ignore what we have to say.
      Unfortunately,     he   exempted    his   own   all-seater
      recommendation from this.
5.    The two years since this report was published, in January
       1990 , have seen the consolidation of consultation
       mechanisms, whereby the FA and Football League jointly
       convene regular meetings with supporters' organisations.
       Only last December the League's Shadow Board resolved upon
       a management structure for the Leagues it will control as
       from next season which gives a formal consultative role to
       supporters' organisations in the running of the game.



I FSA Policy and Activity on Football Stadia
1.    The FSA contributed to the investigation and analysis of
      the Hillsborough disaster at Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry
      and our Merseyside Branch was fully occupied with the human
      consequences of the tragedy as described above.    When the
      report came out it led to a lively and thorough debate at
      all levels of our organisation, and one which was marked by


                               2
     a great deal of emotion, a lot of humanity, and an initial
     degree of conflict between different perspectives.    This
     contrasted sharply with the way in which the Taylor report
     has been greeted almost as a tablet of stone bearing self-
     evident truths by the rest of Football and British public
     life.
2.    Our Conference at Birmingham University in June 1990 passed
     a number of resolutions on aspects of ground development,
     including facilities for disabled supporters, the admission
     of away supporters, facilities for women at grounds and
     supporter representation on Safety Committees.     There was
     also overwhelming support for the following motion:
     "The FSA agrees with the findings of Lord Justice Taylor's
     Technical Working Party that standing accomodation is not
     intrinsically unsafe.       We therefore believe that
     legislation imposing    all-seater stadia is not in the
     interest of football supporters.   It follows that the FSA
     commits itself as a priority to mounting a high profile
     mass campaign amongst football supporters and the wider
     public in favour of building new, safe standing areas
     alongside new safe seating areas at Football League
     grounds".
3.    The "high profile mass campaign" never materialised:
     although our branches found it easy to collect thousands of
     signatures on petitions opposing the all-seater ruling,
     including 800 during half-time at Burnley which we may
     enter for the Guinness Book of Records, nearly all of these
     supporters shared our own growing despondency as to the
     feasibility of achieving this demand.    Crucially, after a
     half day long meeting on the issue with the FLA Chairman,
     Norman Jacobs made it plain that the persuasiveness of our
     arguments was in vain, that the government was already
     backing Taylor on his all-seater recommendation and the FLA
     would enforce it by all means necessary.
4.    Our 1991 Conference in Southampton's Guildhall confirmed
     our policy, while reflecting the general pessimism among
     supporters about the chances of success.    In so doing we
     set ourself against the tide, sustained only by the hope
     that self-interest might later persuade the Football
     industry that the recommendation before which they had all
     genuflected was not, after all, the key to the future.

5.    The policy was and is worded quite deliberately to distance
     ourselves from the much - parodied backward-looking,
     traditionalist fan who wants to stand because he always
     has, his father before him and so on,     and to demonstrate
     that our policy is part of and not apart from the
     modernising and civilising process which the Taylor Report
     ushered in.    The FSA has no sympathy with clubs which are


                             3
     backsliding on the Taylor timetable and pleading poverty.
     We support the work of the FLA Inspectorate in producing
     and implementing guidelines on sightlines, access and exit
     routes and the general quality and design of accomodation
     for supporters. We recognise that this will cost a lot of
     money and support the central disbursement of funds from
     the Football Trust to assist clubs in paying for it.     We
     know, from our own experience, how unsatisfactory the
     existing terracing is in most parts of most grounds and we
     argue that football supporters need better accomodation.
     The FSA argues for higher standards of safety and comfort,
     not the status quo.    The words 'new' and 'safe' in our
     policy reflect our concern that the cosy equation of
     seating with safety could lead, unchallenged, to the
     continued proliferation of unsafe and uncomfortable seating
     and our insistence that terraces be laid anew in line with
     the same rigorous standards which the FLA is developing for
     seats.   We remember Bradford as well as Hillsborough, and
     Ibrox and Bolton before both; in this we step outside of
     the unfortunate modern British tendency to re-shape things
     in line with the specific characteristics of only the most
     recent disaster, a tendency which seems to apply to
     aircraft, ferries and oil rigs as well as to Football
     grounds.
6.   FSA branches are vigilant with regard to unsafe conditions
     and practices at Football grounds and we have drawn to the
     attention of the FLA, ACPO and others a series of
     shortcomings and failures with regard to many aspects of
     crowd management and crowd safety.       Some of the very
     practices and conditions which were recognised as
     contributing to the Hillsborough disaster have been
     repeated, sometimes in dangerous combination during the 2
     and a half seasons since that fateful FA Cup semi-final at
     which 95 supporters died, including a spillage of Leicester
     City fans onto the pitch at Notts. County's Meadow Lane
     ground on 23 March 1991 which had uncanny similarities to
     what happened in the Leppings Lane end of Hillsborough.

7.   We also draw attention to unsafe conditions and practices
     in seating areas, such as long unbroken stretches of seats
     between infrequent gangways, narrow entrances into stands,
     occasions when the police and stewards have instructed
     supporters to sit in gangways, thereby blocking them, steep
     staircases leading down from stands, and seats which fall
     far below FSADC guidelines on size, distance between rows
     and leg room.
8.   In short, as supporters, we cannot afford to drop our guard
     on safety because it is us and our people who were, are and
     always will be the ones to run the risks of whatever
     decisions are made about our safety.        Our policy to
     preserve standing accomodation for supporters is not


                             4
       motivated by the consequences of a club's last conversation
       with its bank manager about meeting the cost of Taylor; It
       exists within and as a part of the F S A 's overall
       commitment to safety, comfort and effective crowd control.



II The FSA's critique of the Taylor Report's grounds for moving
towards all-seater stadia

A. Safety
1.     The FSA believes that Taylor departed from the strong,
       central thrust of his findings when he addressed the issue
       of seating vs. standing.     Many of our members share the
        general suspicion that Lord Justice Taylor, having in his
        report bloodied the nose of the government regarding their
       proposed Identity Card scheme, felt under pressure to back
        an alternative scheme for increasing police control over
        spectators and that this, rather than strict considerations
        of safety, led him to make the recommendation for all-
        seater stadia.    Certainly the government very quickly
        adopted this recommendation as its own       and backed the
        report without losing credibility to   the   extent whichthe
        Report's finding against the ID card scheme might have
        involved.  Colin Moynihan even survived the publication of
        the Report and was able to argue that the thrust of his
        policies, if not the detail, was endorsed by it.    Perhaps
        Lord Justice Taylor felt that his all-seater recommendation
        was the price to be paid for getting the rest of the Report
        implemented and his reforms underway; he certainly, and
        specifically, denied that this recommendation was in any
        way the key which others pretended.
       Alternatively, Lord Justice Taylor believed wholeheartedly
       in his recommendation and in the reasoning behind it.     It
       is therefore necessary to look closely at that reasoning:
2.     Paragraph 62 of the Final Report contains Lord Justice
        Taylor's argument that seats are safer than terraces. The
        reasons advanced may easily be listed thus:
        i. sitting feels more secure because it gives the individual
           a fixed area of personal space.
       ii. standing involves being jostled by swaying or surging,
           which can be especially dangerous for the infirm, small
           or young fan, and particularly so for those pressed
           against crush barriers.  Swaying is unpredictable during
           the course of the game.
     iii.   sitting insulates an individual from crowd pressures
            around him/her during the course of the game.


                                5
     iv. overcrowding can only happen on terraces.

3.   In this paragraph, Lord Justice Taylor briefly acknowledges
     that, irrespective of whether they watch the game sitting or
     standing, supporters can encounter crowd pressure, including
     jostling, on the stairways and areas surrounding the exits,
     whilst arriving or leaving.           Given the specific
     circumstances of the Hillsborough disaster, it is odd that
     the Final Report treats this danger as an aside.   It was in
     fact decisive at Hillsborough and at Ibrox before it, and it
     represents the only regular experience most football fans
     have of being jostled.    As the Appendix makes clear, the
     former West German Football Authorities recognised entry and
     exit as the perennial danger points in football stadia and
     went on to spend as much money on improving these as the
     Football Trust grants to First Division clubs to go all-
     seater.   We should have done likewise in this country and
     still could.    In this case    as in others, the Taylor
     recommendation refracts the real problem and then attempts
     to deal with the refraction: as we say elsewhere, Taylor
     lost his way and became inconsistent on this aspect, thereby
     doing a disservice to safety.
4.   Point i. in para 2 above is questionable. It deals not with
     how safe it is to sit, but how safe it feels to do so, and
     this is really a matter of psychology and experience. Many
     people feel trapped by seats that they cannot vacate except
     by the semi-organised consent of those around them, whether
     in cinemas or football stands, and many others feel safer
     standing, because they can virtually always seek out the
     front, back or wings of even a well-populated terrace and
     find more than enough personal space to allay any fears of
     close physical contact with strangers.      Even so, Lord
     Justice Taylor rather overdoes this fear, and in any event
     it does not appear to be particularly consequential to the
     main argument.

5.   Point ii. above is an important observation, although in
     practice swaying almost always occurs only in those densely-
     packed circumstances in which it is most difficult to
     actually fall down, because of the crush of bodies, and may
     therefore be held to be naturally self-regulating.     This is
     not to deny that it can be uncomfortable and dangerous, as
     well as frightening for those who do not choose it, and    for
     some of those who do if   they are drunk. Crush barriers can
     so quickly turn into life-threatening devices, as they did
     at Hillsborough, but for them to do so several p r e ­
     requisites have to be fulfilled in lethal combination, chief
     among which is that the    section of the terrace behind the
     barrier is overcrowded.    Another is that    there is no escape
     to the front or side when the crowd, as it does, sways back.
     Another is that gangways are blocked, not wide enough or not
     numerous enough because of poor design or poor stewarding or

                              6
     both.
6.   The FSA wants investment and guidelines to ensure that
     overcrowding is virtually ruled out as a possibility, by
     computerised turnstile counting monitored by the club safety
     officer and implemented by the automatic shutdown of
     turnstiles in a phased progression as a terrace approaches
     capacity.    This should be communicated by a visible
     electronic display to those still queuing to get in.
     Capacities should be set in line with the Taylor Report's
     revised densities and clubs heavily fined if FLA Inspectors
     discover that they have breached these rules. The same
     rules should determine the number and width of gangways and
     how they are to be marked and stewarded.    Fans malingering
     in gangways should be removed forthwith by police or
     stewards.
7.   Much jostling during the course of matches is due to poor
     sightlines causing people to stretch and lean forward to get
     a decent view at corners or goalmouth situations partly
     obscured by spectators in front.    This comes down to the
     rake of terraces and the width of each step, and we will
     detail our points on this in a later section.
8.   Lord Justice Taylor's own downwards revision of permissible
     densities on terraces has actually all but eliminated the
     phenomenon of jostling in its dangerous forms listed above.
     Whereas once it was commonplace when the sport was better-
     supported, nearly all crushing in the past two decades has
     been accounted for by the practice of herding away
      supporters into fenced-off pens, and it was no coincidence
      that the Hillsborough tragedy happened in a terrace which
     was used exclusively by away supporters at Sheffield
     Wednesday's home games.    The penning of away supporters at
      the Leppings Lane End and elsewhere on other grounds from
      the 1970s produced conditions completely different from
      those which could be termed natural self-regulating swaying.
      This latter had been the norm in the post-war years and for
      almost a generation afterwards, when it was a common sight
      on crowded kops to see the bodies of children or exhausted
      adults passed over the heads of the crowd from its' densest
      areas to less compacted parts, usually towards the front.
      Although we would not recommend it as a serious pillar of
      modern crowd safety, mostly because of major changes since
      in working class culture in general and in football in
      particular, it does prove that overcrowding alone, even when
      taken to extremes unknown to today's fans, does not
      necessarily lead to panic or to the serious threat of injury
      or death.
9.   The 'pens', or fenced cages which became the preferred mode
     of segregating away fans from home supporters from the 1970s
     allowed no swaying at all when full to the brim, as they

                              7
      often were, just numbing compaction. A high overall density
      is a different thing on a traditional home end like
      Sheffield Wednesday's Spion Kop where there is space to
      allow a variety of differing densities corresponding to the
      varieties of physique and preference among supporters.
      From the 1970s on, the practice was for visitors to be
      herded into one pen, usually the one nearest to the
      turnstiles.  Only when that pen was heaving with supporters
      cramped together like sardines, and sometimes not even then,
      did the police and stewards open the gate into the next
      adjacent pen, through which the fans then squashed in order
      to relieve the crush in the first pen.     If and when this
      second pen as well as the first became swollen beyond what
      police and stewards decided was acceptable, a third pen, if
      available, would be opened, and so on.

10.   The Taylor Report rightly condemned this practice and
      effectively ended it by so reducing terrace capacities that
      any form of compaction has since become all but impossible,
      but he failed to properly grasp the vital distinction
      between big areas of terrace and small pens on shallow
      terraces.
      Part of what went wrong at Hillsborough on the fateful day
      was that the 3,000 or so Liverpool fans who suddenly burst
      into the stadium made for a cul-de-sac comprising a tunnel
      and a small area of terracing: the two central pens.
      On big terraces undivided by pens, this sudden influx would
      have been dangerous, as it would have been had that crowd
      made for a seating area which was already full, but not as
      dangerous, because the ratip of people to available space
      would not have shot up by so much so quickly.   For example,
      an extra 3,000 surging into even a full Kop at Hillsborough
      on top of the 22,000 Forest fans already there, or even into
      an undivided Leppings Lane terrace full to its' overall
      10,000 capacity, would have increased the ratio of people to
      available space by a much smaller factor than happened when
      the surging crowd made for the artificially small area they
      did and which was already jammed.
11.   This was the sequence which killed and it took place in a
      very particular type and size of terracing environment which
      never existed before the last 20 years and should never be
      seen again. Lord Justice Taylor's considerably looser and
      more general statements about jostling and swaying do not
      shed any important or revealing light on the role of
      terracing in crowd safety when examined in the full light
      and from every angle of experience.

12.   The remaining two points in paragraph 62 of the Final Report
      are (iii) that sitting insulates an individual from crowd


                              8
       pressures around him/her during the course of the game, and
       (iv) overcrowding can only happen on terraces. The first of
       these is undoubtedly true so long as we are not discussing
       bench seats or others on which it is easy to stand, but the
       other side of insulation, as the Bradford disaster showed,
       is that quick escape from one's seat towards or else away
       from the pitch is ruled out in an emergency.     As we have
       already argued, standing spectators habitually find their
       own ways out of disagreeable crowd pressures around them by
       simply moving to somewhere less crowded, and only in the
       artificially small, caged terrace pen is there nowhere
       suitable once overall density is too high for comfort.
13.    Even so, the FSA does not denounce seating just because it
       has the potential to trap people in an emergency, with or
       without fences.   Our view is simply that the FLA needs to
       evolve guidelines which reflect and compensate for this
       shortcoming.  We would like to see the FLA given a similar
       brief in relation to terraces.
14.    It might seem a truism that overcrowding cannot occur in a
       numbered seating area with individual seats and this is
       indeed the case for the actual rows of seats themselves. It
       does not, however, follow that a stand, when every seat is
       full, is not overcrowded in terms of the capacity of the
       gangways, exits and corridors to evacuate the crowd.     As
       mentioned much earlier, in point 3. of this section, these
       latter factors are what safety considerations need to re­
       focus on before all concerned get permanently carried away
       on the equation of seats and safety.


B . Comfort
1.     Para 63 deals with Lord Justice Taylor's second argument for
       recommending all-seater stadia - the comfort of supporters.
       This is barely elaborated at all in para 63, yet para 64
       begins as if it has been already proven beyond reasonable
       doubt.  In truth, Lord Justice Taylor's argument in para 63
       is not that seating is more comfortable than standing, but
       that doing either without a roof is less so than with. We
       would certainly not stand in the way of roofs, but we do
       object to the assumption that because it is even more
       uncomfortable to sit in the rain than stand in it, the all-
       seater recommendation therefore means that we all need roofs
       from now on, as if we didn't previously.
       Para 77 of his final Report added a further twist to Lord
       Justice Taylor's argument which was both naive and
       mischievous: it cites a survey of FSA members by the Sir
       Norman Chester Centre for Football Research and picks out
       that 53.6% of the sample said we "would actually support the
       drive for more seating if they were reasonably priced and


                               9
     covered". The same para also concedes that the sample was
     against all-seater stadia, but by highlighting this bare
     majority for something quite different, Lord Justice Taylor
     avoided addressing the reality that his all-seating
     recommendation would be deeply unpopular amongst those who
     it was his avowed intention to assist - supporters.     The
     answers to other questions in the survey underlined FSA
     members strong opposition to all-seating, and it was quite
     naive for Taylor to even toy with the assumption that its
     introduction would be paid for other than out of our
     pockets, as the recent 'bond' schemes at Arsenal and West
     Ham have shown.

2.   There is a more germane point to be made about comfort, and
      one which Taylor missed entirely:      British football is
      played in winter, when we need to move about to keep our
      circulation going properly after a certain age or amidst
      certain unhealthy lifestyles which are all too common still.
      When we are standing up, there are various little exercises
      we indulge in to keep the blood flowing which are not in
      keeping with being slumped on a cold seat and in most cases
      ruled out by sitting in the relatively cramped conditions of
      even the best seats at football.

3.   Alternatively, it is not all so self-evident as Lord Justice
      Taylor assumed, that football supporters in the main crave
      comfort or must otherwise be regarded as some strange sub­
      species of oppressed souls who cannot yet rise above the
      uncivilised standards we have gotten used to.      There was
      something more than a little patronising in parts of Lord
     Justice Taylor's otherwise correct insistence on modernising
      and civilising the environment in which football is watched.
     Many traditional and highly enjoyable outdoor recreations
      involve discomfort, dirt, and exposure to the elements and
      these factors are often recognised as contributing something
      to the atmosphere of, say, hunting or angling, moto cross,
     horse racing or building snowmen.     We are a nation which
     ventures out into cold dark back gardens every 5th November
      to gain pleasure from lighting unspectacular fireworks with
     our cold fingers.    Why should going to football be seen as
     any different?    It may not be a popular clarion call, but
      the right to be uncomfortable should not be taken for
     granted. Safety is one thing, and of overriding importance,
     but in talking comfort, again in a fairly loose way, the
     Taylor report missed the difference between the spectator
     and the supporter.

4.   This is not a necessarily male perspective - most women,
      like most supporters as a whole, stand at football for most
     matches they see. The much-trumpeted need to bring families
      into football is a barely disguised hope that the game's
     following will become more middle class and therefore be
     willing to pay more to watch. The unspoken argument is that


                             10
   middle class supporters prefer to sit, so we all should.
   This is wrong on both counts and part of a thoroughly
   disreputable line of argument which has surfaced post -
   Taylor and reached its high point in a particularly elitist
   chapter in the FA's Blueprint for Football.
   No - Football is the people's game in this rain-sodden land
   of ours, and football supporters quite properly wish to take
   our comfort in ways we decide, not have it foisted upon us
   by those who think they know better.


Forgery
   Para 65 made the minor point that forged tickets are easier
   to spot in stands, because of the musical chairs factor
   which is disguised on the terraces.    While forged tickets
   may well play their part in creating crowd safety problems
   at very big games, the electronic monitoring scheme we
   proposed earlier, in point 6 of the section on the Safety
   argument, would override the turnstile operators in such
   situations, and the likelihood of this happening would be
   communicated regularly to the queuing crowds for some
   considerable time beforehand, as well as to stewards and the
   police, so as to facilitate orderly dispersal of those fans
   who couldn't get in. Even so, the existence of quite large
   numbers of forged tickets is not a decisive factor in
   leading to unsafe conditions on its' own.


Control
    Along with safety, seats as crowd control has been the
    biggest reason for making all-seater stadia seem attractive,
    and particularly so to those who have despaired of the
    hooligan culture which mushroomed in the decade leading up
    to Hillsborough to an unprecedented extent. Anything which
    offered even half a chance of doing something about that was
    seized upon and redommended without hesitation, and so,
    although Taylor's own argumentation on this point was sparse
    and brief, it was decisive in many quarters, including with
    the then beleaguered Colin Moynihan.
    Taylor identified seats + CCTV as the simple wall pass which
    would sort the hooligans out.  Para 64 warmed to this theme
    thus -
    "with the assistance of CCTV the police can immediately zoom
    in with a camera and pinpoint the seats occupied by the
    troublemakers as well as the troublemakers themselves -
    Moreover, if numbered tickets are issued to named
    purchasers " ........ Gotcha!
3.   Such beguiling simplicity, and yet close examination of the
     action replay misses the point that what hooligan activity
     has survived the traumatic effect of Hillsborough on the
     minds of football fans takes place almost exclusively, as it
     did at its1 height in the 1980s, away from the stadia in
     backstreets, near railway stations, outside public houses
     and so forth. This is borne out by repeated sets of police
     statistics on arrests for "football-related offences".    As
     an anti-hooligan measure, altering the interior architecture
     of football grounds in whatever way, including in the ways
     we have proposed, is as relevant as joining BUPA in order to
     ward off illness - it may allay certain fears, but it is an
     expensive way of ignoring reality.
4.   It is yet another example of the drift of          Taylor's
     argumentation connecting to the mood of the times, even
     though its' analytical quality was well short of stunning.
     CCTV is either the best thing since sliced bread or it is
     not - we cannot haveit both ways - and    the Football Trust
     has bought a system     for every club in the country with
     government money.   It has without doubt proven to be quite
     devastatingly effective at identifying hooligan activity on
     terraces and contributed largely to its welcome    departure
     from nearly all grounds virtually all of the time.

5.   Lord Justice Taylor has recently re-stated his position on
     the all-seater   issue, and specifically denied "that I was
     concerned with 'social engineering' rather than safety". We
     accept this and, as we have indicated, his reference to all­
     seating as a crowd control measure was sparse.      Even so,
     others have not been so reticent, and among these bodies
     which have taken seating as the means to eradicate the
     threat of violence is UEFA, the European governing body of
     Football.

6.   FIFA, the World governing body, passed a 1989 resolution
     that as from 1993 all "high-risk" matches must be played in
     all-seater stadia. 'High risk' matches, as Taylor pointed
     out, are defined under UEFA regulations so as to include any
     matches    which UEFA regards    as such on the basis of
     previous incidents of supporters of one or both teams".   It
     also includes any matches expected to attract more than
      3,000 away supporters.

     Luckily, these regulations are not binding on League or
     domestic British matches, but they indicate the extent to
     which the easy equation of seats with civilised as opposed
     to anti-social behaviour permeates discussion and decision­
     making within Football.   If just one national government
     were to take this assumption on, sense could come to prevail
     at an international as well as at a domestic level.
7.   The crowd control argument frequently made against terraces


                             12
     is based on a mixture of pre-CCTV correlation and amateur
     psychology.   The latter holds that the sitting position
     produces a more constrained range of emotion as well as
     movement in the spectator and is therefore more conducive to
     civilised behaviour and less likely to encourage or allow
     for hooliganism. It is of the same order as the presumption
     that a motorist who remains seated in his/her car is more
     likely to be booked by a police officer than one who gets
     out and does the walking towards authority. The association
     of standing with confrontation as against sitting with
     peaceable behaviour belongs to the Desmond Morris genre of
     'pop' psychology and is pretty thin stuff, really.

8.   There are enough notable exceptions to fault the argument
      that sitting down will turn hooligans into civilised
      supporters, including the Luton v Millwall game which
      resulted in a televised riot and which proved fulchral to
      Margaret Thatcher's interest in and understanding of
      Football and hooliganism.  Any correlation between standing
      and incidents of hooliganism has always been without general
      significance, because all the research indicates that only a
      small minority of all standing spectators have ever been
      even peripherally involved in violent confrontation at or
      around matches.   Nearly all of us manage to stand without
      becoming violent, and those who are violently-inclined would
      be so-minded anyway; they just happen to prefer standing to
      sitting on the whole, in so far as they attend matches at
      all since the advent of CCTV and the post-Hillsborough
      backlash against the 'aggro culture' amongst supporters.

9.   Our attendance at many conferences and seminars as well as
      our involvement in the Home Affairs Committee on Policing
      Football Hooliganism has revealed to us an underlying
      confusion amongst many people between two quite separate
      phenomena which are widely regarded by many powers-that-be
      as a continuum - on the one hand, loud, boisterous, partisan
      support for one's team, which may occasionally involve
      directing verbal abuse at the referee, the opposing team, or
      the opposing team's supporters, and on the other,
      calculating violence directed against rival fans.       This
      confusion subsists, even though a succession of police
      undercover operations have shown that violent gangs are
      conspiratorial in nature, and although many of them have
      found it convenient to mingle in with their local club's
      boisterous young fans, they perpetually fail to involve them
      in their depredations. Bill Buford's recent book "Among the
      Thugs" reinforces this point strongly via his eight years
      participant research.
      Effectively, though not noticeably so to the casual
      observer, the thugs are quite distinct, and, not
      untypically, less boisterous in their support during
      matches; so that displacing the boisterous fans from


                              13
      terraces into seats is meaningless meanness towards those
      teenagers and other younger fans who want to jump up and
      down and chant and express their undying     fealty to their
      own community, as well as towards the countless others who
      prefer to stand for other reasons.   Hooligans are criminals
      whom the police are getting to grips with as never before.
      The all-seater recommendation adds nothing to this important
      service to Football, and our meetings with ACPO have shown
      us that the police have no zeal for the all-seater
      recommendation, although they are well able to speak for
      themselves on this.


Ill Further issues raised by Lord Justice Taylor
1.    Para 66 of the Taylor Report asserts quite wrongly that 'the
      football supporters' organisations' deploy three arguments
      against all-seater stadia, which he goes on to characterise,
      variously, as 'the emotional one', 'reducing ground
      capacities' and 'cost'.
2.    Para 67 gives full recognition to the fact that, to younger
      supporters, an integral part of enjoying the match is the
      camaraderie of singing together and jumping up and down, and
      that they do not wish to be seated.      Para 70 sees Lord
      Justice Taylor in his patronising mode once again -

      " I am not convinced that the cherished culture of the
      terraces is wholly lost, when fans are seated. Watching the
      more   boisterous and demonstrative sections at all-seater
      grounds, I have noted no absence of concerted singing,
      chanting, clapping or gesticulating in unison. The communal
      spirit is still there and finds ready expression.    To such
      extent as the seating limits togetherness or prevents
      movement, that price is surely worth paying for the benefits
      in safety and control ".
3.     This argument has never been advanced by ourselves, the
       National Federation of Football Supporters Clubs,
       Independent Supporters Associations or any organisation of
       fans.   This has not, however, stopped others, from Taylor
       onwards, depicting supporters who want the choice of
       standing to remain as unreconstructed boors who are letting
       our conservatism get the better of our judgement on what is
       in the best interests of the game.    This understanding of
       football supporters is based very much on Desmond Morris-
       type superficial impressionism.   The overwhelming majority
       of standing supporters do not clap or sing in unison, but
       oppose the end of terraces for quite different, more down-
       to-earth reasons which we will shortly go into.
4.     Para 68 says that supporters have expressed undue fears
       "that conversion to all-seating will reduce the numbers of


                               14
     fans who can be admitted" and then goes on to compare
     attendances for the 1988/89 season with club's projected
     capacities when they go all-seater to show that there will
     almost always be sufficient room for all who watch now. We
     agree that this should not be a problem for the supporters
     of our clubs, although Manchester United fans are in uproar
     over precisely this issue at the moment, and Taylor's own
     figures can equally show that 23 of the 44 First and Second
     Division clubs had at least one attendance larger than their
     projected all-seater capacity during season 1988/89.
     Moreover, Lord Justice Taylor elsewhere loosely and quite
     naively suggests that capacity can be restored by building
     double or triple decker stands.    Not only do additional
     tiers cost disproportionately more money; the experience of
     clubs up and down the country in the intervening years has
     been that planning permission is routinely refused for
     stands of the height required for further decks of seating.
5.   This problem is not a straightforward result of conversion
     to all-seating, however. It arises out of the choices which
     even our so-called most ambitious clubs have made to opt for
     future capacities close to their average gate.   They could,
     with more and better-targeted assistance from the Football
     Trust, have aimed considerably higher and provided not only
     themselves, but British Football, with a handful of 50,000+
     all-seater stadia covering each region, in which 'big' games
     for clubs in that region could be played.        This would
     satisfy UEFA and make this country a better bet to be chosen
     to host a future World Cup or European Championship Finals.
     The FSA made a recommendation to facilitate this in our
     submission to the Taylor Inquiry, but the government moved
     in soon after to take the all-seater recommendation forward
     quite otherwise: with a maximum of bluster and a minimum of
     sensitivity to the needs of the game.    If 5 or so grounds
     were to be developed beyond the rest in a way which spans
     the different regions, exceptionally attractive matches
     could be held there in all-seater stadia, because, as we
     will detail later, exceptional matches like FA Cup semi
     finals place pressures on crowd safety and control which are
     not otherwise evident.
6.   Paras 69 and 72 deal with an objection we did indeed lodge
     at the time and which continues to concern us - that many
     fans cannot or will not pay the inflated seat prices likely
     to be imposed by clubs for places in all-seater stadia.
     Events since have made Lord Justice Taylor's re-assurances
     on this point in para 72 seem altogether mis-placed.     His
     naive claim that "it should be possible to plan a price
     structure which suits the cheapest seats to the pockets of
     those presently paying to stand" did not allow for Football
     clubs' habit of always asking supporters to fund and sponsor
     their developments.   Manchester United, Arsenal, West Ham
     and Leeds are leading the way forward in this with their


                             15
      mixture of bond schemes and massive price increases. Others
      will no doubt follow in pricing Football out of the pockets
      of many of those to whom it means most. We do not pretend
      to have thought through a grand solution to this development
      - the safe standing areas we want to see built would cost
      virtually as much as new stands and therefore involve much
      the same problems for under-capitalised Football Clubs.   We
      would, however, want to see a more sensitively-targeted
      funding plan than the Football Trust's crude Division-based
      handouts, one which relates to each club's different
      circumstances and prospects, and this would involve
      government sitting down with Football to discuss the amount
      and distribution of funding at the same time as leading it
      towards meeting Taylor's challenge to modernise the game and
      make it safe. Unfortunately, what we have had so far is the
      imposition on Football of a false dogma coupled to a budget
      concession and the distribution of largess.
7.    The FSA has asked the Football Authorities to guarantee the
      right of away fans to be given an agreed percentage of
      accomodation at all grounds, because Football is a public
      sport in danger of becoming a private club.      Manchester
      United, West Ham and others have floated the idea of banning
      away supporters altogether in the light of their projected
      reduced capacities. This would give them the chance to jack
      up prices in such a way as to force supporters to become
      season-ticket holders, after which targeted merchandising
      will know no bounds.


IV Why Terraces are popular
      What terraces have provided in the history of Football is a
      cheap setting in which supporters can enjoy our recreation
      with an important degree of freedom. If we want to go for a
      coffee or bovril or to the toilet, or even take a short walk
      to talk to a friend on another part of the terrace during
      the match we can do so on a terrace without upsetting a
      soul.   If the wind sweeps the rain in under the roof,
      individuals who wish are free to find themselves more
      sheltered positions further back. This is impossible in the
      seats, because it would involve invading someone e l s e '5
      seat, upsetting people close to where you start from and
      others close to where you move to, and in cases where a
      stand is for season-ticket holders only it would be out of
      the question.
2.     To most terrace supporters going to a game is a social
       event.   We meet friends and stand in groups with them, but
       not everyone in the group is a regular or an ever-present.
       Nevertheless, the group is always there in some shape or
       form. Not so in the seats - this typical arrangement cannot
       transfer to the all-seater, mostly season-ticket holders-


                              16
     only stadiums projected for Football. It would require what
     is really a loose affiliation of friends and acquaintances
     to make an organised block-booking of adjacent seats and
     each individual would have to pay up front for a season-
     ticket.  Those without the money or who don't attend quite
     regularly enough to justify a season-ticket would go less
     often and when they do go, have to sit in a different area
     to the season-ticket holders.    The social aspect of going
     along would cease to exist very soon, and Football would
     eventually lose them.

3.   This is related to a further point - that terraces, as well
     as housing the more boisterous fans, whose needs are
     recognised by Taylor, also provide space for a club's more
     casual, occasional supporters, as well as neutrals and other
     visitors.  Any study of attendances will show constant and
     quite significant fluctuations either side of a club's
     seasonal average.  Take the night of 12 February 1992, when
     Stoke City attracted 24,000 for a third division fixture
     against West Bromwich Albion while Chelsea drew but 7,000
     for their first division game against Southampton.     It is
     perhaps impossible to calculate what % of their revenue
     clubs get from gate money for exceptionally attractive games
     which fill their grounds, but it is widely held to be a
     lifeline for most.   It is the existence of terraces which
     enable them to accomodate big as well as average crowds, and
     gain revenue from people who only come along now and then.
     This group probably outnumbers a club's regular support by
     about 2:1 in most cases (in 1988 45,000 Wolverhampton
     Wanderers supporters followed their team to the Sherpa Van
     Final at Wembley; Wolves' average home attendance at the
     time was below 10,000 and, despite 2 successive promotion
     years since, is still only 17,000).         The all-seater
     recommendation will lead to a preponderance of season-ticket
     only areas within grounds, if implemented, and nowhere for
     casual supporters to go.

     In short, terraces have maintained Football matches as open
     public events.

4.   As the respected Football writer Patrick Barclay pointed out
     in 'the Observer' of 2 February just gone "It is a
     misconception that all fans who stand crave atmosphere.
     Many do, but some want freedom.     They want to be able to
     smoke, or avoid smoke, or to move away from a foul-mouthed
     neighbour.   Some just prefer to stand".     The freedom to
     choose with whom you seek recreation or pursue your hobby is
     highly valued generally, including amongst Football fans,
     and Patrick Barclay's list could be extended to include
     people who don't like to be within earshot of persistent
     swearing or obscene language, and people who don't like to
     be within earshot of defeatists or persistent detractors of
     the team, manager or particular players. With the completed

                             17
      conversion to all-seating, season-tickets for numbered seats
      will become the norm and choice of company will disappear.
      Once again, we insist that Football is a public
      entertainment which should not take on the characteristics
      of a private club, but it will if clubs actually go all-
      seater and the consequences will be to make attendance far
      less appealing.
5.    The single most out of touch comment in the entire Taylor
      Report is para 86 - "Proposals for all-seating would clearly
      be inappropriate in relation to sports events at which
      spectators are accustomed, and should be entitled, to move
      about.    For example, at horserace meetings, spectators may
      wish to view horses in the paddock, place bets, view races
      from different vantage points and enjoy the other facilities
      of what is a social occasion as well as a sports event".
       (our emphasis)
      All of this is, of course, equally true of football, as we
      have indicated above. At many lower division clubs, and in
      earlier times at many big grounds too, the tradition has
      been for home supporters to change ends      at half-time to
      watch from behind the goal their team is attacking.      Even
      where this is no longer possible, fans switch at half-time
      from one end of an enclosure along the side of the pitch to
      the other, for the same reason.    Increasingly, we can even
      place bets on the score and scorers at the ground.
6.    Football supporters want and deserve a choice at every
       ground. Sometimes we sit, sometimes we stand, depending
       upon the facilities and our inclination, but most of us
       stand most of the time, because we enjoy it more that way.
       This section has listed some very simple pleasures which
       terraces afford and to which the ordinary man and woman
       should continue to be entitled, and yet for asserting this
       we have been referred to in some public debate as if we were
       leaded petrol, a dangerously - poised nineteenth century
       mill chimney, or an 'uneconomic' coal-mine - something to be
       phased-out, demolished or closed down and replaced by
       something better and more in keeping with modern
       civilisation.
       It would be an illusion of progress, not the real thing, to
       take terracing away on the basis of such rhetoric.

V New safe terraces
1.     John de Quidt, Chief Executive of the FLA, recently told
       Jonathon Foster of 'The Independent on Sunday' (26 January)
       that "there may be arguments that some terracing is safe,
       but that is not to say present terracing is safe".
       The FSA wholly agrees with this starting point, and with the


                               18
     Institute of Structural Engineers, who have given their view
     that standing areas can be safe.     While absolute safety
     cannot be guaranteed in any construction built to
     accommodate people in numbers, it is the duty of all
     concerned with the design, planning and maintenance of them
     to get as near to this as is currently possible.

2.   There has been some progress in safer terracing since the
     Taylor Report.    Allowable densities have been slashed,
     massively at first and completely across the board, too,
     before being negotiated upwards again at those clubs whose
     standing areas are clearly of a higher standard, but even
     then not to pre-Taylor levels. Many fences have been taken
     down completely or else cut back from Berlin wall
     proportions to something on a more human scale. Significant
     moves have also been made towards replacing high profile
     policing with low profile stewarding, and the Football
     League, with the assistance of ACPO, has produced a video
     and training manual for stewards.    The further development
     of this offers the future prospect of much greater self­
     regulation on terraces and, in the meantime, the improved
     crush barriers and additional exits punched into the
     remaining perimeter fences have added to the feeling of
     security amongst standing supporters. Further to this there
     has been a massive change in attitudes to safety and
     hooliganism amongst fans since Hillsborough, together with
     the improved sensitivity of ground    commanders to distress
     and an enhanced ability of rank and file police to
     differentiate between the partisan and the thug.         Set
     against all this the government's obdurate insistence on the
     dogma of all-seating is a slap in the face to the genuine
     efforts of everyone else to turn things round.

3.   None of this represents a fundamental shift away from
     unsatisfactory terracing and the reason is that the all-
     seater policy demanded by government has rendered
     improvements to the provision for standing purely interim in
     both conception and execution.     Toilet and refreshment
     facilities remain as inadequate, disgusting and sometimes
     as unhealthy as the vivid picture painted of them in the
     Taylor report.  The understandable attitude of clubs is why
     improve something about to be done away with when the money
     could be used, or put towards, the enormously expensive
     stands which have to go up.

4.   Lord Justice Taylor never asked his Technical Working Party,
     or anyone else, to develop ideas or research into safer
     forms of standing accommodation, and so neither we nor
     anyone else has been able to develop our ideas on this to
     the extent where they can begin to convince.        And yet
     Taylor's omission was part of a long tradition of apathy:
     football clubs, architects and others have given a degree of
     thought, consideration and finance down the years to the

                             19
     provision of seated accommodation and there have been
     significant developments this century such as double and
     triple tiers, cantilever roofs, executive boxes, bucket
     seats, tip-up seats and so on, all of which has been
     faithfully recorded by Simon Inglis. Nothing much has
     changed for the terrace supporter over the same period; some
     of the kops got straightened and roofed, cinders was
     replaced by concrete steps, and improved crush barriers were
     developed, but the overwhelming bulk of money and thought
     has always gone into seating.
5.   This is unfortunate, because safety and comfort depend on
     the design of a seating or standing area and not on which of
     the two it is. Too often dark tunnels, narrow alleyways and
     internal stairways which are badly lit and narrow lurk
     underneath stands and behind terraces.    Almost invariably,
     turnstiles are too few - no more than one or two for the
     away terracing at most Third and Fourth Division grounds.
     Whenever such a club    hosts an FA. Cup Tie against a big
     First Division club with several thousand away fans, the
     build-up of milling crowds around the one or two turnstiles
     just before kick-off is reminiscent of the scenes outside
     Leppings Lane on 15 April 1989.   Even League games at such
     grounds against 'fallen giants' like Birmingham City, Stoke
     City, Sunderland, Wolves and others in recent seasons
     produced a similar build-up, and there will always be
      'fallen giants'.
6.   Safe terraces, with safe entrances, stairways and gangways
      incorporated into them will cost a lot of money.     Left to
      their own devices, it is clear that clubs would be even more
      reluctant to spend large amounts on converting to safe
      terraces than they are on converting to seating, because
      price increases seem more justifiable for seating then for
      standing and so their outlay would be easier to recoup.   In
      fact, this is probably not the case, because terraces are
      more popular anyway and good, safe terraces would prove even
      more so.   In any case, the FLA's powers should be adjusted
      so as to enforce the construction of an agreed minimum
      percentage of safe terracing at every ground.
7.   The FLA could quite quickly evolve guidelines on safe
      terracing, in consultation with the FSADC, architects,
      structural engineers, clubs and supporters, and they could
      start with looking at the rake and width of terracing.
8.   The Football Licensing Authority recently consulted the FSA
      on their draft guidelines for sightlines in seated areas,
      some of which are designed to make obligatory rakes which
      yield an angle of view which is satisfactory on its' own as
      against acting as an incentive for supporters to stand on
      their seats to gain a better view.   Of course, standing up
      in such a seat seems self-defeating if everyone else does


                              20
      it, since the 'C F a c t o r 1 from which sightlines      are
      calculated will remain the same.      The improvement in view
      which standing affords over seating, given the same
      sightline, is that standing spectators can shuffle sideways
      and make other lateral body movements so as to see between
      the heads of those in front.     This is why placing seats on
      existing terracing is in the majority of cases undesirable,
      and why the FLA has moved to regulate it.

9.    Even so, there are many terraces with such a gentle rake
      that they should be condemned on that ground alone, for
      standing on, let alone placing seats on. The 'away end' at
      Shrewsbury springs to mind as one, and, indeed the problem
      is common at the smaller clubs in particular.          The
      consequences are the jostling referred to in an earlier
      section at corners or at the time of other goalmouth
      incidents. When the crowd is a large one, even relatively,
      this can be dangerous, and is always uncomfortable.
10    At the   opposite extreme, as for seating areas, the rake
      should   not be too steep if it is to remain safe and the best
      angles   need to be investigated for standing, as the FSADC
      has in   its recent report, called simply "Seating".
11.   Sightlines are not the only consideration in deciding upon
      ideal, acceptable and satisfactory rakes for standing.   The
      type and prevalence of crush barriers and the width of tread
      on each step come into the calculation. Most terrace steps
      at our grounds are not much wider than the length of an
      adult male's shoe from toe to heel, whereas many grounds on
      the continent have stepped terracing, which, in milder
      climates than ours, allow supporters to either stand or sit.
      Stepped terracing is considerably wider than what we are
      used to here - wide enough to allow someone to pass along in
      front of another person who is standing on the same step, or
      in excess of 2 feet.   With steps of this size there is
      minimal chance of anyone overbalancing onto the step in
      front and the distances between supporters on different
      steps of the terrace make physical contact between them
      unusual.   It is the narrowness of steps which got British
      terrace fans used to close physical contact between
      ourselves, but it is interesting to observe that, with the
      reduced terrace densities   ordained by the Taylor Report,
      our supporters now tend to leave vacant steps between us,
      choosing to occupy only alternate steps.

12.   Steps of this width and the consequent greatly reduced risk
      of overbalancing forward mean that a steeper rake can be
      achieved quite safely by building in a bigger drop such as 9
       inches or even 1 foot. This in turn reduces the chances of
      anyone overbalancing forward, because the sightlines are
       improved to the extent that every adult can see corner kicks
      and goalmouth incidents over the heads of those in front. A

                                21
      growing number of British fans have stood on such terracing
      abroad and been very impressed at the way it combines the
      traditional and valued virtues of terracing without the
      increasingly unacceptable aspects of inadequately designed
      terracing.   Parts of some grounds here have been developed
      in a similar way, including, with tragic irony, parts of the
      corner section of the Leppings Lane terracing at
      Hillsborough.
      With big steps, steep means safe, and crush barriers become
      things to lean against rather than depend upon to halt sways
      and surges.
13.   Stepped terracing means that the standing capacity quite
      naturally comes down very much on a par with the seating
      capacity for the same size of area. Overall, the density is
      much reduced from what we are used to, but much safer.
14.   FSADC guidelines for seats are that there should be r*o more
       than a line of 28 seats between gangways and 14 for seating
       sections which go right up to a side wall.        Something
       similar should be drawn up for terraces.    It could perhaps
      be more generous considering the extra mobility of standing
       spectators, but we do not wish to pre-judge this matter.
       The gangways should certainly be more plentiful than we are
      used to and at least 6 feet or so wide, so as to allow a
       reasonable ratio between these gangways and those who want
       to use them. Gangways should be regularly re-painted so that
       they stand out, and coloured vertical poles 10 feet or so
       high could let everyone know with a short glance where they
      were in relation to the nearest gangway. Wide gangways are
       easier for stewards to patrol and keep clear, and with
       stepped terracing the stewards have an additional duty of
       literally ushering supporters to particular terraces where
       they have noticed space.     Stadium staff sell refreshments
       from the gangways in European grounds with stepped
       terracing.    Fans simply walk along their terrace to the
       nearest gangway, buy a drink or snack and make their way
       back to their place.     This even happens in the midst of
       singing and chanting.   Everyone has more space in front of
       and behind them, feels safe and is at least as safe as those
       in the seats.
15.   One Architects firm known to the FSA have even done some
       preliminary work on designing leaning posts for stepped
       terracing, much like shooting sticks embedded in the
       concrete, and this could be an interesting addition to parts
       of standing areas favoured by older or less fit supporters.
       It has not been developed because the government's
       insistence on enforcing compulsory seating has removed any
       incentive.
16.   The FSA would certainly like to see main sections of


                               22
      terracing under good roofs which span from the back to
      beyond the front, but corner sections could be left to the
      elements for sunnier days and big games when people don't
      care so much so long as they get a view, thereby retaining a
      capacity beyond a club's average gate.      Without roofs,
      building safe terraces would cost considerably less - the
      roof on Sheffield Wednesday kop cost £500,000 when the Queen
      opened it a few years back.

17.   The FSA is for a quick phasing out of pens, perimeter
      fencing and moats.   These crowd control mechanisms were
      built for a former, deeply unhappy era in football and one
      to which we hope never to return.    Stepped terracing, wide
      gangways and CCTV are likely to facilitate nipping any
      trouble in the bud by giving the police very quick access
      indeed to anyone who is behaving out of order.

18.   We have already detailed our proposals on computerised
       monitoring of queuing fans and turnstiles and the importance
       of communicating the situation to supporters, and stressed
       the key importance of plentiful and high capacity entry and
       evacuation routes in all areas of grounds.      These, taken
       with the above points, are what the FSA means by new, safe
       standing areas.  The idea still needs further development -
       indeed it cries out for it!

19.   Even so, one more thing needs to be put to rights before
       terracing can become safe.   At the moment a big percentage
       of supporters arrive very late at matches. If this
       continued, it would make terraces, turnstiles and entry
       routes less safe than a more gradual influx.

      The great incentive for this behaviour is that it is
      impossible, once inside the ground, to obtain any decent
      food or liquid refreshment other than plastic cups of tea,
      coffee or Bovril which burns your hands during the journey
      between kiosk and your place.      'Kit-Kat', warmed up pies
      with next to nothing inside, 'Wagon Wheels' and 'Mars' bars
      are the extent of the menu at these kiosks, which are
      invariably staffed by no more than 2 teenagers and can only
      be reached at half-time by a queue which involves leaving
      your place at least 5 minutes before the interval. Whether
      or not the civilisation of this should involve sales of
      alcohol as it used to in the days when people used to buy
      beer from the club rather than the pub is a sensitive issue
      for separate debate, but its crowd control implications may
      be more advantageous than disadvantageous.     Lord Taylor's
      Report said that the FSA should be consulted on the problem
      of the last minute rush to grounds and ways of influencing
      an improvement, but, as with every other aspect of his
      report bar one, this recommendation has fallen on deaf ears.



                              23
VI.   Tampering with the All-seater dogma
1.      The Home Affairs Committee on Policing Football Hooliganism
        received written and oral evidence from the FSA and others,
        and recommended a review of the all-seater recommendation,
        and specifically so in the case of "smaller clubs".
        Taylor's own timetable has distinguished between First and
        Second Division clubs, on the one hand, who were given 5
        years to comply, and the other two Divisions which were
        given 10, and it was widely assumed at the time that "small
        clubs" meant 'lower division' clubs. More recently, the
        All-Party Committee on Football has made a similar
        recommendation and both Tom Pendrey MP    and Kate Hoey MP
        have spoken out in favour of a future Labour government
        relaxing the Taylor requirement on seating in respect of
        Third and Fourth Division clubs.
2.     The FSA disagrees fundamentally with this approach.       If
        standing is dangerous, then it is no less so in small,
        densely-packed terraces in cup ties and play off games than
        in larger ends. The Leppings Lane deaths occurred in a very
        small area of terracing in a shallow enclosure similar in
        size to many in the lower Divisions.   In addition, our view
        is that much existing terracing borders on being dangerous,
        particularly in the lower Divisions where it has often
        fallen into disrepair. We want new terracing, not a further
        lease of life for what has been shown to be inadequate.
3.     Furthermore, as we have already indicated, there will always
        be 'fallen giants' in the lower leagues and, until the
        'Premier' Division seals itself off in a fit of anti-
        meritocratic self-interest, there will always be 'risen
        minnows'. This means there will be substantial anomalies in
        any   Division-based approach to the all-seater issue.    If
        small clubs don't need to go all-seater, does this mean
        Wimbledon and Luton do but Birmingham City and West Brom
        don't? There are anomalies too vis-a-vis other sports like
        both rugby codes, racing and athletics, to which compulsory
        all-seating does not apply.    Home Office Minister John
        Patton has said that the phasing out of standing should only
        apply on a voluntary basis for sports other than football.
        While the FSA has no wish to see others brought within the
        same draconian regulations, our Welsh members in particular
        are aggrieved that while their cousins may stand and even
        sway on packed terraces at Cardiff Arms Park during Rugby
        Union internationals, they may not do likewise for
        international football fixtures, when the same terraces are
        empty, by order.
4.      As mentioned previously, we take the alternative approach
        that each club should be required, with help, to settle a
        tailored, realistic re-development and phased timetable for
        its' achievement with the FLA and either the Football Trust


                                24
       or a successor body such as the Football Levy Board favoured
       by Tom Pendrey.   In this, and again ironically in view of
       what follows, we agree with pundit Jimmy Hill, who wrote in
       the 'Daily Telegraph' of February 3rd "I do not support
       clubs being compelled to spend money on facilities which
       bear no relation to their present needs or safety factors.
       An agreed progressive development for each club and ground
       would make much more sense - a case of tailor-made as
       against Taylor-made".

V II Re-drawing Taylor's Recommendation

1.     The FSA does not oppose all all-seater stadia.           Our
       submission to the Hillsborough Inquiry on this was that
       regional all-seater stadia should be built, to house over
       50,000 supporters.   Counting Wembley as the obvious venue
       for big games in the South East and South West, additional
       stadia would be required in each of North West England, the
       North East, South Yorkshire/East Midlands and the West
       Midlands - 4 in all. Suitable club grounds in each region
       would be converted into 50,000 plus all-seater stadia with a
       high degree of central grant aid.   Funding certain clubs as
       a national resource in this way implies that a percentage of
       each of these 4 clubs' gate income would be given back to
       the game nationally in the following years.
2.     The reason behind this proposal is that certain games are
       truly exceptional in that    the demand for seeing them far
       outstrips the supply of tickets.      FA Cup semi-finals are
       an obvious example but there are European matches, key
       League games, play-offs, derbies and other cup games which
       present the same problem.       Such games are absolutely
       predictable by anyone who follows the game closely and they
       could be switched to designated regional stadia equipped by
       design, manning and security to deal with the special
       problems which they sometimes threaten.

       We are still disappointed that Lord Justice Taylor not only
       appeared to give no consideration to our submission, but
       that he appeared to be oblivious to the difference between
       all of the factors surrounding exceptionally attractive
       fixtures as against the rest of the Football calendar, went
       on to arrive at his recommendation for all-seating via a
       one-sided examination of the characteristics of exceptional
       games but then applied it right across the board to a whole
       different set of circumstances.

       By contrast, the FSA recommends a more sensitive and
       flexible approach which recognises real diversity between
       clubs and matches in respect of ambition, support,
       importance and attraction.



                               25
3.   The government's insistence on all-seating, coupled to
     insufficient and mis-targeted funds to pay for it has
     hastened the break-up of the Football League into the
     'haves-but-worr ied-about-the-Tay lor-t imetable ' and the
     'have-nots-who-have-ten-years'.    The direction in which
     Labour policy has appeared to be evolving on Taylor would
     tend to further separate the interests of bigger from
     smaller clubs, by abandoning all-seating in the case of the
     latter but retaining it for the richer clubs who have
     already examined their options in the face of Taylor and
     decided to take all measures necessary to maximise their
     income.   We recall that the Taylor Report specifically
     suggested that increased TV fees could help pay for all­
     seating, since when those with most to pay for all-seating
     have taken steps to monopolise TV income via the creation of
     a breakaway League backed by the Football Association.

4.   Taylor's other major weakness was a complete misreading of
      the attraction of football and of what most supporters seek
      and get from following the game.     Most of the time his
     Report referred to us, as spectators, or else as customers,
      and, however well-meant he obviously was towards us, he
      ultimately did us a disservice by arriving via poor advice
      and miscalculation at a recommendation which will, if it
      continues ahead, seriously endanger the continuation of
      football as a major, open, public recreation available in
      virtually every city and town to anyone who cares to go
      along.
5.   Nevertheless, the Taylor Report was a milestone in jerking
      football out of its' torpor and in signposting a better
      future.   It grasped a great deal of what had been going
     wrong for too long, but ultimately delivered a mixed
      blessing, perhaps because Peter Taylor is only a peripheral
      observer of the game, not a football man, and therefore
      failed at key turns to properly evaluate the advice and
      evidence he was presented with.    The FSA believes in the
      spirit which guided the Taylor Report as we have made clear
      throughout this submission, but in the interests of safety
      and of the supporters who need safe stadia more than anyone
      else, we urge that the next government abandon its' all-
      seater recommendation and adopt policies in line with our
      recommendations. Neither resources nor timetables have been
      attached to any aspect of the Taylor Report bar the one
      recommendation which was out of tune with every other.    In
      this sense and in terms of what events have shown to be
      naive arguments for all-seating, Lord Justice Taylor is
      perhaps not entirely at peace with himself and maybe hums
      the old refrain 'Look what they've done with my song, ma!'

6.   Football and politicians have had 3 years to evaluate
      Hillsborough and the Taylor Report and arrive at a balanced
      approach to building a better future, but unfortunately


                              26
public policy evolved in a far more hurried       and hasty
fashion:

As a member of the FSA wrote to Lord Justice Taylor on
Friday 21 April 1989, less than a week after the tragedy -

   "Along with many supporters I have spoken to in recent
   days I am very worried indeed by the lemming - like rush
   to embrace all-seater stadiums as the obvious and
   inevitable pre-requisite of fundamental improvements in
   safety.    This instant wisdom, completely in advance of
   your investigation, came initially from TV pundit Jimmy
   Hill on Saturday and was followed up almost immediately
   in a televised interview with Mr Blatter of F.I.F.A., the
   world governing body for football in which he re-affirmed
   his organisation's policy that all countries should be
   moving towards all-seater stadiums. Monday and Tuesday
   saw a rash of articles in the press warming to this
   proposal and projecting how much it would cost to
   implement.     The Home Secretary gave it his support on
   Monday, Liverpool Football Club promised to convert the
   Spion Kop to seats on Tuesday, and by Wednesday the
   Football League gave the seats-only idea its' full
   backing,     as did the Football Trust,       the major
   organisation for providing funding to clubs for ground
   improvements and safety work.        The Prime Minister
   endorsed it on Thursday".
That is no way to make public policy on the national sport,
impressive as it may have seemed as an act of atonement for
a terrible tragedy which had just occurred. The public mood
then was that something big and preferably painful had to be
done to commemorate the dead and ensure that no-one else
ever died in a football stadium.    The all-seater idea was
plucked off the shelf by its' greatest proponent, who just
happened to be presenting TV sport on the fateful day, and
for a while it seemed to fit the public mood.        Football
leaders and political leaders were pressed by the media to
tell the people what they were going to do about it.

All of this is understandable, but now even Jimmy Hill
(publicly) and Peter Taylor (privately) are re-thinking
their recommendation.  Only the government remains dogmatic
about it and so we look to you to take us back to a calm and
reasonable policy.
                   A SUMMARY OF OUR SUBMISSION

pg i        RECOMMEMDATIONS

pgs 1 - 2   INTRODUCTION
            1. The wisdom of all-seater policy is under question.

            2. The issue is a matter for government.

            3. The F S A 1s involvement      in   crowd     safety   and
               management.
            4. Supporters have the right to help reach decisions,
               and Taylor recognised this.

            5. Our increasing involvement in shaping football
               policy.

pgs 2 - 5   I FSA policy and activity on football stadia

             1. The Taylor Report needed more debate than it was
                given.

             2. Text of the FSA's policy statement on all-seater
                issue.

             3. Government closed the door on debating the issue.

             4. FSA policy retained despite fhe unconducive
                climate.

             5. Our policy is progressive and for improvements in
                safety.

             6. Vigilance     on    safety        reveals     continued
                shortcomings.

             7. Unsafe practices in seating areas.

             8. Supporters have an uncomplicated vested interest
                in safety.
pgs 5 - 14 II FSA critique of the    Taylor Report's          grounds      for
               moving towards all-seater stadia.
pgs 5 - 9       A. SAFETY

             1. Questions about the way the recommendation came
                about.


                               27
               2. A breakdown of Taylor's reasons why all-seating is
                  safer.

               3. Exit and entry points are more important than the
                  type of spectator accommodation itself.
               4. Does seating feel more secure, and how important
                  is this?

               5. The danger factors on packed terraces.

               6. Measures to manage crowd density safely.

               7. Poor design of terraces can cause jostling and
                  swaying.

               8. The role of crowd density in safety.

               9. Crude crowd management techniques and safety.
              10. Large terraces can be safer than small terraces.
              11. Penned, shallow terraces are unsafe.
              12. The pros and cons of seating, regarding safety.
              13. Both seating and terracing have intrinsic problems
                  which need to be addressed.

              14. Overcrowding is linked to the capacity to evacuate
                  an area.
pgs    9 - 11 B. COMFORT

               1. Roofs are a welcome improvement.

               2. Seats can be uncomfortable in cold weather.
               3. The spectator      may   crave    comfort;       the
                  supporter/participant often does not.

               4. Comfort, gender, class, affluence and seating,
pg    11     C. FORGERY

               1.                Forged tickets are not decisive in safety,
pgs 11 - 14 D. CONTROL

               1.   The attraction of Taylor's crowd control argument.
               2.   Seats and CCTV seen as a decisive duo.


                                   28
             3. Hooliganism happens almost exclusively outside
                grounds.

             4. CCTV has helped greatly in driving hooliganism
                from the terraces.
             5. Others, not Taylor, emphasised "the crowd control
                argument.
             6. FIFA and UEFA believe the crowd control argument.
             7. The psychological case for seating as ant i­
                hooligan strategy.

             8. The facts and research indicate that standing and
                hooliganism are not causally linked.

             9. Boisterous fans are not thugs.


pgs 14 - 16 III Further   issues raised by Lord Justice Taylor

             1. Breakdown of what the Report said were our views.
             2. The so-called "cherished culture of the terraces".

             3. Taylor and   others   misrepresented   supporters'
                feelings.

             4. Reduced capacities should not arise due to all-
                seater stadia.

             5. The FSA recommendation for regional all-seater
                stadia.
             6. Increased costs to fans and the need for better
                targeted funding by government.

pgs 16 - 18 IV Why terraces are popular

             1. Terraces are cheap and allow free movement.
             2. The social aspect of terraces.
             3. Terraces allow access to casual supporters and a
                higher capacity.

             4. Terraces allow the exercise of choice of company.

             5. Taylor failed to grasp that football is a social
                occasion.



                                29
             6. Supporters want a choice between standing and
                sitting, but prefer standing in general.

pgs 18 - 23 V New safe terraces

             1. Safe terracing is possible.
             2. Safer terracing since the Taylor report.
             3. Post-Taylor improvements are not enough.
             4. The design of terraces         has   never   received
                sufficient attention.
             5. Existing terraces are poorly-designed.
             6. Safe terraces are expensive but recoup their cost.

             7. The FLA should develop research and guidelines.
             8. Sightlines for converted terraces are often
                unsuitable.
             9. Gentle rakes are dangerous.

            10. Steep rakes can be dangerous.
            11. The characteristics of stepped terracing.
            12. Stepped terracing gives a better view and a safer
                position.
            13. Stepped terracing reduces crowd density.
            14. The size and frequency of gangways.

            15. The possibility of 'leaning posts' on terracing.

            16. Roofs and costs.

            17. The phasing-out of pens,      perimeter fencing and
                moats.

            18. Stepped terracing needs development work.
            19. The provision of refreshment and the late rush to
                enter the ground.

pgs 24 - 25 VI Tampering with the all-seater dogma

             1. Different policies for smaller as against bigger


                                  30
                clubs.
             2. Terracing at smaller grounds   is often even more
                dangerous.

             3. The anomalies in any Division - based approach.

             4. A tailored approach would be better.

pgs. 25 - 27 VII Re-drawing Taylor's Recommendation

             1. The FSA submission on regional all-seater stadia.
             2. Only exceptionally attractive fixtures need all-
                seater stadia and additional safety.

             3. All-seating contributed to the break-up of the
                league.

             4. Taylor mis-read the attraction of football.

             5. Support for the guiding spirit        of   the Taylor
                Report.

             6. The unthinking adoption of all-seating.

             7. The change in public opinion since 1989.




                               31
