                                                                R tf?
o
                                                                   A*




             Tribunals of Inquiry
         set up under the Tribunals
       of Inquiry (Evidence) Act 1921
       Government views on the Recommendations
        of the Royal Commission on Tribunals of
      Inquiry and the Interdepartmental Committee
          on the Law of Contempt as it affects
                  Tribunals of Inquiry




                      Presented to Parliament by the
               Secretary of State for the Home Department
                 and the Secretary of State for Scotland
                       by Command of Her Majesty
                                M ay 1973




                             LONDON
         H E R M A J E S T Y ’S S T A T IO N E R Y O F F IC E
                                16p net
Cmnd. 5313




                                                                        I
SBN   10   153130   3
(




                                                           CONTENTS
                                                                                                                             Page
     C ha pter      I.   I n t r o d u c t i o n ......................................................
                                                                                                                                5
     C h a pter II.      A ppo in tm en t a n d U se of T ribunals of I n q uiry                                                6
    C ha pter III.       P ro ced ure of T ribu na ls                         ............................................     7
    C h a pter     IV.   P ublicity a n d th e L a w of C ontem pt                                                             13
    C ha pter V.         Sh o u l d there be a n A ppe a l from th e F in d in g s of the
                           T r ib u n a l ? ......................................................
                                                                                                                              16
    C ha pter V I.       R ecommendations r e q u ir in g L e g is l a t io n ..............................                  17



    A ppe n d ix A       T ribu na ls of I nq u iry (E vidence ) A c t 1921

    A ppe n d ix   B     Sum m ary of C onclusions a n d R ecommendations of the
                           R oyal C ommission on T ribunals of I n q u ir y . 1966
    A ppe n d ix C       Sum m ary o f C onclusions a n d R ecommendations of the
                           I nterdepartm ental C ommittee on th e L a w of C ontem pt
                           as it affects T ribu na ls of I n q u ir y . 1969




                                                                                                                                    I;
                                                                                                                                        j




                                                                                                                                    1
                    CHAPTER I.       INTRODUCTION

   1 In February 1966 a Royal Commission was set up under the
chainnanship of Lord Justice Salmon “ to review the working of the
Tribunals of Inquiry (Evidence) Act 1921 and to consider whether it should
be retained or replaced by some other procedure, and, if retained, whether
any changes are necessary or desirable.” The report of this Commission
was published in November 1966 (Cmnd. 3121).

    2 While the previous Government was still considering the recom­
mendations made by the Commission, there was criticism of a statement
made in the House of Commons by the then Attorney General that comment
in public on matters which it was the function of the Aberfan Tribunal to
investigate might be subject to the law of contempt. Since this was not a
matter considered by the Royal Commission an Interdepartmental Com­
mittee, also under the chairmanship of Lord Justice Salmon, was appoin e
in 1968 “ to inquire into the law of contempt as it affects comment on, or
 statements about, matters referred to a tribunal of inquiry under the
 Tribunals of Inquiry (Evidence) Act 1921 and the interviewing of potential
 witnesses concerning such matters        It was then decided by the Govern­
 ment that action on the Royal Commission’s recommendations should be
 delayed until the Committee’s report was received so that all the matters relat­
 ing to Tribunals of Inquiry constituted under the 1921 Act could to considered
 together. In this Paper all references to “ Tribunals ” and to Tribunals of
  Inquiry” are to Tribunals of Inquiry appointed under the Tribunals of
  Inquiry (Evidence) Act 1921, and all references to an “ Inquiry are to an
  Inquiry conducted by such a Tribunal.

     3.      The Committee reported in June 1969 (Cmnd. 4078) and the then
 Home Secretary announced in the House of Commons that the Government
 thought that in principle the Committee’s recommendations represented an
 acceptable limit to the operation of the law of contempt, that the matter
 would be considered in greater detail with particular regard to whethe
 legislation was appropriate, and that a further statement would be ma e. n
 June 1971, the present Government appointed a Committee under me
  chairmanship of Lord Justice Phillimore to consider the law and practice
  relating to contempt of court in general. The Committee has not yet
  reported, but it seems unlikely that its recommendations will significantly
  affect the conclusions of Lord Justice Salmon’s Committee in the restricted
  sphere of the law of contempt in its relation to Tribunals.

      4      The purpose of this Paper is to set out in detail the Government s
  views on the recommendations of both the Royal Commission and the
  Interdepartmental Committee and to describe the legislation necessary to
  put some of these recommendations into effect. Where legislation is not
  required, the Paper is intended to serve as a guide to_ future Tribunals in
  the conduct of their inquiries. In the preparation of this Paper the Govern­
  ment has had the benefit of the advice and e x p e r i e n c e of Lord Widgery
  Lord Justice Scarman and Lord Justice James, each of whom has acted
   as chairman of a recent Tribunal set up under the Act.


         140589
  ( E v M e n ^ A c f iq tlt0 ? a Pap®r . give! the text of the Tribunals of Inquiry
  (Evidence) Act 1921 and Appendices B and C set out all the recommenda-
    ns made respectively by the Royal Commission and the Interdepartmental
  aC hanw
     ^ T o r^n w T th e *appointment
                            *?!*** and
                                     ^             ^      -o m m e n d S fT S
                                            uses of Tribunals of Inquiry
 Chapter III covers recommendations which relate to the procedure
 T rib u n a l Chapter IV examines the application of the law of contemnt
 and the publicity to be given to the work of Tribunals. Chapter V deals
 with the question whether there should be an appeal from the findings of
 the Tribunal, Chapter VI sets out the points which require l e g i s l a S




      CHAPTER II.       APPOINTMENT AND USES OF TRIBUNALS
                              OF INQUIRY

  _ 6. The Government accepts the recommendation of the Roval
 Commissionthat the use of Tribunals of Inquiry should be limited to m a te s
 of vital public importance concerning which there is something of a nation-
 wide crisis of confidence which renders any other method of investigation
 inadequate. It _also _accepts the unsuitability of certain other tvpes of
 inquiry for dealing with matters of this kind (Appendix B 1 2 4 5 7 8V
              ° l the kind.^ f S6Cret     without formal procedures for
taking evidence or examining witnesses, conducted in the Profumo case
and notes the Commission’s recommendation that such an inquiry should
never again be set up (B. 6).                              4 y snouia

     7. The Commission reported before the legislation providing for the
 ppomtment of the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration was
passed and it did not, therefore, consider his role in relation to Tribunals of
 n q u i^. The function of the Parliamentary Commissioner is to t a f e a t e
allegations of maladministration by Government Departments and in normal
ctfcumstances he will be the person best equipped to deal with allegations
nf 1 i h      - ♦ ? th K6 may StiU be circumstances in which an allegation
of maladministration by a Government Department is, or is linked with a
matter of such gravity that the appointment of a Tribunal of Inquiry’ is
necessary to allay public disquiet.                                   nquiry is

    8. It is accepted that the power to set up a Tribunal should continue
to be exercised only on a resolution of both Houses of Parliament (B 26)
The selection of persons to serve on the Tribunal should continue to rest
with the Government of the day and should not become a matter for p u E
debate in Parliament (B. 28).                                      P udiic

   9. The Commission’s arguments in favour of terms of reference which
are drawn precisely enough to identify the specific matter which is causing
a r r a ^ L p t e d ^ B . ^ S S ) ^ S° narrowly that the Tribunal is fettered.

                                       6
     10. The Government recognises the force of the Commission’s arguments
that the Chairman of the Tribunal should be a person holding high judicial
office (B. 27). Not only should this serve to ensure that the Inquiry is
conducted impartially and efficiently, and the judicious exercise of the
Tribunal’s powers of compulsion, but such a person should be best able,
through the experience of his office, to protect the interests of witnesses in
circumstances and procedures which are strange to many in this country, and
inherently difficult. The Government agrees that in most cases it would be
right to follow this recommendation. Nevertheless it thinks that there would
be advantage in allowing an exception to be made in a particular case if there
were unusual circumstances to warrant it.

    11. The Government considers that there would normally be advantage,
and especially so when the Tribunal is inquiring into the conduct of members
of a particular service, profession or calling, or where it is required to deal
with issues of a specialised, technical nature, in its including persons, other
than lawyers, with relevant experience or qualifications.




            CHAPTER III.      PROCEDURES OF TRIBUNALS

The need for flexibility
     12. It follows from the prerequisite that Tribunals should be set up
only sparingly and in very special circumstances that their subject matter is
liable to be specialised and highly variable. The approach and procedure
will, therefore, need to be adapted to the special character of the Inquiry.
The need for maximum flexibility and the desire to avoid any unnecessary
delay which might be caused by alleged breaches of statutory Rules are
accepted as strong reasons for not having statutory Rules of Procedure for
Tribunals of Inquiry (B. 25). The Government considers that with the Report
of the Royal Commission and this White Paper to guide them, Tribunals can
be relied upon to follow acceptable procedures without being bound by any
rigid and detailed code of procedure.

Preliminary arrangements
    13. The Government agrees with the Commission that any kin rj of
preliminary hearing of evidence in private, whether by some agency other
than a Tribunal of Inquiry to decide whether there is sufficient material for
investigation by a Tribunal, or by the Tribunal itself to decide whether
there is a prima facie case against any of the persons concerned, would be
inappropriate (B. 35). (This would not prevent the Government of the day
from causing an informal inquiry to be made before it moved a resolution
to set up a Tribunal under the Act.) The Commission recommends instead
that more time should be given to the preparation of an Inquiry before public
hearings begin (B. 10) and that this time should be used to define allegations
and to discard irrelevant material (B. 35). The Government accepts these
recommendations as objectives to be achieved to the greatest extent
practicable {paragraphs 18-20 below).

                                      7
      140589                                                        B*   2
                                                                                 I
      14. The Government also accepts that the Tribunal should hold one or
 more preliminary meetings in public at the earliest opportunity to explain its
 interpretation of its terms of reference and to give directions as to procedure
 and intended lines of inquiry (B. 34,40). Where the terms of reference contain
 words the construction of which is open to argument, the Tribunal should
 decide whether or not to hear arguments on behalf of interested persons and
 by counsel for the Tribunal before announcing the interpretation to be
 adopted. The Tribunal should also deal with applications for representation.
 Thp more clearly it is possible to set out in the preliminary meetings the
 main issues likely to arise in the course of the Inquiry, the easier it will be
 on the one hand for the Tribunal to identify the interested parties and the
 nature of their interest, to identify possible allegations and to decide questions
 of representation; and on the other hand for the potential witness to prepare
 his case.
 Legal representation of the Tribunal
    15. It is agreed that in England and Wales the Treasury Solicitor
should continue to be appointed as the solicitor acting for the Tribunal
(B. 36) and that in Scotland it would be preferable for the Tribunal to be
represented officially rather than by a private firm of solicitors: the choice
would normally lie between the Crown Agent and the Solicitor to the
Secretary of State for Scotland.
     16. The Commission recommends that the Tribunal should n o m in a te,
 counsel other than a Law Officer of the Crown to act on its behalf (B. 38,
 39). The Government considers, however, that the Tribunal should be free’
to choose its own counsel, and should neither be restricted in its choice to
counsel other than a Law Officer of the Crown, nor be obliged to select a
Law Officer. The Tribunal should consult the Attorney-General or the
Lord Advocate before deciding whether or not a Law Officer should appear,
and also about the choice of other counsel for the Tribunal. If it is decided
that a Law Officer should appear, he might take a full part in the proceedings,
or he might in appropriate cases confine his appearance to opening the
particular issues involved in the terms of reference, and thereafter being
available to the Tribunal to deal with specific matters such as contempt,
waiver of Crown privilege and the grant of immunity from prosecution.
Accordingly, the Government does not accept the Commission’s
recommendations in this matter (B. 38, 39).
The six cardinal principles
    17. The Commission accepts that the risks of hurt and injustice to
persons involved in an Inquiry are inherent in, and cannot be eliminated
from, any procedure which is effective for arriving at the truth. However, it
sets out cardinal principles to be strictly observed to minimise those risks
(B. 3). These a re :
     (i) Before any person becomes involved in an Inquiry, the Tribunal
         must be satisfied that there are circumstances which affect him and
         which the Tribunal proposes to investigate.
    (ii) Before any person who is involved in an Inquiry is called as a
         witness he should be informed of any allegations which are made
         against him and the substance of the evidence in support of them.

                                       8




                                                                                      I
#
      (iii) (a) He should be given an adequate opportunity of preparing hiscase
               and of being assisted by legal advisers.
           (b) His legal expenses should normally be met out of public funds.
      (iv) He should have the opportunity of being examined by his own
           solicitor or counsel and of stating his case in public at the Inquiry.
    (v) Any material witnesses he wishes called at the Inquiry should, if
        reasonably practicable, be heard.
   (vi) He should have the opportunity of testing by cross-examination
        conducted by his own solicitor or counsel any evidence which may
        affect him.
The Government accepts that the six principles, and the recommendations
which give substance to them (B. 12 to B. 21), should be used as guide-lines
to be followed wherever it is practicable to do so; but it considers that
there will be circumstances in which certain of the principles will be
capable of being observed only in the spirit, and not in the letter, as
appears from the following comments.

(i) Involvement in an Inquiry
     18. It is desirable to distinguish, as regards the involvement of persons
in the Inquiry, between the giving of a statement to the solicitor to the
Tribunal and appearance as a witness before the Tribunal itself. At the
beginning of an Inquiry the Tribunal will normally call on all persons who
think they may have evidence relevant to the Inquiry to inform the Secretary
of the Tribunal, indicating the nature of that evidence. It is the duty of
the solicitor to the Tribunal to interview and obtain statements from these
and other persons who have information relevant to the Inquiry. The
Tribunal decides in the light of these statements which persons should be
called as witnesses to give evidence and what material is extraneous to the
Inquiry and can be excluded from it. It is therefore normal and, indeed,
 inevitable that many more persons should give statements to the solicitor to
 the Tribunal than eventually appear as witnesses before it and since both the
 statements and the fact that a person has given a statement remain
 confidential, there should be no risk of injustice or loss of reputation involved
 in this preliminary sifting process.

         19. Subject to this, the Government agrees that before the Tribunal
    hears evidence from a witness in an Inquiry, it should be satisfied that
    there are circumstances which affect him and which the Tribunal proposed
    to investigate (B. 3 (i)). But a person’s involvement wil not always depend on
    the Tribunal. He may ask permission to be represented because he considers
    himself at risk of being prejudicially affected by the Inquiry or he may be
    mentioned by another witness in evidence. While, therefore, the Tribunal
    must be generally responsible for deciding who should be interviewed and
    asked for statements, what material should be excluded, and who should
     be prevented from being unnecessarily involved, these questions may not
     always be entirely within its control. Some related aspects of the question
     of the involvement of witnesses are dealt with in paragraphs 29 and 30 below.

                                          9
                                                                              ♦
(ii) Making of allegations
    20. The principle that a person who is called before the Tribunal should
be informed in advance of the allegations against him and the substance of
the evidence in support of them (B. 3 (ii)) is a desirable objective but raises
a number of difficult issues in practice. For instance, the very nature of
the Inquiry under its terms of reference may be an investigation of what if
any allegations can be made and proved against whom: in this event it
may well be impossible to identify at the stage before evidence is called
either the precise nature of the allegations or the persons against whom
allegations can be made. Secondly, it is not justifiable to make “ fishing ”
allegations against individuals, groups or bodies without supporting evidence
of fault. Thirdly, witnesses cannot have an unqualified right to such
information because it is essential that the Tribunal should have discretion
not only as to the form of the disclosure (B. 13) but also as to the matter
to be disclosed. It is an important duty of the Tribunal to exclude material
that is extraneous to the investigation, but this is often a difficult line to
 draw : the Tribunal must retain full responsibility and discretion as to where
it is drawn and what evidence is used. This is another important safeguard
against a person becoming involved unnecessarily in an Inquiry.

   21. The Government suggests that the course to be adopted should be
as follows. When it is practicable to do so, the Tribunal should inform
any person called as a witness who is likely to have allegations made against
him of the nature of those allegations, insofar as it is known, and of the
substance of the evidence in support of them. That information when it is
available should be given in writing before such a person is called to give
evidence and he should be given an adequate opportunity of obtaining legal
advice and of preparing his case beforehand. In any event, where fresh
evidence or allegations emerge in the course of an Inquiry the person likely
to be concerned should be given a comparable opportunity (so far as
consistent with the need to avoid prolonging the proceedings to an extent
prejudicial to the public interest or the interests of other persons involved)
of obtaining legal advice and of preparing his case before having to deal with
such evidence and allegations.


(iii) (a) Legal representation of witnesses
     22.     The next of the Commission’s cardinal principles is that a witness
should have adequate opportunity of preparing his case and of being
assisted by legal advisers and that his legal expenses should normally be
met out of public funds (B. 3 (iii)). The Government accepts the
Commission’s recommendation that the 1921 Act should be amended so
that anyone called as a witness should have the right to be legally represented
(B. 15). It considers that it should ultimately be a matter for the witness’s
own choice whether he should be represented separately or with others,
and that considerations of public cost should not be allowed to prejudice
that decision; but that the right to representation should be qualified by a
discretion in the Tribunal to ascertain and prescribe the particular issues
in which the applicant for representation is an interested person. The

                                       10
Tribunal should also have a discretion to allow anyone to be legally
represented who is not a witness but who claims to be an interested person
in that he is at risk of being prejudicially affected by the Inquiry (B. 16).


(iii) (b) Payment of witnesses’ costs
     23.     The Commission recommends that the Act should be amended so as
to include a provision empowering the Tribunal to order payment of all
or any proportion of a witness’s costs out of public funds and that once the
Tribunal had made an order for costs in favour of a witness, he should
receive them as of right and not ex gratia (B. 19). It also recommends that
the relevant statutes and regulations should be amended to enable the
Tribunal to grant legal aid to a witness whose financial position qualified
him for it (B. 21). While the Government agrees that it should be possible
 for witnesses to recover costs as of right and not ex gratia as at present (B. 19),
 it thinks that the best way of achieving this is to enable the Tribunal to
 make orders as to costs at the outset of its proceedings, or, in the case of a
 witness who became connected with the Inquiry at a later stage, in time for
 that witness to be able to count on an order before making his arrangements
 for representation. The power to make an advance order for costs, which
 will require legislation, will be as effective for the purpose of providing^ legal
 representation as the power to grant legal aid, but will be less complicated
  and will avoid introducing attributes of the legal aid scheme into the Tribunal
  procedure.

     24.     The Government shares the Commission’s views on how the
 Tribunal’s discretion in respect of costs should be exercised, except that the
 discretion proposed to be given to the Tribunal to prescribe the particular
 issues on which an applicant for representation is an interested party should
 dispose of the need for costs to be withheld on grounds of unnecessary
 or frivolous representation. The Tribunal will nevertheless still require
 power for other reasons, such as deliberate obstruction or unwarranted delay
 by a witness, to revoke or suspend costs already granted (B. 20), and the
 level and extent of reimbursement will be subject to the discretion of the
 Tribunal.

 (iv) Examination by own solicitor or counsel
     25. The Government accepts the Commission’s recommendation (B. 17)
 that where a witness is legally represented, he should be examined by his
 own counsel or solicitor on his statement to the solicitor to the Tribunal.
 It also agrees that a witness should, if he wishes and time permits, have his
 own legal adviser present when his statement is taken by the Treasury
 Solicitor.

     26. The Government accepts that when a witness is not represented, he
  should be examined and re-examined by one of the counsel for the Tribunal
  and that no witness should be examined and cross-examined by the same
  counsel.

                                         11
                                                                             ♦
(v) Right to have other evidence called
    27. The Government accepts the Commission’s recommendation that,
subject to the discretion of the Tribunal, a witness should have the right to
have evidence called on his behalf by counsel for the Tribunal (B. 18).

(vi) Cross-examination of other witnesses by own counsel or solicitor
    28. The Commission envisaged that the Tribunal should give leave,
in its discretion, to counsel representing interested persons to cross-examine
a witness after he had been cross-examined by counsel for the Tribunal and
before he was finally re-examined by his own counsel. This is acceptable.

Revelation of sources
    29. The Commission recommended, in the context of evidence given
by the Press, that Tribunals should insist on the revelation of sources of
information only where this was of vital importance, and that they should
then explain fully to the witnesses concerned why the information was vital
to the Inquiry (B. 46). This recommendation also has some relevance to
the question of the necessary involvement of witnesses (paragraph 18 above).
The Government accepts this recommendation, both in its application to the
Press and in its wider implications.

Reporting of unfounded allegations
    30. The Government fully supports the Commission’s recommendation
that the Tribunal should give particular emphasis in its report to cases where
allegations against witnesses or interested persons are shown to be
unfounded (B. 49). This is a natural corollary to the concern that no one
should be involved unnecessarily.

Criminal records
    31. The Commission recommends that the criminal records of persons
involved in the Inquiry should be made available to the Tribunal, which will
decide in its discretion whether such evidence may be used in cross-
examination (B. 24). The Government accepts the Commission’s arguments
in favour of this recommendation and agrees that particulars of any previous
convictions should be given to the Tribunal. The 1921 Act will accordingly
be amended to provide statutory authority for providing the Tribunal with
this information.

Other matters concerning the conduct of the Inquiry
    32. The Government agrees that the Tribunal should decide, in its
discretion, whether an opening statement should be made by counsel
appearing for it and that counsel for any witness should have the opportunity
of making a short speech following the opening speech by counsel for the
Tribunal (B. 23).

    33. All witnesses are the Tribunal’s witnesses and the order in which
they are called and in which interested persons put their case must be for the

                                      12




                                                                                 V
Tribunal’s decision. Save in exceptional circumstances, the final speech
should be made by counsel for the Tribunal.

    34. The Tribunal should decide, in its discretion, whether a witness
against whom allegations have been made in the course of the Inquiry should,
particularly if he is not separately represented, be given the opportunity
to make a short statement at the close of his evidence to bring out any
relevant factors which have not been dealt with during his evidence.

Immunities
   35. The Government accepts, and intends to bring into effect by
amendments to the 1921 Act, the recommendations of the Commission that
members of Tribunals should have immunity, similar to that enjoyed by a
Superior Court of Record, for anything said by them in the course of the
Inquiry or in their report (B. 29) and that solicitors, counsel and others should
have immunity for what they may say before the Tribunal (B. 31).

    36. Section 1 (3) of the 1921 Act entitles a witness to the same immunities
and privileges as if he were a witness before the High Court or the Court of
Session. The Commission recommended that the witness’s immunity should
be extended so that neither his evidence or statement to the solicitor to the
Tribunal, nor documents he is required to produce, shall be used against him
in subsequent civil or criminal proceedings except where he is charged with
giving false evidence before the Tribunal, or with conspiring with or
procuring others to do so. The Commission recognised that if a witness
was granted immunity as far as the use of his evidence in any subsequent
civil or criminal proceedings against him was concerned, it would be difficult
for him to refuse to answer any question on the ground that it might tend
to incriminate him. This proposal is acceptable.

Accommodation
   37. The Government accepts its responsibility for providing adequate
accommodation for the Tribunal (B. 41).



    CHAPTER IV.        PUBLICITY AND THE LAW OF CONTEMPT

Discretion of Tribunals to sit in private
    38. Section 2 of the 1921 Act prohibits the exclusion of the public
from hearings “ unless in the opinion of the Tribunal it is in the public
interest expedient so to do for reasons connected with the subject matter
of the inquiry or the nature of the evidence to be given    In the past this
has been interpreted as requiring hearings to be held in public except when
this would constitute a security risk.

    39. The Government recognises the force of the Commission’s arguments
in favour of allowing the Tribunal a wider discretion to hear evidence in
private and accepts both its recommendation that the Tribunal should have

                                        13
         this wider discretion (B. 45) and its view that section 2 can be interpreted
         as giving the Tribunal power to hear evidence in private in all the circum­
         stances where this might be considered necessary. The Government sees no
         reason why future Tribunals need regard themselves _as fettered by the
         practice of their predecessors in this respect and accordingly does not think
          that the law needs amending in order to allow them this greater freedom.

         Reporting of proceedings
            40.      Since, in spite of this wider discretion, Inquiries will still ordinarily
         be held in public, it seems right that those members of the public not able
         to attend the hearings in person should be entitled to be kept informed
         by the Press of what is taking place. The Government therefore accepts the
         recommendation that proceedings should be conducted generally in public
         and reported day by day in the Press (B. 43).

             41 It is unlikely that anyone would dissent from the recommendation
         that the greatest care should be taken by the Press when reporting the
         hearings of the Tribunal (B. 44). It is not less important that care should
         be exercised in Press reports during the period between the announcement
         of a decision to set up the Tribunal and the actual hearings particularly
         in relation to the comments of persons who are likely to be asked to
         give evidence to the Tribunal. For in the immediate aftermath of the kmd of
          event that leads to the setting up of the Tribunal, the persons concerned may
          not yet have had time to consider fully either what they are saying or the
          implications of saying it. The character and career of an individual^may
          suffer irreparable damage by the publicity given to his remarks and the
          truth may be unintentionally concealed by an ill-considered statement to the
          Press that the person concerned may later find it embarrassing to retract.

             42.      All these considerations apply equally to the other mass media of
          communication, broadcasting and television. While free reporting in the
          Press, broadcasting or television must not in any way be fettered, those
          concerned in all these media should bear in mind how much harm to the
          individual and damage to the interests of justice can be done by carelessness
          and thoughtlessness when reporting events during this critical period.

           Limitations imposed by the law of contempt
               43 The Government accepts without reservation the assumption which
           was implicit in the report of the Royal Commission and made explicit in the
           first recommendation of the Interdepartmental Committee, that the law of
           contempt does apply to Tribunals of Inquiry. The Committee recommended
           however that the law of contempt should not prohibit or curtail anycommen
           at any time about the subject matter of the inquiry (C. 3). This is in
           keeping with the principle that there should be free reporting of the Proceed­
           ings and the Government accepts it fully, subject to the two following
            recommendations (C. 4, 5) that it should be a contempt if any person after
            the Tribunal is appointed says or does anything, or causes anything to b
            said or done, in relation to any evidence relevant to the subject ma«er of
     j
            the inquiry which is intended or obviously likely to alter, distort, destroy
\,

                                                   14




                                                                                                 V
or withhold such evidence from the Tribunal, and that the chairman of the
Tribunal in his discretion may make a request that no interview with certain
named persons whom he regards as especially vulnerable shall be published,
without imposing a legal obligation to comply with such a request. As the
Committee says, anyone who ignored such a request would know that he
was treading on dangerous ground and legal sanctions other than those
available under the law of contempt are unnecessary.

Application of the law of contempt
    44. In the Government’s view there can also be no doubt about the
Committee’s recommendation that the law of contempt should apply only
as from the date of the instrument appointing the Tribunal (C. 2). It is
difficult to see how a contempt can be committed in relation to a non­
existent body; and although there may be a risk of undesirable publicity
between the time when the intention to set up the Tribunal has been
announced and its appointment, the Government agrees with the Committee
that this is a price worth paying in return for certainty as to the moment
at which commentators are at risk : a moment which, as the Committee points
out, should not depend on anything so unpredictable as to whether at some
future date a Tribunal will be appointed under the 1921 Act.

     45. Section 1 (2) (c) of the 1921 Act provides that any person may be
punished by the High Court, or in Scotland the Court of Session, as if he
had been guilty of contempt of the court if he does anything which would,
if the Tribunal had been a court of law having power to commit for contempt,
have been contempt of that court. In view of this, the Government considers
that the Committee’s recommendation that any unjustifiable attack upon the
integrity of any member of the Tribunal in his capacity as a member of
the Tribunal (C. 6) and that anything said or done in the face of the Tribunal
which would, if the Tribunal had been a court of law having power to
commit for contempt, have been contempt of court (C. 7) should be a
contempt, describes the effect of the existing law, having regard to the terms
of section 1 (2) of the Act.

    46. The Government does not share the view of the Committee (C. 8)
that section 1 (2) of the Tribunal of Inquiry (Evidence) Act 1921 needs to
be amended to put the recommendations relating to contempt into effect.
One disadvantage of attempting to clarify this section as proposed by the
Committee is that what is not specifically included in the section will be
assumed to be excluded, which means that a Tribunal would be powerless to
deal< with any unforeseen circumstances which might arise. The most
substantial amendment would be the proposed addition to section 1 (2)
of the subsection relating specifically to anything said or done which is
“ intended or obviously likely ” to alter, distort, destroy or withhold evidence
from the Tribunal. But the question whether any particular statement
or action is intended or obviously likely to do anything is so much a
matter for subjective judgment that it seems unlikely that such a provision
would afford any real guidance as to the circumstances in which a contempt
would be committed. If a provision could be drafted which had the

                                       15
                                                                                      c
element of certainty necessary to offer such guidance, it WQuM h a v e the
disadvantage just described; unless it introduces the element of certainty
is superfluous.
   47.      In these circumstances, the Government considers that the 1921
Act is better left unamended, especially since future Tribunals
the benefit of the Committee’s report to serve as a guide t o '
they are considering whether any particular action should be treated as
a contempt.
Procedure for committal for contempt                             , t .
   48 The Government agrees with the Royal Commission that the
present procedure whereby cases of contempt ™
Court or the Court of Session on the certificate of the Tribunal snouia
continue to be followed (B. 47) and that questions <         p a° t o n
for contempt should in no circumstances be referred back to Parlia



     CHAPTER V               SHOULD TH ERE BE AN APPEAL FROM THE
                           ' FINDINGS OF TH E TRIBUNAL?




  T r ib u n a l   believes and that it would be impossible   to   reverse such findings

                   s s w                                s r
  and confidence restored with the publication of the Report.
                                                                             “

        50         After careful consideration the Government has decided that the




   S e ru “               evidmce and procedure of the Tribunal to be t e m u t e d m

    L —               t      "       bf                            K p ^ jn d .   Where



                                                16
strictures which may appear jn the report are truly w a r r a n t e d hy the facts
adduced; and this is a verdict which should properly be left, not to an
appeal body, but to Parliament, to which the reports are presented and
by which it is customary for them to be debated.



CHAPTER VI. RECOMMENDATIONS REQUIRING LEGISLATION
   51. The recommendations to give effect to which the Government
considers legislation necessary are :
   {a) the right of witnesses to be legally represented (paragraph 22);
   0b) the power to make an advanceorder as to witnesses’               costs
        (paragraph 23);
   (c) the power to suspend or revoke such an order {paragraph 24),
   {d) the power to disclose previous convictions to theTribunal
         {paragraph 31);
   {e) immunity for members of Tribunals {paragraph 35),
     (/) immunity for solicitors, counsel and others {paragraph35),
    (g) immunity for witnesses {paragraph 36).

     52. A Bill giving effect to the recommendations listed above will be
 introduced when a suitable opportunity occurs.




                                          17
                                                                                c  i>

                                  a p p e n d ix a

r u Geo. 5.)       TRIBUNALS OF INQUIRY (EVIDENCE)                      [Ch. 7J
                              ACT, 1921

                                    C ha pter 7




      1921.]
Be it enacted by the King’s most Excellent Majesty, ^                     “^ “ s




     *•  <1,W heref f-
 commencement    of this rAct)
                            ^
                               by t T C
                                          .^   —
                                                  definite matter described in
 that a tribunal be established for                and in pursuance of the
 the Resolution as of urgen tp u b      p        ^ either by His Majesty or
 Resolution a tribunal is appointed       P P          ib   l is appointed or
  a Secretary of State the instrument *                       Act shall apply,
  any instrument ^pplem ental                 all such poWers, rights, and
  and in such case the tr Ju ™ 1             ^ Scotland the Court of Session,
  ^ f S e T ^ c h c L on the evasion of an action in respect of the

  “            r ^ c i -he attendance o, witnesses and examining th e * on
            oath, affirmation, or otherwise,
        (h\ The compelling the production of documents;
        (b) The compen g          y                 commission or request to
        (c) Subject to rules of court, uie issuing
            examine witnesses abroad;
   and a summons signed by one o r m o r e * the
   h ^ f i s S n ' S y ^ i o n for enforcing the attendance of witnesses and com-
   pelling the production of documents.


         S     m M n g 'd u ly summoned as a witness before a tribunal makes default


         („,                         -   a “         t *   £ £ £   any d S —       Tn




               that court;
                                               18
the chairman of the tribunal may certify the offence of that person under his
hand to the High Court, or in Scotland the Court of Session, and the court
may thereupon inquire into the alleged offence and after hearing any witnesses
who may be produced against or on behalf of the person charged with the
 offence, and after hearing any statement that may be offered m defence,
 punish or take steps for the punishment of that person m like manner as
 he had been guilty of contempt of the court.
   (3) A witness before any such tribunal shall be entitled to the same
immunities and privileges as if he were a witness before the High Court or the
Court of Session.
    2. A tribunal to which this Act is so applied as aforesaid
    (a) shall not refuse to allow the public or any portion of the public to be
        present at any of the proceedings of the tribunal unless m the opinio
        of the tribunal it is in the public interest expedient so to do tor
        reasons connected with the subject matter of the inquiry or the nature
        of the evidence to be given; and
    (b) shall have power to authorise the representation before them of any
        person appearing to them to be interested to be by counsel or solicitor
        or otherwise, or to refuse to allow such representation.

    3.      This Act may be cited as the Tribunals of Inquiry (Evidence) Act,
 1921.




                                         19
                                                                              o
                               APPENDIX B
    SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
      OF THE REPORT OF THE ROYAL COMMISSION ON
          TRIBUNALS OF INQUIRY 1966 (Cmnd. 3121)

    1. There is a need for standing legislation to permit the setting-up
whenever necessary of an inquisitorial tribunal and for this purpose the
Tribunals of Inquiry (Evidence) Act, 1921, subject to certain amendments
and safeguards, should be retained.
    2. The Act should not be invoked for matters of local or minor
importance, but confined to circumstances which occasion a nation-wide
crisis of confidence.
    3            The following cardinal principles should be observed to minimise the
risk of personal hurt and injustice to any person involved in the inquiries: —
      (i) Before any person becomes involved in an inquiry, the Tribunal must
           be satisfied that there are circumstances which affect him and which
           the Tribunal proposes to investigate.
      (ii) Before any person who is involved in an inquiry is called as a
           witness, he should be informed in advance of allegations against him
           and the substance of the evidence in support of them.
     (iii) (a) He should have adequate opportunity of preparing his case and
                 of being assisted by legal advisers.
            (b) His legal expenses should normally be met out of public funds.
     (iv) He should have the opportunity of being examined by his own
            solicitor or counsel and of stating his case in public at the inquiry.
      (v) Any material witnesses he wishes called at the inquiry should, if
            reasonably practicable, be heard.
       (vi) He should have the opportunity of testing by cross-examination
            conducted by his own solicitor or counsel any evidence which may
             affect him.
      4.        Investigation by Royal Commission would not afford a practicable
 alternative to procedure under the Act of 1921.
     5      Investigation of allegations of public misconduct should be free of
 political influence and Select Parliamentary Committees of Inquuy would
 accordingly be inappropriate for dealing with circumstances hitherto
 with under the Act.
     6.      No Government should in future set up a tribunal of the type adopted
 in the Profumo case to investigate any matter causing nation-wide public
 concern.
      7 The procedure followed by Departmental and Accident Inquiries
 would not be suitable for dealing with the special type of case which the Act
 was designed to meet.
      8.     Inquiry by the Security Commission could not be regarded as a
  suitable alternative to inquiry by a 1921 Act Tribunal.

                                         20
    9. Should the Security Commission or any other body require powers
of compulsion similar to those provided by the Act, they should be furnished
by separate enactment.

    10. More time than has been allowed in the past should be given to
the preparation of an inquiry before public hearings begin.

   11. A witness should, if he wishes, have his own legal adviser present
when his statement is taken by the Treasury Solicitor.

    12. Before giving his evidence in public, a witness should be supplied
with a document setting out the allegations against him, and the substance
of the evidence in support of those allegations.

    13. The form of disclosure of evidence to a witness should be in the
discretion of the Tribunal; and where fresh evidence or allegations emerge
in the course of the inquiry, the persons concerned should be given adequate
opportunity for meeting the new situation.

   14. In Scotland, a procedure similar to that followed in England, should
be adopted to permit the Tribunal to see the precognitions of witnesses.

   15. The Act should be amended so that anyone called as a witness would
have the right to be legally represented.

    16. The Tribunal should have a discretion to allow anyone to be legally
represented who is not a witness, but who claims to be an interested person
in that he is at risk of being prejudicially affected by the inquiry.

    17. When a witness is legally represented, he should be examined by his
own solicitor or counsel on his statement to the Treasury Solicitor. When
he is not represented, he should be examined by one of the counsel appearing
for the Tribunal. No witness should be examined and cross-examined by the
same counsel.

     18. Subject to the discretion of the Tribunal, a witness should have the
 right to have evidence called on his behalf by counsel for the Tribunal.

    19. The Act should be amended so as to include a provision empowering
 the Tribunal to order payment of a witness’s costs out of public funds.
 This would enable witnesses to receive costs as of right and not ex gratia.

     20. The Tribunal should deprive a witness of all or part of his costs if,
 in their view, there are good grounds for doing so.

     21.      The relevant statutes and regulations should be amended so as to
 permit a Tribunal to grant legal aid.

    22.      The Act should be amended so as to extend the present immunity
 conferred on a witness so that neither his evidence nor statement to the

                                      21
                                                                            C)
Treasury Solicitor, nor documents he is required to produce shall be used
against him in subsequent civil or criminal proceedings except where he is
charged with giving false evidence before the Tribunal, or conspiring with
or procuring others to do so.

    23. The Tribunal should decide, in its discretion, whether an opening
statement should be made by counsel appearing for it; and counsel for any
witness should have the opportunity of making a short speech following the
opening speech by counsel for the Tribunal.

   24. Criminal records of persons involved should be made availableto
the Tribunal, who will decide in their discretion whether such evidence may
be used in cross-examination.

   25. There should be no statutory rules of procedure, but Tribunals
should follow the general principles laid down in this report.

    26. The present procedure whereby the power to set up a Tribunal can
be exercised only on a resolution of both Houses of Parliament should be
retained.

   27. The Act should be amended so as to provide that the Chairman of a
Tribunal must be a person holding high judicial office; no requirement should
be laid down as to the status or qualifications of the remaining members,
but the possibility of a non-legal appointment should be considered.

    28. Members of a Tribunal should not be named or debated in the
 passage of the resolution through Parliament.

     29. The Act should be amended to provide immunity for members of
 Tribunals, similar to that enjoyed by a Superior Court of Record, for anything
 said by them in the course of the inquiry or in their report.

    30. Consideration should be given to conferring a similar immunity on
 persons appointed to conduct a Departmental inquiry.

    31. The Act should be amended to provide immunity for solicitors and
 counsel and others for what they may say before a Tribunal of Inquiry.

    32. The terms of reference of Tribunals should be drawn as precisely
 as possible.

     33. Tribunals should not be set up to investigate vague and unspecified
 rumours; equally, they should not be fettered by terms of reference which
 are too narrowly drawn.

    34. Tribunals should explain in public their interpretation of their
 terms of reference at the earliest opportunity.

                                       22
0
       35. A preliminary hearing of evidence in private, whether by the
    Tribunal or another agency would be inappropriate. The Tribunal should
    be afforded ample opportunity to define the allegations and discard irrelevant
    material before public hearings begin.                          ...........
        36. The Treasury Solicitor should continue to be appointed as the
    solicitor acting for the Tribunal.
        37. In Scotland, it would be preferable for the Solicitor for the Scottish
    Department or the Procurator Fiscal to act for the Tribunal rather than a
    private firm of solicitors.
       38. The Tribunal should nominate counsel other than a Law Officer
    of the Crown to be instructed by the Treasury Solicitor and to act on its
    behalf.
       39. It would be preferable for Tribunals in Scotland to be represented by
    independent counsel rather than the Lord Advocate or Solicitor-General.
         40'. The Tribunal should, at a preliminary meeting in public, give its
     interpretation of its terms of reference, and give directions as to procedure
     and intended lines of inquiry.
        41. Adequate accommodation should be provided for the inquiry.

      : 42. One of the team of counsel acting on behalf of the Tribunal should
     be available to examine and re-examine any witness not legally represented.
        43. Proceedings should be conducted generally in public and reported
     day by day in the Press.
        44.   The Press should exercise extreme care in reporting proceedings.

         45. Discretion of Tribunals to sit in private should be interpreted to
     extend beyond the hearing of evidence which would constitute a security
     risk; but nevertheless to be exercised with reluctance and only in most
     exceptional circumstances.
        46. Tribunals to insist on revelation of sources of information only where
     of vital importance, and to explain fully to witnesses concerned why the
     information is vital to the inquiry.
         47. Present procedure whereby cases of contempt are referred to the
      High Court on the certificate of a Tribunal should continue to be followed.

          48. Questions concerning committal for contempt should in no circum­
      stances be referred back to Parliament.
          49. Tribunals to give particular emphasis in their report to cases where
      allegations against witnesses or interested persons are shown to be unfounded.

          50. There should be no appeal from the findings of a Tribunal.

                                            23
                                                                              o
                                APPENDIX C

 SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF
 THE REPORT OF THE INTERDEPARTMENTAL COMMITTEE
   ON TH E LAW OF CONTEMPT AS IT AFFECTS TRIBUNALS
               OF INQUIRY. 1969 (Cmnd. 4078)

   1. The law of contempt in a clarified and modified form should continue
to apply to Tribunals of Inquiry appointed under the Act of 1921.

    2. The law of contempt should apply only as from the date of the
instrument appointing the Tribunal.

    3. The law of contempt in its application to Tribunals of Inquiry should
not prohibit or curtail any comment at any time about the subject matter
of the Inquiry.
   4. It should be a contempt if any person after a Tribunal is appointed
says or does anything, or causes anything to be said or done, in relation to
any evidence relevant to the subject matter of the Inquiry which is intended
or obviously likely to alter, distort, destroy or withhold such evidence from
the Tribunal.
    5. The chairman of a Tribunal in his discretion may make a request
that no interview with certain named persons whom he regards as especially
vulnerable shall be published without imposing a legal obligation to comply
with such a request.
    6. Any unjustifiable attack upon the integrity of any member of the
 Tribunal in his capacity as a member of the Tribunal should be a contemp .

    7. Anything said or done in the face of the Tribunal which would, if
 the Tribunal had been a court of law having power to commit for contempt
 have been contempt of court should be punishable as a contempt.

     8. The Tribunals of Inquiry (Evidence) Act, 1921 should be amended
 in order to carry out the foregoing recommendations.




                    Printed in England by H er M ajesty’s Stationery Office

                               3140589   D d. 141698   K30   5/73


                                   SBN     10   153130       3
