       Safety of Sports Grounds
                Act 1975
                          CHAPTER         52


             ARRANGEM ENT OF SECTIONS
Section
  1.      Safety certificates for large sports stadia.
  2.      Contents of safety certificates.
  3.      Applications for certificates.
  4.      Amendment etc. of certificates.
  5.      Appeals.
  6.      Regulations.
  7.      Determinations and appeals—supplementary.
  8.      Alterations and extensions.
  9.      Exclusion of other statutory requirements.
 10.      Emergency procedure.
 U,       Powers of entry and inspection.
 12.      Offences.
 13.      Civil liability.
 14.      Service of documents.
 15.      Power to extend Act by order.
 1$.      Application to Crown.
 17.      Interpretation.
 18.      Orders and regulations.
 19.      Short title, extent and commencement.




                                 A
                        ELIZABETH H                                c. 52                  1




   Safety of Sports Grounds
            Act 1975
                       1975 CHAPTER 52

An Act to make provision for safety at sports stadia and
  other sports grounds.                [1st August 1975]
     e it enactedby the Queen’s most Excellent M ajesty, by and

B    with the advice and consent o f the Lords Spiritual and
     Tem poral, and Commons, in this present Parliam ent
assembled, and by the authority o f the same, as follows:—

   1.__(1) T he Secretary of State may by order designate as a gafety
stadium r ^ S f f l ^ r ^ c e r t M B I e ' under "tfcis Act (in this A ct certificates
      a                          S S 'f lc a te ;•) any spom Stadium which
in his opinion has accommMa.fa9 n
spectators.                   “
   (2) The Secretary of State—
      (a) may estimate, by any means which he considers appro­
            priate, for how many spectators a sports stadium has
            accommodation; and
      (b) may require any person concerned with the organisation
            or management of a sports stadium to furnish him
            within such reasonable time as he may specify with
            such information as he considers necessary for the
            purpose of making such an estimate.
   (3) A safety certificate m a^b^,either—
       (a) a certificate issuedTby the local authority for the area in
             wMc! a stadium is situated in respect of the use of the
             stadium for an activity o r a number of activities speci­
             fied in the certificate during an indefinite period com­
             mencing with a date so specified; or
       (b) a certificate issued by that authority in respect of the
             use of the stadium for an activity or a number of
                                     A2
2               c. 52           Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975


                         activities specified in the certificate on an occasion or
                          series of occasions so specified.
                  (4) In this Act—
                    “ designated stadium ” means a stadium in respect of which
                         a designation order is in operation;
                    “ designation order ” means an order under this section;
                     “ general safety certificate ’’ means such a safety certificate
                         as is mentioned in subsection (3Ha) ab o v e; and
                    " special safety certificate ” means such a safety certificate
                         as is mentioned in subsection (3)(b) above.

Contents            2.— ( 1) A safety certificate shall contain such terms and
of safety
certificates   conditions as the local authority consider necessary or expedient
               to secure reasonable safety at the stadium when it is in use for
               the specihea activity or activities, and the terms and conditions
               may be such as to involve alterations or additions to the stadium.
                    (2) Without prejudice to subsection (1) above, a safety
                     tificate—
                        («) *Vlf snftrify the maximum number of spectators to be
                              "^-pitted to the stadium ;
                                   specify the maximum number to he admitted tr>
                               Afferent parts of I t ; and
                 | (c) shall include terms and conditions—
                 |         *■**‘ (i) as to the number, size and situation of entrances
                 |              to and exits from the stadium or any part of it
                  |             (including means of escape in case of fire or other
                   |            emergency) and the means of access to any such
                   |            entrances or exits ;
                    X              (ii) requiring those entrances, exits and means of
                     §          access to be properly m aintained and kept free from
                                obstruction; and
                                   (iii) as to. the number, strength a nd situation of
                                 any crush barners.                 —»            -
                   (3) W ithout prejudice to subsection (1) above, a safety cer­
               tificate may include a condition that the following records shall
               be kept—
                      (a) records of the attendance of spectators a t the sta d iu m ;
                           and
                      (b) records relating to the m aintenance of safety at the
                           stadium.
                  (4) A general safety certificate shall contain or have attached
                   it a pJan ot the stadium, and the terms and conditions in
               the certificate, or in any special safety certificate issued for the
               stadium, shall be framed, where appropriate, by reference to
               that plan.
                Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975               c. 52             3


   (5) A safety certificate may include different terms and
conditions in relation to different activTGesT^
   (6HSfoifiing TiT a "safety certificate shall derogate from any
requirements imposed by regulations under section 6 (2 ) below.

   3.     (i) if a local authority receive an application for a safety Applications
certificate for a designated stadium in their area, it shall be their tor cemncaw* .
duty to determine whether the applicant is a person likely to be
in a position to prevent contravention of the terms and conditions
of a certificate; and such a person is referred to in this Act as
a “ qualified person ”.
    (2) If a local authority determine that an applicant is a
qualified person—                                              . . .
       (a) where no general safety certificate for the stadium is in
             operation, they shall issue such a certificate for it to
             h im ; and
       (b) where a general safety certificate for the stadium is in
             operation, they may issue a special safety certificate
             for it to him.
    (3) T he loca1 ai1ffrftrity "illfl11 rami'1 ° ropy of an application              *
 for a gaiety rertificate for a stadium to the chief officer o ljo lic e   ^         .
 anrl thA HiNldlflS kulhoritv for the area in which it is situated,              ff±A*
 anVl shall rn n s iiirtB e n ra b o u t the terms anH conditions to_he      'A
 included in the certificate.
    -$) The local authority may by notice in writing require an
                                                                                I
 applicant for a safety certificate to furnish them within such
 reasonable time as they may specify in the notice with such
 information and such plans as they consider necessary to enable
 them to determine the terms and conditions which ought to be
 included in any certificate issued in response to his application.
     (5)      If an applicant for a safety certificate fails to comply with
  a requirement under subsection (4) above within the time
  specified by the local authority, or within such further time as
  they may allow, he shall be deemed to have withdrawn his
  application.
   4 . (l) The local authority_jH 3 y, in any case in which it Amendment
 appears appropnatTto them to do so—                              certificates.
      (а) apsnd a safety certificate by notice in writing to its
             ho ld er; or
       (б ) replace a safety certificate;.
    (2) A safety certificate m a y b e amended or replaced either
 on the application of the holder or without such an application.
   (3) Section 2 above shall apply on the amendment or replace-
  ment dTa safety certificate.
4              c. 52             Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975


                 (4 ) A notice under subsection (l)(a) above amending a general
               safety certificate shall specify the date on which the amendment
               to which it relates is to come into operation, and the date so
               specified may be a date later than the date of issue of the notice.
                   (5) If the local authority receive an application for the trans­
               fer of a safety certificate from the holder to some other person,
               it shall be their duty to determine whether that person is a
               qualified person; and if they so determine, they may transfer the
               certificate to him.
                   (6 ) An application under subsection (5) above may be made
                either by the holder of a safety certificate or by a person to
                whom it is proposed that it should be transferred.
                      (7) The local authority shall send a copy of an application
                   for the transfer of a safety certificate for a stadium to the
                   chief officer of police and the building authority for the area in
                   which it is situated.
                      (8) The local authority shall consult the chief officer of police

               1      and the building authority about any proposal to amend,
                      replace or transfer a safety certificate.
                       (9) The holder of a safety certificate may surrender it to the
                   local authority, and it shall thereupon cease to have effect.
                       (10) The local authority may cancel a safety certificate if the
                    holder dies or (if a body corporate) is dissolved.

    Appeals.         5 __ (i) A local authority shall serve on a person whom they
                   determine not to be a qualified person notice in writing of their
                   determination, and a person on whom such a notice is served
    fi>sQ M        may appeal against the determination to the Secretary of State.
                      (2 )  An applicant for a special safety certificate may also
                   appeal to the Secretary of State against a refusal of his applica­
     et. vJf       tion on grounds other than a determination that he is not a
                   qualified person.
           ■
                       H) An interested party may appeal to the Secretary of State
                    aeainst— ^
                        (i) the inclusion of anything in, or the omission of anything
                              from, a safety certificate ; or
                        (ii) the refusal of the local authority to amend or replace
                              a safety certificate.
                      (4 )    Before determining an appeal, the Secretary of State
                    shall, if the appellant, the local authority or an interested party
                    so desires, afford to the appellant, to the local authority and to
                    each interested party an opportunity of appearing before, and
                    being heard by, a person appointed by the Secretary of State
                    for the purpose.
               Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975             c.52                   5


  (5) In subsections (3) and (4) above “ interested party ”
includes—
     (a) the holder of a safety certificate ;
     (b) any other person who is or may be concerned in
           ensuring compliance with the terms and conditions of
           a safety certificate;                                /   .            -
     (c) the chief officer of polic e ; and           * KrfU /'W'-i
     (d) the building authority.
  (6 ) The Secretary of State may, if he considers it necessary,
appoint one or more persons to hold an inquiry in relation to an
appeal and to report to him.
   (7) Subsections (2) to (5) of section 250 of the Local Govern- 1972 c. 70.
ment Act 1972 or in Scotland subsections (2) to (8 ) of section 210
of the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973 shall apply in 1973 c. 65.
relation to an inquiry under this section as they apply in relation
to inquiries held for the purposes of those Acts.
   (8 ) On determining an appeal the Secretary of State may
give such directions to the local authority as he considers
appropriate to give effect to his determination; and the local
authority shall give effect to his directions.                 . .
                                                                     /VjJfcfcjL
  6.— (1) The Secretary of State may by regulations—              Regulations.
    (a) prescribe the procedure (subject to the provisions of
          this Act) for the issue, amendment, replacement,
         transfer and cancellation of safety certificates and the
         particulars to be given in applications for their issue,
         amendment, replacement or transfer;
    (b) authorise local authorities to determine, subject to such
         limits or in accordance with such provisions as may be
         prescribed by the regulations, the fees (if any) to be
         charged in respect of such applications; and
    (c) prescribe the procedure for appeals under section 5
        above, including, without prejudice to the generality
         of this paragraph, the time within which notice of an
         appeal is to be given and the manner in which an
         appeal is to be determined.
   (2) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision
for securing safety at sports grounds.
  (3) Regulations under subsection (2) above may provide, with­
out prejudice to its generality, that the following records shall
be kept—
     (a) records of the attendance of spectators a* sports
         grounds; and
6             c. 52             Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975


                      (b) records relating to the maintenance of safety at sports
                           grounds.
                 (4)   Regulations under this section may contain such incidental
              and supplementary provisions as the Secretary of State thinks
              expedient.

Determinations 7__ (1) Subject to subsection (2) below, if a local authority
and appeals— serve a notice under section 5(1) above on any person—
supplementary.       w^ en j1(. js an a ppjiciiHl for a safety certificate, he shall
                        be deemed to have withdrawn his application, and
                   {b) when he is the holder of a safety certificate, he shall
                        be deemed to have surrendered it,
              on the expiry of the period within which, by virtue of regulations
              under section 6 above, notice of an appeal against the authority’s
              determination may be given.
                 (2) Subsection (1) above shall not have effect if notice of
              appeal is given before the expiry of the period there mentioned,
              but if the notice is withdrawn or the Secretary of State upholds
              the authority’s determination, the appellant shall be deemed
              to have withdrawn his application or surrendered his certificate
              on the date of the withdrawal of his notice of appeal or of the
              Secretary of State’s determination.
                 (3) Where notice is given of an appeal against the inclusion
              of any term or condition in a safety certificate (whether it was
              included in the certificate originally or only on its amendment
              or replacement), the operation of that term or condition shall be
              suspended, subject to subsection (4) below, until the Secretary
              of State has determined the appeal.
                  (4) If the court is satisfied, on an application made by the
               local authority, that, pending the determination of an appeal,
               a term or condition the operation of which is suspended ought
               to be made immediately effective for the reasonable safety
               of persons at the stadium, the court may order that it shall be
               effective pending that determination.
                 (5) An application under subsection (4) above shall be
               made in England and Wales by complaint, and in Scotland by
               summary application.

Alterations       —( 1) It while a general saiety certmcate is in operation wnn
a^extension . respect to a stadium it is proposed to alter or extend that
                Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975              c. 52                 7


   (2)    Subsection (1) above in particular requires notice when it
is proposed to alter the entrances to or exits from a stadium or
any part of it (including any means of escape in case of fire or
other emergency) or the means of access to any such entrances
or exits.

  9 __ (I) While a general safety certificate is in force in relation Exclusion
to a stadium, the following provisions shall not apply to it, ^othcr^
that is to say                                                        requirements.
      (a) section 37(1) of the Public Health Aots Amendment Act 1890 c 59.
            1890 (platforms for public occasions);
      (b) sections 168 and 175 of the Burgh Police (Scotland) 1892 c. 55.
           Act 1892 and section 31 of the Burgh Police (Scotland) 1903 c. 33.
           Act 1903 (which make provision for the safety of the
           public in buildings and other places used for accom­
           modating a number of persons), in so far as those
           sections relate to any matter in relation to which
           requirements are imposed by the terms and conditions
           of the safety certificate ;
      (c) section 59 of the Public Health Act 1936 (exits, 1936 c. 49.
           entrances, etc. in the case of certain public and other
           buildings);
       (d) any provision of the Fire Precautions Act 1971 or 1971 c. 40.
           of a fire certificate issued under that Act in so far as
           it relates to any matter in relation to which require­
           ments are imposed by the terms and conditions of
            the safety certificate ; and
      (e) any provision of a local Act in so far as it relates to
            any matter in relation to which requirements are
            imposed by those terms and conditions.
   (2) Where any enactment provides for the licensing of premises
)  of any class or description and the authority responsible for
   licences thereunder is required or authorised to impose terms,
conditions or restrictions in connection with such licences, then,
so long as there is in operation with respect to the premises a
safety certificate covering the use of the premises by reason of
which a licence under that enactment is required, any term,
condition or restriction imposed with respect to those premises
in connection with any licence under that enactment shall be of
no effect in so far as it relates to any matter in relation to
which requirements are imposed by the terms and conditions of
that certificate.
    (3)   A person required by or under a local Act to do anything
 that would involve a contravention of the terms or conditions
 of a safety certificate shall not be treated as having contravened
 that Act if he fails to do it.
8                 c. 52                 Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975


Emergency            10 . (1) If the court is satisfied, on the application of the local
procedure.        authority, that the risk to spectators at a sports ground is so great
                  that, until steps have been taken to reduce it to a reasonable
                  level, their admission ought to be prohibited or restricted* the
                  court may by order prohibit or restrict, to the extent that the
                  court considers appropriate in the circumstances of the case, the
                  admission of spectators to the whole or any part of the ground,
                  until such steps have been taken as, in the opinion of the court,
                  are necessary to reduce the risk to a reasonable level.
                     (2) At any time when an order under subsection (IV above
                  is in operation, any person may apply to the court which made ^
                  the order for its cancellation or modification; and upon such ^
                  an application the court may order that it shall be cancelled, or
                  modified in such manner as may be specified by the court, from
                  such date as the court may specify.
                     (3) An application under subsection (1) or (2) above shall be
                   made in England and Wales by complaint, and in Scotland by
                   summary application.
                      (4) In England and Wales any of the following persons may
                   anneal to the Crown Court against an order under subsection
                   (1) or (2) above or the refusal of an application for such an
                   order, namely—
                         (a) the local authority ;
                         (b) any person who is concerned in the m anagem ent of
                               the sports ground in question or the organisation of
                               any activity th e re ;
                           (c) the chief officer of police ; and
                           (d) the building authority.
                     (5) In Scotland, it shall be competent for any of the following *
                   persons to appeal against an order m ade on an application under
                   this section or the refusal of such an application, namely
                        (a) the local authority ;
                         (b) any person who is concerned in the m anagem ent of the
                               sports ground in question or the organisation of any
                               activity th e re ;
                         (c) the chief officer of police ; and
                         (d) the building authority.                             .
                    notwithstanding that that person was not party to the proceedings
                    on that application.

    Powers of             11   .   A person authorised by—
    entry and              (a) the local authority ;
    inspection.
                           (/>) the chief ollicer of police :
                    Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975                 c. 52


          (c) the building authority ; or
     [    {<D the Secretary of State,
    may, on production if so required of his authority, en tera sports
    "Sound at any reasonable time, and maky such inspection of
     it and such inquiries relating to it as he considers necessary for
     the purposes of this Act, and in particular m a y examine records
     of attendance at the ground and records relating to the main­
      tenance of safety at the ground, and take copies of such records.

       12.— (1) Subject to subsection (4) below, if—                          Offenqes.
         (a) spectators are admitted to a designated stadium after
                the date on which the designation order relating to it
                comes into operation but at a time when no application
                for a general safety certificate in respect of it has been
                made or such an application has been made but has
                been withdrawn, or is deemed to have been withdrawn ,
                 or
          (.b )
                when  a general safety certificate is in operation in respect
                 of a stadium spectators are admitted to the Stadium on
                 an
                 ail occasion
                     UlAtaMUU when
                                wuwii it
                                      II is used for an activity.. to which.
                 neither the general safety certificate nor a special
                 safety certificate relates; or
           (c) spectators are admitted to a designated stadium on an
                 occasion when, following the surrender or cancellation
                  of a safety certificate, no safety certificate is in
                  operation in respect of that stadium , or                        .
            (d) any term or condition of a safety certificate is contra-
          — vened; or
      f t (e) spectators are admitted to a sports ground in contraven­
                  tion of an order under section 10 above,
t     any responsible person and, if a safety certificate is in operation,
      the holder of the certificate, shall be guilty of an offence.
        (2) In subsection (1) above “ responsible person” means a
      person who is concerned in the management of the stadium or
      other sports ground in question or the organisation of any
      activity taking place there at the time when an offence is alleged
      to have been committed.
         (3) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (1) above
       shall be liable—
            (a) on summary conviction, to a fine of not more than
                  £400; or
            (b) on conviction on indictment, to imprisonment for not
               " Tnore than two years or a fine or to botiT
c. 52           Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975


  (4) Where any person is charged with an offence under sub­
section ( 1) above it shall be a defence to prove—
     (a) that the spectators were admitted or the contravention
           of the certificate or order in question took place with­
           out his co n sen t; and
     (b) that he took all reasonable precautions and exercised
           all due diligence to avoid the commission of such an
           offence by himself or any person under his control.
  (5) Regulations under section 6(2) above may provide that a
breach of the regulations shall be an offence punishable as
provided by the regulations, but shall not provide that a person
guilty of such an offence shall be liable to punishments greater
than those specified in subsection (3) above.
   (6) Any person who—
      (a) without reasonable excuse, refuses, neglects or other­
            wise fails to comply with a requirement under section
           I (2) (ft) above within the time specified by the Secre­
           tary of S tate; or
      (b) in purporting to carry out such a requirement, or a
            requirement under section 3(4) above, or for the
           purpose of procuring a safety certificate or the amend­
           ment, replacement or transfer of a safety certificate,
           knowingly or recklessly makes a false statement or
           knowingly or recklessly produces, furnishes, signs or
           otherwise makes use of a document containing a false
           statem ent; or
      (c) fails to give a notice required by section 8 ( 1) ab o v e; or
      (d) wilfully obstructs any person in the exercise of powers
            under section 11 above, or without reasonable excuse
            refuses, neglects or otherwise fails to answer any
            question asked by any person in the exercise of such
            powers,
 shall be guilty of an offence and liable on summary conviction
 to a fine not exceeding £400.
  (7) Where an offence under this Act which has been com­
mitted by a body corporate is proved to have been committed
with the consent or connivance of, or to be attributable to any
neglect on the part of, a director, manager, secretary or other
similar officer of the body corporate, or any person who was
purporting to act in any such capacity, he, as well as the body
corporate, shall be guilty of that offence and be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
   (8) Where the affairs of a body corporate are managed by its
 members, subsection (7) above shall apply in relation to the acts
 and defaults of a member in connection with his functions of
 management as if he were a director of the body corporate.
                Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975            c. 52             11


  13.    Except in so far as this Act otherwise expressly p ro - civil liability,
vides, and subject to section 33 of the Interpretation Act 1889 1889 c. 63.
(offences under two or m ore laws), the provisions of this Act
shall not be construed as—
     (a) conferring a right of action in any civil proceedings
           (other than proceedings for the recovery of a fine) in
           respect of any contravention of this Act or of any
           regulations made under this Act or of any of the terms
           or conditions of a safety certificate ; or
      (b) affecting any requirement or restriction imposed by or
           under any other enactment whether contained in a
           public general Act or in a local or private A c t, or
      (c) derogating from any right of action or other remedy
            (whether civil or criminal) in proceedings instituted
            otherwise than under this Act.
   14.— (1) Any notice or other document required or autho-
rised bv or by virtue of this Act to be served on any person may
be served on him either by delivering it to him or by leaving it
at his proper address or by sending it by post.
   (2) Any notice or other document so required or authorised
to be served on a body corporate or a firm shall be duly served
if it is served on the secretary or clerk of that body or a partner
of that firm.
    (3) For the purposes of this section, and of section 26 of the
 Interpretation Act 1889 in its application to this section, the
 proper address of a person, in the case of a secretary or clerk
 of a body corporate, shall be that of the registered or pnncipal
 office of that body, in the case of a partner of a firm shall be
 that of the principal office of the firm, and in any other case
 shall be the last known address of the person to be served.
         .
    15 The Secretary of State may by order direct that any
 of the provisions of this Act which are not expressed to app y ^ order.
 •to sports grounds other than sports stadia shall, subject to such
 exceptions, adaptations and modifications as may be specified
 in the order, extend to classes of such sports grounds.
    16.— (1) Sections 1 to 4 and 6(2) above bind the Crown, but * P g £ £ »
  shall have effect, in relation to premises occupied by the Crown
  with the substitution of a reference to the Secretary of State
  for any reference to the local authority.
     (2)    Nothing in this Act shall be taken to authorise the entry
  of premises occupied by the Crown.
        j7   (]) i n this Act unless the context otherwise requires,   interpretation.
         “ building authority ” means—
12            cf 52              Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975


                                   (a) in an Outer London borough* the council of
                               the borough;
                                   (b) elsewhere in Greater London, the Greater
                               London Council;
                                   (c) in England outside Greater London, or in
                               Wales, the district council;
                                   (d) in 'Scotland, the local authority within the
1959 c. 24.                    meaning of the Building (Scotland) Act 1959;
                      “ the court ” means, in relation to premises in England
                           or Wales, a magistrates’ court acting for the petty
                           sessions area in which they are situated and, in relation     g,
                           to premises in Scotland, the sheriff within whose             \
                           jurisdiction they are situated ;
                      “ designated stadium ” and “ designation order ” have the
                           meanings assigned to them by section 1(4) above;
                      “ general safety certificate ” has the meaning assigned to it
                           by section 1(4) above;
                      “ local authority ” means—
                                   (a) in Greater London, the Greater London
                               Council;
                                    (b) in England outside Greater London, or in
                               Wales, the county,council;
                                    (c) in Scotland, the regional or islands council;
                      “ means of access ” includes means of access from a
                           highw ay;
                      “ qualified person ” has the meaning assigned to it by
                           section 3(1) above;
                      “ safety” does not include safety from danger inherent
                           in participation in a sporting or competitive activity;
                      “ safety certificate ° has the meaning assigned to it by seotion   n
                            1 ( 1) above;
                      “ special safety certificate ” has the meaning assigned to it
                           by section 1(4) above ;
                      “ spectator ” means any person occupying accommodation
                           provided for spectators at a sports ground ;
                      “ sports ground ” means any place where sports or other
                           competitive activities take place in the open air and
                           where accommodation has been provided for spectators,
                           consisting of artificial structures or of natural struc­
                           tures artificially modified for the purpose;
                      “ sports stadium ” means a sports ground where the accom­
                           modation provided for spectators wholly or substantially
                           surrounds the area used for activities taking place on
                           the ground.
                 Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975                     c. 52


   (2) Any reference in this Act to any enactment is a reference
to it as amended, and includes a reference to it as applied by
or under any other enactment, including this Act.

  18.— (1) Any power to make an order or regulations conferred Orders
on the Secretary of State by any provision of this Act shall be ^ , lations
exercisable by statutory instrument.
   (2) Any power to make an order conferred by any provision
of this Act shall include power to make an order varying or
revoking any order previously made under that provision.
  (3) Orders and regulations under this Act (except an order
under section 19(6) below) shall be subject to annulment in
pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.
   (4) It shall be the duty of the Secretary of State, before making
an order or regulations under any of the preceding provisions
of this Act, to consult with such persons or bodies of persons
as appear to him requisite.

  19 .— (i) This Act may be cited as the Safetv of Sports Grounds »v+»n+
                                                                  Short title,
        '                   J                         *      1
                                                                  extent and
                                                                         an/4
Act 1975.                                                         commence­
 (2) This Act does not extend to Northern Ireland.                ment.

 (3) Except as provided by an order under this section, this
Act does not extend to the Isles of Scilly.
   (4) The Secretary of State may by order direct that this Act
shall, subject to such exceptions, adaptations and modifications
as may be specified in the order, extend to the Isles of Scilly.
   (5) An order made under subsection (4) above may contain
such incidental and consequential provisions, including pro­
visions conferring powers or imposing duties on the Council
of the Isles of Scilly, as the Secretary of State thinks necessary.
   (6) This Act shall come into force on such day as the Secre­
tary of State may by order appoint, and different days may be
so appointed for different provisions and for different purposes.

                             Produced in the U.K. for
                                   W.J. SH AR P
        Controller and Chief Executive o f Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
                    and Q u een’s Printer o f A cts o f Parliament
     L O NDO N: P UBLISH ED BY H E R MAJESTY’S S T A T IO N E R Y OFFICE




                         Dd0905275     CIO   9 /8 5
52             Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975




       LO N D O N : PUBLISHED BY H E R M AJESTY’S STATIONERY O FFICE
                              £2.30 net
                         ISBN 0 10 545275 0
 (379301)
