NEWS CONFERENCE




Introduction



          Now completed my Interim Report and recommendations
          into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster on 15 April
          last.



          Pipsented to the Home Secretary last^ Tuesday, and the
          Home Secretary is publishing it today.



          You have had copies of the Report which really speaks
          for itself, but I will say a few words about it and
          then will be happy to answer questions.



          Can I express my gratitude to all those who have
          assisted me in this task.   Particular thanks must go to
          my Assessors.   Very pleased that Brian Johnson is here
          today:   Professor Maunder is now on holiday.



          Particular thanks to the West Midlands Police and
          Counsel for the Inquiry, but many others as well.



Scope of Report



          Part One describes what happened at Hillsborough on 15
          April - the background and the sequence of events.



          Part Two discusses why the disaster happened, analysed
          under a number of headings.
          Part Three draws the conclusions.    I make findings as
          to the causes of the disaster.    These are summarised in
          Chapter 16 of the Report.



Comments on Parts One to Three



          Before continuing, a few points to make about the first
          three parts of this Report.



          As I said when I opened the Preliminary Hearing on 28
          April, it was not the purpose of the Inquiry to
          apportion blame.



          While I have necessarily had to make findings about
          where responsibility lay, it is not for me to comment
          further than that.     In particular, I have no further
          comment to make about individuals.



          Nor do I consider individually the case of each of the
          95 who died.   That is a matter for HM Coroner for the
          City of Sheffield.



Part Four - Interim Recommendations



          The purpose of my interim recommendations is to propose
          measures capable of implementation forthwith and where
          possible before the start of the next football season.
         They are designed to prevent overcrowding and crushing
         on terraces in the short-term, and to improve safety
         procedures.



         But they do not and cannot meet all the problems or
         address all the issues of post-Hillsborough football.



          I have listed                     _ sets I have not yet
         considered.      There will doubtless be others.



         For the present, my inquiries at Hillsborough suggested
          to me that a substantial number of lessons could be
          learned.   In many cases, I have no doubt, action of the
          kind I have proposed will already have been started.
          But where it has not, I believe it should start now.



Part Two of the Inquiry



          With my Assessors I will now be starting work on Part
          Two.



          This will be directed to making final and long term
          recommendations about crowd control and safety at
          sports grounds.



          I have received a large body of written evidence, for
          which I am grateful.     I may want to supplement this in
          some instances with oral discussion.
We may also need to make a number of visits and
inspections.



Obviously I cannot be precise about how long all this
will take, but I hope to be able to report to the Home
Secretary about the turn of the year.
