TELEPHONE:                                            SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
SHEFFIELD (0742) 768522                                POLICE HEADQUARTERS
TELEX: 547996                                            SNIG HILL
FAX: (0742) 523243                                        SHEFFIELD S3 8LY


R B WELLS QPM MA
CHIEF CONSTABLE                                          13 September 1990




The Right Honourable Lord Justice Taylor
c/o Court of Appeal
The Royal Courts of Justice
The Strand
London
WC2A 2LL




On a number of occasions each year, those interested in the management
of football in South Yorkshire meet to dine and then to thrash out the
way forward for the ensuing months in a variety of areas, but principally
at the moment in matters of safety.     Chairmen and Vice Chairmen of our
five clubs, Leaders of the four municipal boroughs, and the Leaders of
the Fire, Ambulance, and Police Services, attend.  It is, in county terms,
a high-powered gathering, intent on activity rather than talk.

The clubs have already made creditable progress, spurred on by the impetus
of your Final Report recommendations, investing tens of thousands of
pounds on ground improvements.   I think you would be genuinely heartened
to hear their commitment to meeting your suggested standards.

At our meeting last week, the members asked if I would write to you      to
see if I might persuade you to come as a guest to our next session,      so
that the group - which includes Sheffield Wednesday Football Club        of
course - could have the direct benefit of your insight into matters      of
safety, following your Enquiry.

The facts and deliberations of the Hillsborough disaster specifically
are not on the agenda and it is a strictly private meeting, the two
meetings so far held having received no press coverage whatsoever.

I believe that your acceptance would be most helpful in giving a fillip
to the group - especially, perhaps the smaller, less well-endowed clubs
- who are manfully facing increased outlay to meet the cost of raised
standards.  There are no angry cries, off-stage, of 'author1; only what
I took to be a genuine desire to hear from you personally.
I do hope that you'll feel able to accept.   The group makes an open-ended
offer so far as dates are concerned: you could choose any suitable evening
around early March 1991 and the members would move mountains to join
you.   Each of the clubs hosts the occasions in rotation.        Sheffield
Wednesday hosted last week's and so it will not be their turn again for
your proposed visit.

The members look forward very much to your reply to their invitation.
       From: The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor




                                                    18th September 1990


R.B. Wells QPM, MA
Chief Constable
South Yorkshire Police
Police Headquarters
Snig Hill
Sheffield S3 8LY.




         Thank you for your letter of 13th September and the kind invitation to
Sheffield to meet representatives in football management.   I greatly
appreciate the generosity of you and your fellow members in extending the
invitation and am happy to accept.  I enter only one caveat. Since delivering
my Final Report I have been back in the Court of Appeal and, apart from what I
read in the papers, I am not fully apprised of subsequent developments.
However,if I can make some contribution I would be glad to do so.

          As to dates, it is a little difficult for me to predict my commitments
so far ahead. Mid-week engagements out of London are awkward during the legal
sittings.   I don't suppose your members would relish a Friday evening.
Otherwise I wonder whether after the end of term, 27th March, would be too
late.   Perhaps you would be good enough to come back to me on this a little
later.

                                                Yours sincerely,
