    PUBLIC INQUIRIES: A CURE OR A DISEASE?




                                By
                          STEPHEN SEDLEY




                                     Reprinted from
                      T h e M o d e r n L a w R e v ie w
K                                      July 1989
Was
    A w *.                                                              Uz—



                   STEVENS & SONS LIMITED
      S o u th Q u a y P l a z a ,   183 M a r s h W a l l , L o n d o n E14 9FT
                                     Law Publishers
   PUBLIC INQUIRIES: A CURE OR A DISEASE?1

 If public inquiries are to be known by their fruits, and if their proper
 fruits are reforms and improvements in law and practice, t h e r e is
 probably not a great deal to be said for them. In the field of child
 care, it is safe to say that only the very first of the numerous public
 inquiries held in the last five decades either brought about or helped
 to shape a major reform in the law: Sir Walter Monckton s report in
  1945 on the death of Denis O’Neill played an important part in the
  genesis of the Children Act 1948. It may be, too, that in the current
  overhaul of family law the Cleveland Report,2 and perhaps some
  fragments of other recent reports on child abuse, will play a part. For
  the rest, if justification is to be found it has to be looked for else­
  where because by the time in recent years that child abuse inquiries
  became a prevalent feature of the landscape nobody can any longer
  have believed that they were a^seriousJnstmment ofjpL rgfQ im ^
  Their effects on practice are another matter, to which I shall return,
  but while detectable they have certainly not been uniformly positive.
   Mv thesis is, however, that public inquiries play a significant part in
   the management and government of this country, and one which is no
   less real because its effect, like the proverbial effect of education, is

  ^ T h e proliferation of inquiries into catastrophes of local authority
  child care, and the media attention focused on them, have tended to
  constrict our understanding of public inquiries as an instrument of
  social and political management in that sensitive axea where law
  meets policy. The reason I call it a sensitive area is that in a society
  which, for a mass of reasons lying beyond my present remit, needs its
  law to be or to appear to be a system of Olympian detachment, the
  courts cannot afford to get involved in overt policy-making; and yeta_
' varietyoi public issues can arise which because they concern policy
   and practice rather than rights or wrongs are not litigable, but still
   need somehow to be got away from the public shin-kicking contests
   which they frequently provoke. In all these situations there has been
   a framework of law, usually both substantive and procedural, but the
   disaster has occurred either within that very framework or in a
   fashion for which the law offers no worthwhile redress, so that
   enforcement of the law will be of very little use. It is precisely because
   there is no ready resort here to litigation that public rows break out—
   a striking reminder in itself of the therapeutic value to civil society of
   an Olympian legal system. A t the same time, there is commonly no

     1 This paper is the text of the Mary Robertson Lecture delivered at No tmgham
   University on O ctober 6,1988. A debt of gratitude is owed to Ms. Shuiouk al Sabbah
   and to Professor A. W. Bradley for advice on source material.
     2 R eport of Inquiry into Child Abuse in Cleveland, 1987; Cm. 412.
f




       4 /U                         THE MODERN LAW REVIEW                              [Vol. 52

         ready political response, or none that will still the noise, usually
         because politicians are already parti pris or will not be believed if they
         claim not to be.
     i       It is classically here that a public inquiry of one sort or another has
         its usefulness and its role^By being pubUc it bQrxows one of the
         strengths of the legal system7funnelling the arguments away from the
     ^"anarchy andsubjectivity of publicHebate and into the apparently"
         oEjecfive~and orderly formnjof-a-proceeding which the world ran
    j watch but in wfjicji nobadv-SPeaks unless spoken to. By taking the
        to n n o f a n inquiry it escapes the constrictions of subject-matter and
        procedure which make litigation an inapt solution. There are now no
        parties, only those whose legitimate interest has gained them entry on
        sufferance; no isolated issue to be resolved; no predefined questions
        of fact to be answered or body of statute or common law to be applied
        to them like acid to litmus paper. The matter, as lawyers like to sav is
        at large.3
            I believe, too, that the view of the public inquiry as an instrument
        of government helps to explain those instances where a public
        inquiry, though entirely appropriate, does not take place. Where an
        event such as the killing of Blair Peach occurs, the government of the
        day may well reckon that a full public investigation of facts that are
       likely to help its political opponents is not a price worth paying for the
       stilling of public clamour. Better to let it take its course and, over the
       years, subside. Here is yet another advantage of a public inquiry: no
       individual has a right to one—only the central or local state can in
       practice mount it, and whether or not to do so lies entirely in its dis­
       cretion.
           The Blair Peach case as it happens illustrates a number of other
       aspects of my theme. Most recently it has illustrated the inefficacy of
       the courts as an alternative public forum for an issue of this kind.

       3 Lord Scarman’s opening statem ent at the Red Lion Square Inquiry in 1974 has
     become a classic source of tone and format for a m ajor public inquiry:
          “First of all—and I stress it—this is an inquiry, not a piece of litigation. It is not
          the sort of adversary-type confrontation with which we English lawyers are fami­
          liar in the criminal and civil trials of our country. This inquiry is to be conducted—
          and I stress it—by myself. This means that all the decisions have to be taken by
          me. . . First of all, it is I and I alone who will decide what witnesses are to be
          called. I also decide to what matters their evidence will be directed. There is in an
          inquiry of this sort no legal right to cross-examination, but I propose within limits
          to allow cross-examination of witnesses to the extent that I think it helpful to the
          forwarding of the Inquiry, but no further. I also have to determine how witnesses
          will be examined, bearing in mind the inquisitorial rather than the adversarial
         nature of the Inquiry. . . . No witness will be called to give evidence unless he or
         she has first given to the Tribunal a written statem ent of evidence. It is from the
         w ritten statements of evidence submitted to the Tribunal that I shall make my
         selection as to the witnesses to be called. The only criterion that I propose to
         observe in exercising this power of selection will be the extent to which, in my
         judgm ent, the witness can help the Inquiry.”
       4 Cf. the eponymous study by W raith and Hutcheson (1971).
J u l y 1989]     p u b lic in q u irie s : a c u r e o r a d is e a s e ?          471

Refused a public inquiry,5 Peach’s family sued on behalf of his estate
for damages, the only language in which the civil law knows how to
express responsibility for causing a death. Nine years after Peach’s
death, the nominal defendant, the Commissioner of Metropolitan
Police, paid enough into court to satisfy the claim in full. A brief pub­
lic argument followed as to whether this amounted to an admission of
liability (the Commissioner claiming apparently to have become an
eccentric philanthropist), and it was all over.
    But in the immediate aftermath of the event, by law an inquest had
to be held—a legally required and regulated public inquiry. The
 crowner’s ‘quest, as Miss Bailey’s ghost called it, is probably our
 oldest quasi-judicial institution. In England and Wales it is the local
 coroner’s duty to sit, with a jury in defined cases of public concern, in
 order to inquire into any violent or unexplained death. (In Scotland,
 where the coroner does not exist, a statutory public inquiry com­
 monly takes place instead.) During this century the coroner has lost
 his power to indict anyone he thinks guilty of unlawful killing, and
 neither he nor his jury can any longer either apportion guilt to any
 individual7 or add riders to verdicts" They are confined to answering
 the questions where, when and how the deceased came to die, and
 even then their verdict binds nobody and does not have the status of
 evidence in a court of law.10
    It is legitimate therefore to wonder why the state has bothered to
  preserve this institution at all, having so grossly reduced its powers. I
  suggest that the reason for its preservation is the reason I have pro­
  posed in relation to public inquiries generally. As the present Master
  of the Rolls pointed out in the Helen Smith case, the presence in this
  country of a dead body, where the death is unexplained, “creates a
  very real and legitimate public interest in holding an inquiry.” The
  coroner’s inquest is a means of satisfying that interest by, once again,
  a resort to detached formality, the transmuting of uninformed public
  speculation into a formal verdict distilled from sworn evidence. To
  the logical or curious mind, the open verdict finally returned by a jury
   on the nurse Helen Smith left the mystery of her death in Saudia Ara­
  bia wide open; but to the newspaper-reading public and to a relieved
   Foreign Office it put an effective end to the argument. Whether or
   not the family then buried the body, the state had buried the issue.

    5 Blair Peach was killed on A pril 23,1979 during the general election campaign. On
  May 3, while police investigations were still under way, a Conservative government
  took office.
    6 Criminal Law Act 1977, s.56(l).
    7' See now coroners
                Coroners Ruies
                         Rules 1984, 1.
                                      r. 42.
    8 Coroners (Amendment) Rules 1980; see now Coroners Rules 1984, r. 36(2).
     9 Coroners Act 1887, s.4(3); see now Coroners Act 1988.
     10 Bird v. Keep [1918] 2 K.B. 692. And see Tristram v. Moon Life Assurance Com­
  pany, in A . P. H erbert, Misleading Cases in the Common Law , subtitled “Why is the

  C°iri ft. v. West Yorkshire Coroner, ex parte Smith [1983] Q.B. 335 at p. 357H.
      472                       THE MODERN LAW REVIEW                         [Vol. 52
         Inquests are thus another tolerably flexible and still useful form of
      public inquiry; not an expensive anachronism in the eyes of a cost-
      conscious central government but a worthwhile element in the man­
      agement of public controversy. Whether there will be governmental
      second thoughts about this balance of usefulness in the wake of the
      Gibraltar inquest remains to be seen.
        Let me return from this peculiar institution to the type of public
'     inquiry which more commonly comes to mind. Local government has
  I   no powers which enable it to set up inquiries able to administer oaths
 !    and compel the attendance of witnesses or the production of docu-
 j    ments. Central government does have. For industrial troubles it-h a s
      power to set up a court of inquiry underlhe IndustirialCourts Act
      iyiy, which it used to try to defuse the Grunwick dispute. For polic­
      ing it has the Police A ctl964 under which both the Red Lion Square
      Inquiry and the Brixton Inquiry were established. For local authority
      child care it has the Child Care Act 1980, and for medical services the
      National Health Service Act 1977. For~maior one-off issues it has in

    liihes lull judici&l powers and immunities for any tribunal established
    by resolution of both Houses of Parliament to inquire into matters of
    urgent public importance. For these rare but important inquiries—
    the Lynskey Tribunal and the Aberfan inquiry are examples—the
    Act lays down that they are to be held in public except where privacy
    is held to be expedient in the public interest. These major inquiries
    held under statutory powers consequently have a status and a life of
    their own.
       Why is it overwhelmingly judges and senior lawyers who are called
    on to conduct or preside over these and other inquiries? First of all,
    the use of lawyers plays a significant part in what I have suggested is a
    major function of inquiries: the organising of controversy into a form
    more catholic than litigation but less a n a r c h ic th a n s t r e e t fig h tin g
    Secondly, in areas of high controversy § judge offers a seal of credi-
^ b ilitj^ Lord Scarman, in a preface to the Pelican edition of hislirixton
    report,12 wrote:
          I believe that a judge does have special qualifications both for
          investigating disorders and for speaking about inner cities. He is
          a trained adjudicator between differing parties. He is ajrained,
          investigator of fact. HeTs by office. andsHould be by nature,
          impartial and detached. . . . Public disorder usually arises out of
         'Tsense of injusticeT A sense of injustice is not limited to people
          with legal or judicial training, but judges will certainly have
          experience in uncovering it and have an instinctive understand­
          ing of the causes and consequences of injustice. Above all, a
          judge has a passion for righting injustice.


       12 The Scarman Report, Pelican 1986.
J u l y 1989]      p u b lic in q u ir ie s : a c u r e o r a d is e a s e ?      473

As a generalisation this is heavily idealised—almost an adman’s
image. But like many such images, it corresponds with popular per­
ception. And the public persona of certain judicial figures, such as
Lord Scarman himself and Lord Denning, does approximate to this
image, blending the judicial and the human, the legitimist and the
liberal. This is not the place to try to compare image with reality: my
argument is that the choice of such figures to head sensitive inquiries
both illustrates and reflects the fact that central government is well
 aware of the special kind of value a good public inquiry can have, JL-
can bridge the gap between government and governed, between
Tuffi^prrty and liberty, in situations where those sides have pulled
 apart to an extent which could damage the body politic. But govern­
 ment also knows that it is not every judge or every public figure who
 can be relied on not to make the gap bigger : hence the importance of
 public images and perceptions.
     So far I have spoken in pretty universal terms about the impera­
 tives which in my view impel the central state from time to time to
 establish a public inquiry. But this institution, precisely because it is
 an instrument of government, is going to be affected by changes in
 the mode of government in this country; indeed it already is being.
     The grandest of all forms of public inquiry, the royal commission,
 with its junior and generally more private sibling the departmental
 committee, is still regarded as a major part of our constitutional
 apparatus. Where fundamental reform is in the air on a topic too sig­
 nificant to become a party political football, governments have histor­
 ically appointed in the name of the monarch a body of the great and
  the good, with an appropriate minority of trustworthy radicals, to
  deliberate and report. The grand version, the royal commission, ordi­
  narily sits in public. Almost 400 royal commissions were set up during
  the 19th century. Nearly 140 were appointed in the first three
  quarters of the present century. But since 1977 not one new royal
  commission has been appointed-              ..... "              ~     _
   r Tcfo not thifilTthat this~can be put down simply to cost, although
  royal commissions are expensive.13 It may have something to do with
  the fact that they cannot be guaranteed to produce all the answers
  government wants, but to prioritise this is to miss both the fact that
   governments, like the curate, can and do pick out the good parts, as
   was done in transmuting the Report of the Royal Commission on
   Criminal Procedure into the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984,
   and the fact that what a royal commission produces is probably not as
   important as the fact that it has sat, taken evidence and deliberated.
   More credibly, the present disappearance of the royal commission
   may march with the modern growth of parliamentary select and
   standing committees which do in many ways a similar job, which sit
   (theoretically at least) in public, but which are firmly under the con-

    13 It is said in W hitehall that the first priority of a Royal Commission is lay down a
  good cellar.
   474                        THE MODERN LAW REVIEW                          [Vol. 52

     trol of the government of the day. Its public liaison role has passed, in
     shrunken form, into the practice of inserting into contemporary legis­
     lation, which frequently gives ministers huge new discretionary
     powers, a duty to consult interested bodies and individuals before
     exercising these powers, though without any concomitant duty to
     take any notice of what they say when consulted. In this way every­
     body gets a prize: the voices of the interested public get a hearing; the
     minister listens politely through his departmental ear trumpet; and
     the department then gets on with what it had initially determined to
     do.
        The reason why I find this shift in the mode of government a cred­
     ible explanation, at least in part, is that the present government in its
     three incarnations to date has introduced more sweeping and radical
     measures in almost every major area of national life than any since
     the postwar Labour government (which—and this supports my the­
     sis14—was the last doldrum for royal commissions, with only 4
     appointed from 1946 to 1950). Many of these measures would have
     been prime candidates, 20 years ago, for a prior royal commission:
     the process would have helped to set the subject and the solutions
     above party allegiance, to convey the message that the new measures
     were not ways of paying off old scores or loading the dice in favour of
     the government’s supporters and friends, but were sober require­
     ments in the interests of the nation. The style and philosophy of
     government have changed quite dramatically in this respect during
     the present decade (though I should make it clear that in my view the
     b e g in n in g s of the change predate the Conservative victory of 1979).
i The premise is now that government needs only the mandate and the
\ legitimacy that it receives from the ballot box: from mere on its j o b is
      tu goTCiu, not 10 agomse in puonc about what it ought to be doing. In
     this scenario the demise, if that is what it is, of the grand public
      inquiry, the royal commission, is inevitable: it no longer has anything
      usetui to do or say, saveTperltaps on some special occasion. What
   , Cartwright, writing in the early 1970s,15 perceived as the virtues of
 , A royal commissions—their ubiquity, their adaptability, their non-
      bureaucratic character and the opportunity they gave for individuals
 I and interest groups to participate in the formation of public policy—
 I Vhave become vices. Parliamentary and departmental committees and
      the charade of formal consultation do the job more briskly without
      any longer fostering the illusion that the formation of public policy is
      anything to do with the public.16

       14 But perhaps not very strongly, for the postwar reforms followed major reports,
    such as Beveridge’s, bespoken by the wartime coalition government.
       15 T. J. Cartwright, Royal Commissions and Departmental Committees in Britain
    (1975).
       16 Or indeed with some of the statutory bodies with whom consultation is manda­
    tory. The Association of Municipal Authorities and the Supplementary Benefits Com­
    mission are among those treated by Ministers in recent years with something
    approaching contempt.
J u l y 1989]     p u b lic in q u ir ie s : a c u r e o r a d is e a s e ?   475

    I am not so much concerned to lament the possible extinction of
this constitutional dinosaur, whose pedigree goes back almost a
thousand years, as to see how far its causes go. If I am right in identi­
fying a new indifference towards public or minority concern as the
motor of the trend, then it affords a good explanation of what is per­
haps the most disturbing recent retreat from the use of a public
inquiry, the refusal of the Home Secretary to set up an inquiry under
the Police Act into the Broadwater Farm disturbances in Tottenham.
We know from Brixton and Red Lion Square that such an inquiry
does not have to cut across criminal proceedings. We also know that
the situation in that part of Haringey was the kind of powder keg for
which the grand public inquiry is tailor-made—at least in a polity
which seeks unity and values consensus. I would regard the refusal of
government to set up a public inquiry into the Broadwater Farm trou­
bles in spite of requests from many sections of the community as a
barometric event. Its message is that policing strategies and police
 attitudes are no longer going to come under a public microscope if
that is part of the price to be paid for establishing an inquiry. As
 governments are there to govern us, so the police are there to police
 us. In this slow reduction of even the ordered and restricted forms of
 dialogue which public inquiries can set up between state and people, I
 have to say that I detect the slow translation of authority into authori­
 tarianism.
    But the London Borough of Haringey went ahead and set up its
 own public inquiry under Lord Gifford into the Broadwater Farm
 events.17 Like all other local authorities, including the more numer­
 ous ones which have instituted inquiries into child care disasters, it
 had to do so within the confines of its existing general powers, for
 where an inquiry held under express statutory powers has a consti­
 tutional status, the ad hoc local authority inquiry has none. It is in law
 no more than a means by which a local authority chooses to inform
 itself of facts and to solicit more or less expert views for the authority
 or others to adopt or reject as they wish. In spite of the Marre Com­
 mittee’s proposal, a decade ago, that it should be placed on a statu­
 tory footing, the local authority inquiry still has no original powers
 and no true jurisdiction. It is entirely dependent on the local auth­
 ority for its resources and on individual and institutional goodwill for
 its evidence. And yet this fragile creature, with few visible means of
 support, has in recent years been the most prolific and durable
 species of public inquiry, as well as the most effective—and on
  occasion devastating—in terms of public and private impact. The
  same is true, incidentally, of its national analogue, the governmental
  non-statutory inquiry, which over the years has stylishly and effec­
  tively investigated dramas from Crichel Down to Profumo.
     Why is this? The principal recent occupants of the limelight have
  been inquiries into fatal episodes of child abuse; and it is worth a

   17 The Broadwater Farm Inquiry, Karia Press 1986.
476                        THE MODERN LAW REVIEW                          [Vol. 52

moment’s pause to consider which comes first—the limelight or the
inquiry. For much the same reasons as those for which Shakespeare
drew tears at the Globe with Act IV of Richard III and Dickens found
fame and his publisher fortune with Little Nell and Oliver Twist,
child abuse sells newspapers. I do not mean to be sceptical in saying
this, because it is entirely right that people should be concerned and
shocked at the worst of the violence meted out by adults to children
and that the news media should report it. The undertones of pruri­
ence which accompany some of the reportage are not my concern
here, nor the lack of a comparable sense of scandal and concern
when, say, an elderly person dies through neglect.18 But one result of
sometimes sensational media coverage of the death or abuse of a
child in care or at risk, or—months later—of the trial of the abuser, is
a hugely heightened sensitivity on the part of both officers and mem­
bers of the local authorities on which statute law casts the never-end­
ing burden of being the child’s last refuge and protector. How can
they show that they really are concerned, and at a pitch comparable
to that of the public agitation surrounding their failure to protect a
helpless child from a violent adult? How can they make it clear at the
same time that they are not passing the buck or looking for scape­
goats? How can they contain and objectify the often ignorant contro­
versy in the newspapers, streets and pubs and channel criticism into
positive reform? A public inquiry can serve most or all of these ends.
But one thing it cannot do is put an end to the publicity. The limelight
will now swing on to the inquiry, and although lawyers know that the
stamina of journalists rarely lasts beyond the second day even of sig­
nificant hearings, the final report provides a final flow of copy, news
bulletins and perhaps even panel discussions and documentaries.
(One of my greatest humiliations was being played, in a dramatic
reconstruction of a public inquiry in which I had appeared as counsel,
by an actor so unencumbered by talent as to make me wonder
whether I couldn’t have done it better myself.)
   All of this, I think, helps to explain both why local authorities with
a child care disaster on their hands and reporters with copy-hungry
editors on their backs find a public inquiry a valuable asset. Hence
the unresolved tension between the British Association of Social
Workers, who argue powerfully and in my view convincingly for
these inquiries to be conducted in private,19 and the press, often sup­
ported by the local authorities themselves, who insist that public
hearings are the public’s right. It is significant too that central govern­
ment, which now exerts rigorous control over what local authorities
may do and may spend, has in no way discouraged such inquiries,
expensive though they are. Indeed the former DHSS has published

  18 O f course there has been real concern about, for example, maltreatment of old
people in homes, and occasionally inquiries have resulted. But individual cases have
not provoked the same sense of outrage.
  19 Child A buse Inquiries, British Association of Social W orkers 1982.
 J u ly 1989]       pu b lic in q u ir ie s : a c u r e or a d is e a s e ?   477

  analyses of them20 and has gone out to public consultation about how
 they should be run.21 It seems to me that all these factors coalesce in
 the scheme of things that I am putting forward. There is no wasteful
 or misleading air of public consultation and governmental cogitation
 in these local inquiries as there is, or was, in the lofty hesitancy of a
 royal commission. Instead there is a businesslike investigation of
 what went wrong and why, and an opportunity to rap knuckles, pat
 backs and make proposals for avoiding a repetition and for smarten­
 ing up practice. It is germane to my argument that central govern­
 ment evidently does have a continuing use for this kind of inquiry.
The magisterial performance of Butler-Sloss L J . in the Cleveland
 inquiry and report, albeit under statutory powers and at the instance
 of a Secretary of State, is a striking example of the abiding value to
 central government of the ad hoc public inquiry as a kind of socio-
 legal fire-brigade, quite irrespective of any legislative sequel there
 may be. And Lord Gifford’s inquiry into policing and law enforce­
 ment in Toxteth, not as a fire brigade or damage limitation exercise
 but with a view to improving matters for the future, seems to me a
valuable and innovative use of inquiry procedure in which it was to be
hoped the police would co-operate.
    Several recent public inquiries have been into catastrophes in
which a large number of lives have been lost—Bradford, Zeebrugge,
King’s Cross.22 They too fulfil the classic task of meeting public con­
cern with visible official concern. They are also, I would suggest,
capable of performing a further task openly and judicially but with
much fuller and fresher evidence than a court of law ever enjoys, and
that is the establishment and apportionment of legal blame. Is there
not a case for legislation which will invest particular judicial public
inquiries with powers of adjudication? To do so would eliminate what
at present are the wasted years of individual writs, of fragmented
legal process, of tactical denials of liability designed to procure settle­
ments at a heavy discount, as victims or their families fight for com­
pensation over ground traversed and swept clean years before by a
public inquiry. Even to reduce the litigation by this means to issues of
causation and quantum would be a real achievement.
   To come back to the ad hoc local authority inquiry, which pos­
sesses and needs no such jurisdiction, it is a central paradox that its
possession of minimal legal powers is accompanied by the power to
do a maximum of practical harm. This negative product is not only
related to individuals, though it is at its sharpest there. It can have a
damaging effect on practice generally, for if a child care initiative
goes disastrously wrong it may no longer be a matter of simply seeing
what can be learnt from the mistake: there may be a public inquiry,
public obloquy, public sacrifices. It is probable that, like the defens­

  20 Child A buse, HMSO 1982.
  21 Consultative Paper on Child Abuse Inquiries, July 1985.
  22 A nd now Hillsborough.
478                      THE MODERN LAW REVIEW                   [Vol. 52

 ive medicine generated in the United States by endless malpractice
 suits, defensive social work is developing as a passive response to the
 proliferation of public inquiries. It seems to me entirely understand­
 able that if taking an intelligent risk is going to bring few or no con­
gratulations if it works and to end in a public inquiry if it does not,
social workers are going to go for the safe and unimaginative option
every time. And yet there is no field of activity where doing every­
thing by the book is less appropriate than in social work, where by
 definition every case is unique.
   It might not matter if this fear on the part of social workers, how­
ever real, were unfounded; but it is not. The aftermath of more than
one recent inquiry has generated the legitimate fear among local
 authority staff that any public inquiry may for them turn into a hang­
ing party. It was in that aftermath that the panel appointed by Lam­
beth to sit with me to inquire into the death of Tyra Henry made it
insistently clear both privately and publicly that we were not a disci­
plinary tribunal.23 But in all candour I have to say that this is only a
partial protection, because no responsible inquiry can be silent about
professional misjudgements if it uncovers them, and no responsible
local authority can confer immunity on employees if they should be
found to have blundered.
   For the fact is that in a legal and administrative regime which with­
out reserve or qualification says that all children at risk are to be kept
safe by the local authority, the very fact of the death of a child who
was or should arguably have been in care makes it almost a foregone
conclusion that someone has blundered. There is only one other pro­
fession, medicine, in which a mistake by a professional at any minute
of the day may literally be a matter of life and death, and it is a matter
of some interest that the medical profession, although administered
by public or statutory bodies, manages to handle these issues in pri­
vate, reserving publicity for any ultimate disciplinary proceedings
which may ensue, often years later. Historic factors have retarded the
recognition of social work as a true profession and have meanwhile
placed it in the hands not of a specialist establishment but of the labile
elected body which also maintains the parks and collects the rubbish.
As a result social workers carry a responsibility no less than that of
doctors but with no more structural protection than that of a council
labourer. It may be—I take no sides here—that this is as it should be,
and that the sooner doctors, lawyers and others are exposed to simi­
lar public scrutiny when they make a mess of their work, the healthier
it will be for them and for society. But in the meantime, the social
worker’s sense of singular and unjust exposure to the cold winds of
criticism is entirely reasonable. For the individuals under the spot­
light public inquiries are a disease, not a cure.
   If my thesis is right that these inquiries are designed in part to
absorb and still controversy, it will depend on your point of view

 23 Whose Child?, London Borough of Lambeth 1987, pp. 3,78.
J u l y 1989]     p u b lic in q u ir ie s : a c u r e o r a d is e a s e ?                 479

whether this makes them a disease of the body politic or a remedy for
some of its ailments. But in either case it seems to me beyond doubt
that public inquiries do have curative properties which cannot be
found elsewhere. And these, I think, are the ones that are going to
continue to matter, because the one thing they help to heal above all
others is the thing the state, both central and local, needs most: pub­
lic confidence in its capacity to cope.
                                                                        St e p h e n S e d l e y *

  * Q .C ., Bencher of the Inner Temple.
PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN
           BY
 THE EASTERN PRESS LTD.
OF LONDON AND READING
