       SOMERSET & AVON (SOUTH)
        FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                  Established 1885




Midsomer Norton
Bath
                  Somerset and Avon (South) F» A .
                                               President: E.T. KING Esq.

Chairman                     A .J. H O BBS,                         Midsomer Norton, Bath, Avon BA3 I
                             Tel: Day (0761)               Evening (0761 )\

Secretary         H Marchment , Office:                            MidsomerNorton, BA3           Tel: (0761)
                             OfficeHours: Monday-Friday 9 a .m .- 5 p.m.   Saturday 9 a.m .-1 2 noon.

F A Millichip Esq
Chairman
The Football Association                                                               Midsomer Norton
16 Lancaster Gate                                                                      Bath BAB
London W2 3LW

20 May 1991

Dear Mr Millichip

On Sat\     Last I attended the F A Cup Final at
            / • / I O '* f
                                                           This VvtuS my first
visit for a number of years, and it will certainly be the last in view of my
experiences.

Bearing in mind the exhorbitant addmission prices now being charged and the
fact Wembley boasts an all seater stadium, my first surprise was seating.
We were allocated something I can only describe as a corrugated piece of
plastic approximately 2ft x 1ft with no back.

My next and more important point concerns the findings of Lord Justice Peter
Taylor's report that stadiums shall become all seater. Lord forbid, but
after Saturday I am of the opinion this would not alleviate but cause dis­
asters that could exceed what occurred at Hillsborough.

After some ten minutes of last Saturday's game, in the Tottenham supporters
end of the ground, if you hadn't stood up you wouldn't have seen a ball
kicked. On every occasion; after that when Tottenham crossed the halfway
line, these so called supporters were standing on the seats. The point I
therefore wish to highlight, and in no way exaggerate, is the obvious danger
created- It doesn't require marfh imagination to eE&iisage a surge, a few
geaspte.- going oser, and literalTy thousands c £ .-gaaptelapsing like a pack:
of cards. Stewards took no action whatsoever and even if they had would
have been absolutely powerless. If X tell you that my son and myself (both
6ft in height) saw, at the outside, half of the ninety minutes, that is being
more, than fair.

I have been in football now for 45 years and am a long standing member of the
Council of the Somerset and Avon (South) F A and trust this letter will be
received as constructive critiscism and appropriate members of your Cup
Committee will take the earliest opportunity of getting down out of the
stands and among the crowd to see at first hand the very serious issues I
raise.

Yours sincerely




Copies to:                   Lord Justice Peter Taylor
                             C Willcox MBE JP
                             T Venables
                             B Clough
