          Public Order Act 1986
                         C H A P T E R 64

            ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
                               Part I                   r
                           N ew Offences
Section
 1.    Riot.
 2.    Violent disorder.
 3.    Affray.
 4.    Fear or provocation o f violence.
 5.    Harassment, alarm or distress.
 6.    Mental element: miscellaneous.
 7.    Procedure: miscellaneous.
 8.    Interpretation.
 9.    Offences abolished.
10.    Construction o f other instruments.

                               P art II
                     P rocessions   and   A ssemblies
 11.   Advance notice of public processions.
 12.   Imposing conditions on public processions.
 13.   Prohibiting public processions.
 14.   Imposing conditions on public assemblies.
 15.   Delegation.
 16.   Interpretation.
                               Part III
                           R acial H atred
                      Meaning o f “racial hatred”
 17. Meaning of “ racial hatred ”.
          Acts intended or likely to stir up racial hatred
 18. Use of words or behaviour or display of written material.
 19. Publishing or distributing written material.
 20. Public performance of play.
                               A
    c . 64                Public Order Act 1986

    Section
    21. Distributing, showing or playing a recording.
         ^ i c e CaSting ° f including programme in cable programme

                      Racially inflammatory material
    %a' £ ossessi° n  racially inflammatory material.
    24. Powers o f entry and search.
    25. Power to order forfeiture.

                        Supplementary provisions
 0 7 £avinSs for reports o f parliamentary or judicial proceedings.
 27. Procedure and punishment.
 28. Offences by corporations.
 29. Interpretation.

                                Part IV

                          Exclusion O rders
30.    Exclusion orders.
31.    Offences connected with football.
32.    Effect o f order.
33.    Application to terminate order.
34.    Information.
35.    Photographs.
36.    Prescribed football matches.
37.    Extension to other sporting events.


                                P art V

                     M iscellaneous   and   G eneral
38. Contamination of or interference with goods with intention
    ot causing public alarm or anxiety, etc.
39. Power to direct trespassers to leave land.
40. Amendments, repeals and savings.                    ;    |
41. Commencement.
42. Extent.               ;
43. Short title.

       S chedules:
       ? Schedule 1—Sporting events.
         Schedule 2—Other amendments.
b        Sehedulfe 3^R epeals.
                          Public Order Act 1986
                                PGA 1986 c.64
                            ISBN 0 10 546486 4

                               CORRECTION
  Page 22, in the first line of section 34(2), “ section 28 ” should
read “ section 33


                     PRINTED IN ENGLAND BY J. A. DOLE
        Controller and Chief Executive of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office and
                        Queen’s Printer of Acts of Parliament
       LONDON: PUBLISHED BY HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
January 1987                                                                    (571371)
                                                              c. 64
                         ELIZABETH II




          Public Order Act 1986
                       1986 CHAPTER 64
i>   '

 An Act to abolish the common law offences of riot, rout,
     unlawful assembly and affray and certain statutory
     offences relating to public order; to create new offences
     relating to public order; t o ' control public processions
     and assemblies; to control the stirring up o f racial
     hatred; to provide for the exclusion o f certain offenders
     from sporting events; to create a new offence relating
     to the contamination o f or interference with goods; to
     confer power to direct certain trespassers to leave land;
     to amend section 7 o f the Conspiracy and Protection o f
     Property Act 1875, section 1 of the Prevention o f Crime
     Act 1953, Part V of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act
      1980 and the Sporting Events (Control o f Alcohol etc.)
     Act 1985; to repeal certain obsolete or unnecessary
     enactments; and for connected purposes.              _
                                          [7th November 1986]

   -w -y e i t en acted by the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty, by and
A '' L c with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and
   JJ     Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parliament
   assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:— '

                                Part I

                            N ew O ffences
     1 . (l) Where 12 or more persons who are present together Riot
   use or threaten unlawful violence for a common purpose and
   the conduct of them (taken together) is such as would cause
   a person of reasonable firmness present at the scene to fear for
 2               c*64                  Public Order Act 1986

     Pa r t I
                 his personal safety, each of the persons using unlawful violence
                 for the common purpose is guilty of riot.
                    (2) It is immaterial whether or not the 12 or more use or
                 threaten unlawful violence simultaneously.
                   (3) The common purpose may be inferred from conduct.
                    (4) N o person of reasonable firmness need actually be, or be
                 likely to be, present at the scene.
                   (5) Riot may be committed in private as well as in public
                 places.
                   (6 ) A person guilty of riot is liable on conviction on indictment
                to imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years or a fine or
                both.

Violent            2.— ( 1) Where 3 or more persons who are present togethe
disorder.
                use or threaten unlawful violence and the conduct of them
                (taken together) is such as would cause a person of reasonable
                firmness present at the scene to fear for his personal safety,
                each of the persons using or threatening unlawful violence
                is guilty of violent disorder.
                  (2) It is immaterial whether or not the 3 or more use or
                threaten unlawful violence simultaneously.
                   (3) N o person of reasonable firmness need actually be, or be
                likely to be, present at the scene.
                  (4) Violent disorder may be committed in private as well as in
                public places.
                   (5) A person guilty of violent disorder is liable on conviction
                on indictment to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 5 years
                or a fine or both, or on summary conviction to imprisonment for
                a term not exceeding 6 months or a fine not exceeding the statu­
                tory maximum or both.

Afiray.           3.— (1) A person is guilty of affray if he uses or threaten
                unlawful violence towards another and his conduct is such a&
                would cause a person of reasonable firmness present at the
                scene to fear for his personal safety.
                   (2 ) Where 2 or more persons use or threaten the unlawful
                violence, it is the conduct of them taken together that must be
                considered for the purposes of subsection ( 1 ).
                  (3) For the purposes of this section a threat cannot be made
                by the use of words alone.
                   (4) No person of reasonable firmness need actually be, or be
                likely to be, present at the scene.
                      Public Order Act 1986                   c.64                   3


  (5) Affray may be committed in private as well as in public          Part !
places.
   (6) A constable may arrest without warrant anyone he reason­
ably suspects is committing affray.
   (7) A person guilty of affray is liable on conviction on indict­
ment to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 3 years or a fine
or both, or on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 6 months or a fine not exceeding the statutory
maximum or both.

   4.— (1) A person is guilty of an offence if he —                Fear or
   ^ ^ “'uses ' towards another person threatening, abusive or
           insulting words or behaviour, or
      (b) distributes or displays to another person any writing,
^          sign or other visible representatioii which is threaten-
           ing, abusive oFInfflffig,                                   ,
 with in ten fto cause that person to believe that immediate un-                 \
 lawful violence will be used against him or another by any              .      /
 person, or to provoke the immediate use of unlawful violence •
 by that person or another, or whereby that person is likely to ?
 believe that such violence will be used or it is likely that such |
 violence will be provoked.
    (2) An offence under this section may be committed in a
 public or a private place, except that no offence is committed
 where the words or behaviour are used, or the writing, sign
 or other visible representation is distributed or displayed, by a
 person inside a dwelling and the other person is also inside
 that or another dwelling.
   (3) A constable may arrest without warrant anyone he reason­
 ably suspects is committing an offence under this section.
     (4) A person guilty of an offence under this section is liable
   on sum m ary conviction to imprisonment for a term not ex­
   ceeding 6 months or a fine not exceeding level 5 on the standard
' )scale or both.

   5.— (1) A person is guilty of an offence if he—                   Harassment,
      (a) uses threatening, abusive or insulting words or be-
           haviour, or disorderly behaviour, or
      0b) displays any writing, sign or other visible representation
           which is threatening, abusive or insulting,
 within the hearing or sight of a person likely to be caused harass­
 ment, alarm or distress thereby.
    (2)    An offence under this section may be committed in a
  public or a private place, except that no offence is committed
4              c. 64                 Public Order Act 1986


    Pa r t I   where the words or behaviour are used, or the writing, sign or
               other visible representation is displayed, by a person inside a
               dwelling and the other person is also inside that or another
               dwelling.
                 <3) It is a defence for the accused to prove—
                     (a) that he had no reason to believe that there was any
                          person within hearing or sight who was likely to be
                          caused harassment, alarm or distress, or
                 (b) that he was inside a dwelling and had no reason to
                          believe that the words or behaviour used, or the writing,
                          sign or other visible representation displayed, would
                          be heard or seen by a person outside that or any other
                          dwelling, or
                    (c) that his conduct was reasonable.
                 (4) A constable may arrest a person without warrant if—
                    (a) he engages in offensive conduct which the constable
                         warns him to stop, and
                    (b) he engages in further offensive conduct immediately or
                         shortly after the warning.
                  (5) In subsection (4) “ offensive conduct ” means conduct the
               constable reasonably suspects to constitute an offence under this
               section, and the conduct mentioned in paragraph (a) and the
               further conduct need not be of the same nature.
                  (6) A person guilty of an offence under this section is liable
               on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the
               standard scale.

Mental           6.— (1) A person is guilty of riot only if he intends to use
element:       violence or is aware that his conduct may be violent.
miscellaneous.
                  (2) A person is guilty of violent disorder or affray only if he
               intends to use or threaten violence or is aware that his conduct
               may be violent or threaten violence.
                  (3) A person is guilty of an offence under section 4 only if hr
               intends his words or behaviour, or the writing, sign or other
               visible representation, to be threatening, abusive or insulting,
               or is aware that it may be threatening, abusive or insulting.
                  (4) A person is guilty of an offence under section 5 only if he
               intends his words or behaviour, or the writing, sign or other
               visible representation, to be threatening, abusive or insulting,
               or is aware that it may be threatening, abusive or insulting or
               (as the Case may be) he intends his behaviour to be or is aware
               that it may be disorderly.
                  (5) For the purposes of this section a person whose awareness
               is impaired by intoxication shall be taken to be aware of that
               of which he would be aware if not intoxicated, unless he shows
                       Public Order Act 1986                     c.64                   5


either that his intoxication was not self-induced or that it was           Part I
caused solely by the taking or administration of a substance in
the course of medical treatment.
  (6) In subsection (5) “ intoxication ” means any intoxication,
whether caused by drink, drugs or other means, or by a com­
bination of means.
  (7) Subsections (1) and (2) do not affect the determination for
the purposes of riot or violent disorder of the number of
persons who use or threaten violence.

  7.—(1) No prosecution for an offence of riot or incitement Procedure:
to riot may be instituted except by or with the consent of the miscellaneous.
Director of Public Prosecutions.
) (2) For the purposes of the rules against charging more
 than one offence in the same count or information, each of
 sections 1 to 5 creates one offence.
   (3) If on the trial on indictment of a person charged with
violent disorder or affray the jury find him not guilty of the
offence charged, they may (without prejudice to section 6(3) of
the Criminal Law Act 1967) find him guilty of an offence under          1967   c. 58.
section 4.
   (4) The Crown Court has the same powers and duties in
relation to a person who is by virtue of subsection (3) con­
victed before it of an offence under section 4 as a magistrates’
court would have on convicting him of the offence.

  8. In this Part—                                                   Interpretation.
     “ dwelling ” means any structure or part of a structure occu­
          pied as a person’s home or as other living accommoda­
          tion (whether the occupation is separate or shared with
          others) but does not include any part not so occupied,
> r         andfor this purpose          “ structure ” includesa tent, cara-
J         van, vehicle, vessel or other temporary or movable
          structure;
     “ violence ” means any violent conduct, so that—
                (a) except in the context of affray, it includes
             violent conduct towards property as well as violent
             conduct towards persons, and
                (b) it is not restricted to conduct causing or in­
             tended to cause injury or damage but includes any
             other violent conduct (for example, throwing at or
             towards a person a missile of a kind capable of caus­
             ing injury which does not hit or falls short).
                               A 2
6              c.64                     Public Order Act 1986


    Part I        9 .— (1) The common law offences of riot, rout, unlawful
Offences       assembly and affray are abolished.
abolished.
                  (2) The offences under the following enactments are abol­
               ished—
1661 c. 5.           (a) section 1 of the Tumultuous Petitioning Act 1661 (pre­
                          sentation of petition to monarch or Parliament accom­
                          panied by excessive number of persons),
1793 c. 67.          (b) section 1 of the Shipping Offences Act 1793 (inter­
                          ference with operation of vessel by persons riotously
                          assembled),
1817 c. 19.          (c) section 23 of the Seditious Meetings Act 1817 (prohi­
                          bition of certain meetings within one mile of West­
                          minster Hall when Parliament sitting), and
1936 c. 6.          (d) section 5 of the Public Order Act 1936 (conduct con­
                          ducive to breach of the peace).
Construction     10— (1) In the Riot (Damages) Act 1886 and in section 515
of other       of the Merchant Shipping Act 1894 (compensation for riot
instruments.
               damage) “ riotous ” and “ riotously ” shall be construed in accor­
1886 c. 38.
               dance with section 1 above.
1894 c. 60.
1906 c. 41.       (2) In Schedule 1 to the Marine Insurance Act 1906 (form and
               rules for the construction of certain insurance policies) “ rioters ”
               in rule 8 and “ riot ” in rule 10 shall, in the application of the
               rules to any policy taking effect on or after the coming into force
               of this section, be construed in accordance with section 1 above
               unless a different intention appears.
                  (3) “ Riot ” and cognate expressions in any enactment in force
               before the coming into force of this section (other than the enact­
               ments mentioned in subsections (1) and (2) above) shall be con­
               strued in accordance with section 1 above if they would have
               been construed in accordance with the common law offence of
               riot apart from this Part.
                  (4) Subject to subsections (1) to (3) above and unless a different
               intention appears, nothing in this Part affects the meaning of
               “ riot ” or any cognate expression in any enactment in force, or
               other instrument taking effect, before the coming into force of
               this section.

                                                 P art II

                                 P r o c e s s io n s a n d A s s e m b l ie s
Advance notice 11.— (1) Written notice shall be given in accordance with this
of public     section of any proposal to hold a public procession intended—
processions.
                    (a) to demonstrate support for or opposition to the views or
                         actions of any person or body of persons,
                      Public Order Act 1986                  c. 64


     (b) to publicise a cause or campaign, or                         Part II
     (c) to mark or commemorate an event,
unless it is not reasonably practicable to give any advance notice
of the procession.
   (2) Subsection (1) does not apply where the procession is one
commonly or customarily held in the police area (or areas) in
which it is proposed to be held or is a funeral procession organ­
ised by a funeral director acting in the normal course of his
business.
  (3) The notice must specify the date when it is intended to
hold the procession, the time when it is intended to start it, its
proposed route, and the name and address of the person (or of
one of the persons) proposing to organise it.
„ (4) Notice must be delivered to a police station—
)    (a) in the police area in which it is proposed the procession
          will start, or
     (b) where it is proposed the procession will start in Scotland
          and cross into England, in the first police area in Eng­
          land on the proposed route.
  (5) If delivered not less than 6 clear days before the date when
the procession is intended to be held, the notice may be delivered
by post by the recorded delivery service; but section 7 of the
Interpretation Act 1978 (under which a document sent by post is 1978 c. 30.
deemed to have been served when posted and to have been
delivered in the ordinary course of post) does not apply.
   (6) If not delivered in accordance with subsection (5), the
notice must be delivered by hand not less than 6 clear days before
the date when the procession is intended to be held or, if that
is not reasonably practicable, as soon as delivery is reasonably
practicable.
  (7) Where a public procession is held, each of the persons
organising it is guilty of an offence if—
     (a) the requirements of this section as to notice have not
; ,       been satisfied, or
     (b) the date when it is held, the time when it starts, or its
          route, differs from the date, time or route specified in
          the notice.
   (8) It is a defence for the accused to prove that he did not
know of, and neither suspected nor had reason to suspect, the
failure to satisfy the requirements or (as the case may be) the
difference of date, time or route.
  (9) To the extent that an alleged offence turns on a difference
of date, time or route, it is a defence for the accused to prove
that the difference arose from circumstances beyond his control
                                 A3
8                c. 64                 Public Order Act 1986


    P a r t II   or from something done with the agreement of a police officer
                 or by his direction.
                    (10)   A person guilty of an offence under subsection (7) is liable
                 on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the
                 standard scale.

Imposing            12.— (1) If the senior police officer, having regard to the time
conditions       or place at which and the circumstances in which any public
on public
processions.     procession is being held or is intended to be held and to its route
                 or proposed route, reasonably believes that—
                      (a) it may result in serious public disorder, serious damage
                           to property or serious disruption to the life of the
                           community, or
                      (b) the purpose of the persons organising it is the intimida­
                           tion of others with a view to compelling them not t«|
                           do an act they have a right to do, or to do an act
                           they have a right not to do,
                 he may give directions imposing on the persons organising or
                 taking part in the procession such conditions as appear to him
                 necessary to prevent such disorder, damage, disruption or in­
                 timidation, including conditions as to the route of the procession
                 or prohibiting it from entering any public place specified in the
                 directions.
                   (2) In subsection (1) “ the senior police officer ” means—
                      (a) in relation to a procession being held, or to a procession
                           intended to be held in a case where persons are assemb­
                           ling with a view to taking part in it, the most senior
                           in rank of the police officers present at the scene, and
                      (b) in relation to a procession intended to be held in a case
                           where paragraph (a) does not apply, the chief officer
                           of police.
                   (3) A direction given by a chief officer of police by virtue of
                 subsection (2)(b) shall be given in writing.
                    (4) A person who organises a public procession and knowingly
                 fails to comply with a condition imposed under this section is
                 guilty of an offence, but it is a defence for him to prove that
                 the failure arose from circumstances beyond his control.
                    (5) A person who takes part in a public procession and know­
                 ingly fails to comply with a condition imposed under this section
                 is guilty of an offence, but it is a defence for him to prove that
                 the failure arose from circumstances beyond his control.
                   (6) A person who incites another to commit an offence under
                 subsection (5) is guilty of an offence.
                     Public Order Act 1986


    (7) A constable in uniform may arrest without warrant anyone    Pa r t II
he reasonably suspects is committing an offence under subsec­
tion (4), (5) or (6).
    (8) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (4) is
liable on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 3 months or a fine not exceeding level 4 on the
standard scale or both.
    (9) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (5) is
 liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 3
 on the standard scale.
    (10) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (6) is
 liable on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not
 exceeding 3 months or a fine not exceeding level 4 on the
 standard scale or both, notwithstanding section 45(3) of the
sMagistrates’ Courts Act 1980 (inciter liable to same penalty as 1980 c. 43.
incited).
     (11) In Scotland this section applies only in relation to a
  procession being held, and to a procession intended to be held
  in a case where persons are assembling with a view to taking
  part in it.

   13. (1) If at any time the chief officer of police reasonably Prohibiting
believes that, because of particular circumstances existing in any public
district or part of a district, the powers under section 12 will not processions,
be sufficient to prevent the holding of public processions in that
district or part from resulting in serious public disorder, he shall
apply to the council of the district for an order prohibiting for
such period not exceeding 3 months as may be specified in the
application the holding of all public processions (or of any
class of public procession so specified) in the district or part
concerned.
   (2)     On receiving such an application, a council may with the
consent of the Secretary of State make an order either in the
terms of the application or with such modifications as may be
approved by the Secretary of State.
y (3) Subsection (1) does not apply in the City of London or the
metropolitan police district.
    (4)    If at any time the Commissioner of Police for the City of
 London or the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis reason­
 ably believes that, because of particular circumstances existing
 in his police area or part of it, the powers under section 12 will
 not be sufficient to prevent the holding of public processions in
 that area or part from resulting in serious public disorder, he may
 with the consent of the Secretary of State make an order pro­
 hibiting for such period not exceeding 3 months as may be speci­
 fied in the order the holding of all public processions (or
                                   A 4
 10              c. 64                  Public Order Act 1986


      P art II   of any class of public procession so specified) in the area or
                 part concerned.
                    (5) An order made under this section may be revoked or
                 varied by a subsequent order made in the same way, that is,
                 in accordance with subsections (1) and (2) or subsection (4), as
                 the case may be.
                   (6) Any order under this section shall, if not made in writing,
                 be recorded in writing as soon as practicable after being made.
                    (7) A person who organises a public procession the holding
                 of which he knows is prohibited by virtue of an order under
                 this section is guilty of an offence.
                    (8) A person who takes part in a public procession the hold­
                 ing of which he knows is prohibited by virtue of an order under
                 this section is guilty of an offence.
                   (9) A person who incites another to commit an offence undei
                 subsection (8) is guilty of an offence.
                    (10) A constable in uniform may arrest without warrant any­
                 one he reasonably suspects is committing an offence under sub­
                 section (7), (8) or (9).
                    (11)A person guilty of an offence under subsection (7) is liable
                 on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceed­
                 ing 3 months or a fine not exceeding level 4 on the standard scale
                 or both.
                    (12) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (8) is
                 liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 3 on
                 the standard scale.
                    (13) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (9) is liable
                 on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding
                 3 months or a fine not exceeding level 4 on the standard scale
1980 c. 43.      or both, notwithstanding section 45(3) of the Magistrates’ Courts
                 Act 1980.
Imposing           14.—(1) If the senior police officer, having regard to the tin /
conditions       or place at which and the circumstances in which any public
on public
assemblies.      assembly is being held or is intended to be held, reasonably
                 believes that—
                      (a) it may result in serious public disorder, serious damage
                            to property or serious disruption to the life of the
                           community, or
                      (b) the purpose of the persons organising it is the intimi­
                            dation of others with a view to compelling them not
                            to do an act they have a right to do, or to do an act
                            they have a right not to do,
                 he may give directions imposing on the persons organising or
                 taking part in the assembly such conditions as to the place at
                       Public Order Act 1986                                     11



 which the assembly may be (or continue to be) held, its maxi-         Part II
 m um duration, or the maximum number of persons who may
 constitute it, as appear to him necessary to prevent such disorder,
 damage, disruption or intimidation.
      (2) In subsection (1) “ the senior police officer ” means—
         (a) in relation to an assembly being held, the most senior
               in rank of the police officers present at the scene, and
         (b) in relation to an assembly intended to be held, the chief
               officer of police.
      (3) A direction given by a chief officer of police by virtue of
   subsection (2)(b) shall be given in writing.
      (4) A person who organises a public assembly and knowingly
   fails to comply with a condition imposed under this section is
   guilty of an offence, but it is a defence for him to prove that
   "jhe failure arose from circumstances beyond his control.
      (5) A person who takes part in a public assembly and know­
   ingly fails to comply with a condition imposed under this sec­
   tion is guilty of an offence, but it is a defence for him to prove
   that the failure arose from circumstances beyond his control.
      (6) A person who incites another to commit an offence under
   subsection (5) is guilty of an offence.
      (7) A constable in uniform may arrest without warrant any­
   one he reasonably suspects is committing an offence under sub­
   section (4), (5) or (6).
      (8) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (4) is liable
   on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceed­
   ing 3 months or a fine not exceeding level 4 on the standard
   scale or both.
      (9) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (5) is liable
   on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the
   standard scale.
      (10) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (6) is
 .liab le on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not
f Xceeding 3 months or a fine not exceeding level 4 on the stan­
   dard scale or both, notwithstanding section 45(3) of the Magi- 1980 c. 43.
   strates’ Courts Act 1980.
   15.—(1) The chief officer of police may delegate, to such Delegation,
 extent and subject to such conditions as he may specify, any of
 his functions under sections 12 to 14 to a deputy or assistant
 chief constable; and references in those sections to the person
 delegating shall be construed accordingly.
    (2)   Subsection (1) shall have effect in the City of London and
 the metropolitan police district as if “ a deputy or assistant chief
 constable ” read “ an assistant commissioner of police ”.
                               A 5
 12                 c. 64                   Public Order Act 1986


      P a r t II      1 6 . In this Part—
Interpretation.          « the City of London ” means the City as defined for the
                              purposes of the Acts relating to the City of London
                              police;
                        “ the metropolitan police district ” means that district as
1963 c. 33.                   defined in section 76 of the London Government Act
                              1963 ;
                        “ public assembly” means an assembly of 20 or more
                              persons in a public place which is wholly or partly
                              open to the a ir;
                        “ public place ” means—
                                   (a) any highway, or in Scotland any road within
1984 c. 54.                     the meaning of the Roads (Scotland) Act 1984, and
                                   (b) any place to which at the material time the
                                public or any section of the public has access, or>
                                payment or otherwise, as of right or by virtue o f
                                express or implied permission;
                        “ public procession ” means a procession in a public place.

                                                  P art III
                                              R acial H a t r e d

                                      Meaning of “ racial hatred ”
Meaning of           17. In this Part “ racial hatred ” means hatred against a group
“ racial           of persons in Great Britain defined by reference to colour, race,
hatred ” .
                   nationality (including citizenship) or ethnic or national origins.

                             Acts intended or likely to stir up racial hatred
Use of words         18.— (1) A person who uses threatening, abusive or insulting
or behaviour       words or behaviour, or displays any written material which is
or display of      threatening, abusive or insulting, is guilty of an offence if—
written
material.               (a) he intends thereby to stir up racial hatred, or
                        (b) having regard to all the circumstances racial hatred i(
                             likely to be stirred up thereby.
                      (2) An offence under this section may be committed in a public
                   or a private place, except that no offence is committed where the
                   words or behaviour are used, or the written material is displayed,
                   by a person inside a dwelling and are not heard or seen except by
                   other persons in that or another dwelling.
                     (3) A constable may arrest without warrant anyone he reason­
                   ably suspects is committing an offence under this section.
                     (4) In proceedings for an offence under this section it is a
                   defence for the accused to prove that he was inside a dwelling
                   and had no reason to believe that the words or behaviour used,
                             Public Order Act 1986                                           13


    or the written material displayed, would be heard or seen by a                Part III
    person outside that or any other dwelling.
           (5) A person who is not shown to have intended to stir up
        racial hatred is not guilty of an offence under this section if he
        did not intend his words or behaviour, or the written material,
        to be, and was not aware that it might be, threatening, abusive
        or insulting.
          (6) This section does not apply to words or behaviour used, or
        written material displayed, solely for the purpose of being
        included in a programme broadcast or included in a cable pro­
        gramme service.

          19.— (1) A person who publishes or distributes written material Publishing or
        which is threatening, abusive or insulting is guilty of an offence distributing
/        __                                                                     written
‘   /                                                                           material.
              (a) he intends thereby to stir up racial hatred, or
              (b) having regard to all the circumstances racial hatred is
                   likely to be stirred up thereby.
          (2) In proceedings for an offence under this section it is a
        defence for an accused who is not shown to have intended to stir
        up racial hatred to prove that he was not aware of the content of
        the material and did not suspect, and had no reason to suspect,
        that it was threatening, abusive or insulting.
           (3) References in this Part to the publication or distribution of
        written material are to its publication or distribution to the public
        or a section of the public.

     20. — (1) If a public performance of a play is given which Public
   involves the use of threatening, abusive or insulting words or performance
  behaviour, any person who presents or directs the performance Pla^-
  is guilty of an offence if—
        (a)          he intends thereby to stir up racial hatred, or
* v     (b) having regard to all the circumstances (and, in particu-
Ty           lar, taking the performance as a whole) racial hatred is
             likely to be stirred up thereby.
           (2)      If a person presenting or directing the performance is not
        shown to have intended to stir up racial hatred, it is a defence
        for him to prove—
               (a) that he did not know and had no reason to suspect that
                    the performance would involve the use of the offending
                    words or behaviour, or
               (b) that he did not know and had no reason to suspect
                    that the offending words or behaviour were threaten­
                     ing, abusive or insulting, or
14              c. 64                   Public Order Act 1986


     Part in            (c) that he did not know and had no reason to suspect that
                             the circumstances in which the performance would be
                             given would be such that racial hatred would be likely
                             to be stirred up.
                   (3) This section does not apply to a performance given solely
                or primarily for one or more of the following purposes—
                      (a) rehearsal,
                      (b) making a recording of the performance, or
                      (c) enabling the performance to be broadcast or included in
                           a cable programme service ;
                but if it is proved that the performance was attended by persons
                other than those directly connected with the giving of the per­
                formance or the doing in relation to it of the things mentioned
                in paragraph (b) or (c), the performance shall, unless the contrary
                is shown, be taken not to have been given solely or primarily
                for the purposes mentioned above.
                  (4) For the purposes of this section—
                     (a) a person shall not be treated as presenting a perform­
                          ance of a play by reason only of his taking part in it as
                          a performer,
                     (b) a person taking part as a performer in a performance
                          directed by another shall be treated as a person who
                          directed the performance if without reasonable excuse
                          he performs otherwise than in accordance with that
                          person’s direction, and
                     (c) a person shall be taken to have directed a performance
                          of a play given under his direction notwithstanding
                          that he was not present during the performance;
                and a person shall not be treated as aiding or abetting the com­
                mission of an offence under this section by reason only of his
                taking part in a performance as a performer.
                  (5) In this section “ play ” and “ public performance ” have
1968 c. 54.     the same meaning as in the Theatres Act 1968.
                   (6) The following provisions of the Theatres Act 1968 applv
                in relation to an offence under this section as they apply to an
                offence under section 2 of that Act—
                   section 9 (script as evidence of what was performed),
                   section 10 (power to make copies of script),
                   section 15 (powers of entry and inspection).

Distributing,     21.—(1) A person who distributes, or shows or plays, a record­
showing or      ing of visual images or sounds which are threatening, abusive or
playing a       insulting is guilty of an offence if—
recording.
                     (a) he intends thereby to stir up racial hatred, or
                     (b) having regard to all the circumstances racial hatred is
                          likely to be stirred up thereby.
                       Public Order Act 1986                    c. 64                15


     (2) In this Part “ recording” means any record from which            Part III
  visual images or sounds may, by any means, be reproduced,
  and references to the distribution, showing or playing of a
  recording are to its distribution, showing or playing to the public
  or a section of the public.
     (3) In proceedings for an offence under this section it is a
  defence for an accused who is not shown to have intended to
  stir up racial hatred to prove that he was not aware of the
  content of the recording and did not suspect, and had no reason
  to suspect, that it was threatening, abusive or insulting.
    (4) This section does not apply to the showing or playing of a
  recording solely for the purpose of enabling the recording to be
  broadcast or included in a cable programme service.

( ) 22.— (1) If a programme involving threatening, abusive or Broadcasting
   insulting visual images or sounds is broadcast, or included in
   a cable programme service, each of the persons mentioned in jn cabje
   subsection (2) is guilty of an offence if—                       programme
        (a) he intends thereby to stir up racial hatred, or         service.
        (b) having regard to all the circumstances racial hatred is
             likely to be stirred up thereby.
      (2) The persons are—
          (a) the person providing the broadcasting or cable pro­
               gramme service,
          (b) any person by whom the programme is produced or
               directed, and
          (c) any person by whom offending words or behaviour are
               used.
       (3) If the person providing the service, or a person by whom
   the programme was produced or directed, is not shown to have
    intended to stir up racial hatred, it is a defence for him to prove
   that—
vx        (a) he did not know and had no reason to suspect that the
X .)           programme would involve the offending material, and
          (b) having regard to the circumstances in which the pro­
               gramme was broadcast, or included in a cable pro­
               gramme service, it was not reasonably practicable for
               him to secure the removal of the material.
     (4) It is a defence for a person by whom the programme was
   produced or directed who is not shown to have intended to stir
   up racial hatred to prove that he did not know and had no
   reason to suspect—
        (a) that the programme would be broadcast or included in
              a cable programme service, or
 16                 c. 64                   Public Order Act 1986


      P a rt   in           (b) that the circumstances in which the programme would
                                 be broadcast or so included would be such that racial
                                 hatred would be likely to be stirred up.
                       ( 5) It is a defence for a person by whom offending words or
                    behaviour were used and who is not shown to have intended
                    to stir up racial hatred to prove that he did not know and had
                    no reason to suspect—
                           (a) that a programme involving the use of the offending
                                material would be broadcast or included in a cable
                                programme service, or
                           (b) that the circumstances in which a programme involving
                                the use of the offending material would be broadcast,
                                or so included, car in which a programme broadcast
                                or so included would involve the use of the offending
                                material, would be such that racial hatred would be
                                likely to be stirred up.
                       (6) A person who is not shown to have intended to stir up
                    racial hatred is not guilty of an offence under this section if he
                    did not know, and had no reason to suspect, that the offending
                    material was threatening, abusive or insulting.
                      (7) This section does not apply—
                         (a) to the broadcasting of a programme by the British
                              Broadcasting Corporation or the Independent Broad­
                              casting Authority, or
                         (b) to the inclusion of a programme in a cable programme
                              service by the reception and immediate re-transmission
                              of a broadcast by either of those authorities.
1984 c. 46.            (8) The following provisions of the Cable and Broadcasting
                    Act 1984 apply to an offence under this section as they apply to
                    a “ relevant offence ” as defined in section 33(2) of that Act—
                          section 33 (scripts as evidence),
                          section 34 (power to make copies of scripts and records),
                          section 35 (availability of visual and sound records);
                    and sections 33 and 34 of that Act apply to an offence under
                    this section in connection with the broadcasting of a pro­
                    gramme as they apply to an offence in connection with the
                    inclusion of a programme in a cable programme service.

                                      Racially inflammatory material
Possession            23.— (1) A person who has in his possession written material
o f racially        which is threatening, abusive or insulting, or a recording of
inflammatory        visual images or sounds which are threatening, abusive or
material.           insulting, with a view to­
                         te) in the case of written material, its being displayed,
                              published, distributed, broadcast or included in a cable
                              programme service, whether by himself or another, or
                         Public Order Act 1986                    c. 64          17


        (b)       in the case of a recording, its being distributed, shown,   Part III
              played, broadcast or included in a cable programme
              service, whether by himself or another,
   is guilty of an offence if he intends racial hatred to be stirred up
   thereby or, having regard to all the circumstances, racial hatred
   is likely to be stirred up thereby.
      (2) For this purpose regard shall be had to such display, pub­
   lication, distribution, showing, playing, broadcasting or inclu­
   sion in a cable programme service as he has, or it may reasonably
   be inferred that he has, in view.
      (3) In proceedings for an offence under this section it is a
   defence for an accused who is not shown to have intended to
   stir up racial hatred to prove that he was not aware of the content
   of the written material or recording and did not suspect, and
   had no reason to suspect, that it was threatening, abusive or
O  insulting.
     (4) This section does not apply to the possession of written
   material or a recording by or on behalf of the British Broad­
   casting Corporation or the Independent Broadcasting Authority
   or with a view to its being broadcast by either of those
   authorities.

     24.— (1) If in England and Wales a justice of the peace is Powers of entry
   satisfied by information on oath laid by a constable that there and search-
   are reasonable grounds for suspecting that a person has pos­
   session of written material or a recording in contravention of
   section 23, the justice may issue a warrant under his hand
   authorising any constable to enter and search the premises
   where it is suspected the material or recording is situated.
       (2) If in Scotland a sheriff or justice of the peace is satisfied
    by evidence on oath that there are reasonable grounds for
    suspecting that a person has possession of written material or a
    recording in contravention of section 23, the sheriff or justice
    may issue a warrant authorising any constable to enter and
^ ■search the premises where it is suspected the material or record-
f'Jing is situated.
       (3) A constable entering or searching premises in pursuance
    of a warrant issued under this section may use reasonable force
    if necessary.
     (4) In this section “ premises ” means any place and, in
   particular, includes—
        (a) any vehicle, vessel, aircraft or hovercraft,
        (b) any offshore installation as defined in section 1(3) (b)
             of the Mineral Workings (Offshore Installations) Act 1971 c. 61.
             1971, and
        (c) any tent or movable structure.
18               c. 64                 Public Order Act 1986


   P art III       25.—(1) A court by or before which a person is convicted of—
Power to order        (a) an offence under section 18 relating to the display of
forfeiture.
                           written material, or
                      (b) an offence under section 19, 21 or 23,
                 shall order to be forfeited any written material or recording pro­
                 duced to the court and shown to its satisfaction to be written
                 material or a recording to which the offence relates.
                   (2) An order made under this section shall not take effect—
                      (a) in the case of an order made in proceedings in England
                            and Wales, until the expiry of the ordinary time within
                            which an appeal may be instituted or, where an appeal
                            is duly instituted, until it is finally decided or
                            abandoned;
                      (b) in the case of an order made in proceedings in Scotland,
                            until the expiration of the time within which, by virtue-
                            of any statute, an appeal may be instituted or, where
                            such an appeal is duly instituted, until the appeal is
                            finally decided or abandoned.
                   (3) For the purposes of subsection (2) (a)—
                      (a) an application for a case stated or for leave to appeal
                           shall be treated as the institution of an appeal, and
                      (b) where a decision on appeal is subject to a further appeal,
                           the appeal is not finally determined until the expiry of
                           the ordinary time within which a further appeal may
                           be instituted or, where a further appeal is duly instituted,
                           until the further appeal is finally decided or abandoned.
                 (4) For the purposes of subsection (2)(b) the lodging of an
                 application for a stated case or note of appeal against sentence
                 shall be treated as the institution of an appeal.

                                     Supplementary provisions
Savings for     26.— (1) Nothing in this Part applies to a fair and accurate
reports of    report of proceedings in Parliament.
parliamentary
or judicial      (2)   Nothing in this Part applies to a fair and accurate report
proceedings.  of proceedings publicly heard before a court or tribunal exercis­
                 ing judicial authority where the report is published contem­
                 poraneously with the proceedings or, if it is not reasonably
                 practicable or would be unlawful to publish a report of them
                 contemporaneously, as soon as publication is reasonably
                 practicable and lawful.

Procedure and   27.—(1) N o proceedings for an offence under this Part may be
punishment.   instituted in England and Wales except by or with the consent
                 of the Attorney General.
                          Public Order Act 1986                  c. 64                   19


    (2) For the purposes of the rules in England and Wales against         Pa r t   HI
charging more than one offence in the sam e count or informa-
tion, each of sections 18 to 23 creates one offence.
    (3) A person guilty of an offence under this Part is liable—
       (a) on conviction on indictment to imprisonment for a term
            not exceeding two years or a fine or both ;
       (b) on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not
          exceeding six months or a fine not exceeding the statu­
          tory maximum or both.

  2 8 . — (1) Where a body corporate is guilty of an offence under
this Part and it is shown that the offence was committed with the
consent or connivance of a director, manager, secretary or other
similar officer of the body, or a person purporting to act m any
such capacity, he as well as the body corporate is guilty of the
offence and liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly.
  (2)    Where the affairs of a body corporate are managed by its
members, subsection ( 1) applies in relation to the acts and
defaults of a member in connection with his functions of man­
agement as it applies to a director.

        2 9. In th is Part—                                     Interpretation.
          “ broadcast ” means broadcast by wireless telegraphy (within
               the meaning of the Wireless Telegraphy Act1949) for 1949 c. 54.
               general reception, whether by way of soundbroad­
               casting or television;
          “ cable programme service ” has the same meaning as in
               the Cable and Broadcasting Act 1984 ;                   1984 c. 46.
          “ distribute ”, and related expressions, shall be construed
               in accordance with section 19(3) (written material)
               and section 2 1 (2 ) (recordings);
    !     “ dwelling ” means any structure or part of a structure
                occupied as. a person’s home or other living accom­
0               modation (whether the occupation is separate or shared
                with others) but does not include any part not so
                occupied, and for this purpose “ structure ” includes
                a tent, caravan, vehicle, vessel or other temporary
                or movable structure;
           “ programme ” means any item which is broadcast or
                included in a cable programme service ;
           “ publish ”, and related expressions, in relation to written
                material, shall be construed in accordance with section
                 19 (3);
           “ racial hatred ” has the meaning given by section 17 ;
20                 c. 64                   Public Order Act 1986


     P a rt II I           “ recording ” has the m eaning given by section 21(2), and
                                “ play ” and “ show ”, and related expressions, in
                                relation to a recording, shall be construed in accor­
                                dance with that p rovision ;
                           “ written material ” includes any sign or other visible
                                representation.


                                                   Part    IV
                                            E   xclusion   O   rders

Exclusion            3®.—(1) A court by or before which a person is convicted
orders.            of an offence to which section 31 applies may make an order
                   (an exclusion order) prohibiting him from entering any premises
                   for the purpose of attending any prescribed football match there.
                                                                                    f
                      (2) No exclusion order may be made unless the court isv
                   satisfied that making such an order in relation to the accused
                   would help to prevent violence or disorder at or in connection
                   with prescribed football matches.
                     (3) An exclusion order may only be made—
                        (a) in addition to a sentence imposed in respect of the
                             offence of which the accused is convicted, or
                        (b) in addition to a probation order or an order discharging
                             him absolutely or conditionally.
                      (4) An exclusion order may be made as mentioned in sub­
                   section (3)(b) notwithstanding anything in sections 2, 7 and 13
1973 c. 62.        of the Powers of Criminal Courts Act 1973 (which relate to
                   orders there mentioned and their effect).

Offences             3 1 .— (1) This section applies to any offence which fulfils one
connected          or more of the following three conditions.
with football.
                      (2) The first condition is that the offence was committed
                   during any period relevant to a prescribed football match (as
                   determined under subsections (6 ) to (8 )), while the accused w a|
                   at, or was entering or leaving or trying to enter or leave, the
                   football ground concerned.
                     (3) The second condition is that the offence—
                        (a) involved the use or threat of violence by the accused
                             towards another person and was committed while
                             one or each of them was on a journey to or from an
                             association football match,
                        (b) involved the use or threat of violence towards property
                             and was committed while the accused was on such a
                             journey, or
                        (c) was committed under section 5 or Part III while the
                              accused was on such a journey.
                       Public Order Act 1986                  c. 64               21


    (4) The third condition is that the offence was committed        P a r t IV
 under section 1(3) or (4) or 1A(3) or (4) of the Sporting Events 1985 c. 57.
 (Control of Alcohol etc.) Act 1985 (alcohol on journeys to or
 from certain sporting events) and the designated sporting event
 concerned was an association football match.
    (5) For the purposes of subsection (3) a person’s journey in­
 cludes breaks (including overnight breaks).
    (6 ) The period beginning 2 hours before the start of the
 match or (if earlier) 2 hours before the time at which it is adver­
 tised to start, and ending 1 hour after the end of it, is a period
 relevant to it.
    (7) Where the match is advertised to start at a particular time
  on a particular day and is postponed to a later day, the period
.in the advertised day beginning 2 hours before and ending
Ohour after that time is also a period relevant to it.
     ( 8) Where the match is advertised to start at a particular
  time on a particular day and does not take place, the period
  in that day beginning 2 hours before and ending 1 hour after
  that time is a period relevant to it.

    32.   (1) A n exclusion order shall have effect for such period Effect of
  as is specified in the order.
      (2) The period shall be not less than three months or, in the
   case of a person already subject to an exclusion order, not less
   than three months plus the unexpired period of the earlier order
   or, if there is more than one earlier order, of the most recent
   order.
      (3) A person who enters premises in breach of an exclusion
    order is guilty of an offence and liable on summary conviction
    to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 1 month or a fine not
    exceeding level 3 on the standard scale or both.
     (4) A constable who reasonably suspects that a person has
 f entered premises in breach of an exclusion order may arrest
   him w ithout warrant.

       33.— (1) A person in relation to whom an exclusion order has
    had effect for at least one year may apply to the court by which order
    it was made to terminate it.
      (2)    On such an application the court may, having regard to the
    person’s character, his conduct since the order was made, the
    nature of the offence which led to it and any other circumstances
    of the case, either by order terminate the order (as from a date
    specified in the terminating order) or refuse the application.
22                c. 64                 Public Order Act 1986


     P a r t IV
                     (3) Where an application under this section is refused, a further
                  application in respect of the exclusion order shall not be enter­
                  tained if made within the period of six months beginning with
                  the day of the refusal.
                     (4) The court may order the applicant to pay all or any part of
                  the costs of an application under this section.
                     (5) In the case of an exclusion order made by a magistrates’
                  court the reference in subsection (1) to the court by which it
                  was made includes a reference to any magistrates’ court acting
                  for the same petty sessions area as that court.

1980 c. 43.         (6 ) Section 63(2) of the Magistrates’ Courts Act 1980 (power
                  to suspend or rescind orders) does not apply to an exclusion
                  order.

Information.
                          .
                    3 4 __(i) Where a court makes an exclusion order, the clerM
                  of the court (in the case of a magistrates’ court) or the appro­
                  priate officer (in the case of the Crown Court)—
                        (a) shall give a copy of it to the person to whom it relates,
                        (b) shall (as soon as reasonably practicable) send a copy of
                             it to the chief officer of police for the police area in
                             which the offence leading to the order was committed,
                             and
                        (c) shall (as soon as reasonably practicable) send a copy of
                              it to any prescribed person.
                     (2) Where a court terminates an exclusion order under section
                   28, the clerk of the court (in the case of a magistrates court)
                   or the appropriate officer (in the case of the Crown Court)
                        (a) shall give a copy of the terminating order to the person
                             to whom the exclusion order relates,
                        (b) shall (as soon as reasonably practicable) send a copy of
                             the terminating order to the chief officer of police for
                             the police area in which the offence leading to the ex­
                              clusion order was committed, and
                        (c) shall (as soon as reasonably practicable) send a copy
                              the terminating order to any prescribed person.
                      (3) References in this section to the clerk of a magistrates’
                   court shall be construed in accordance with section 141 of the
 1980 c. 43.       Magistrates’ Courts Act 1980, reading references to that Act as
                   references to this section.
                      (4) In this section “ prescribed ” means prescribed by order
                   made by the Secretary of State.
                       (5) The power to make an order under this section shall be
                   exercisable by statutory instrument subject to annulment in pur­
                    suance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.
                       Public Order Act 1986                   c. 64           23


   35.— (1) The court by which an exclusion order is made may         P a r t IV
  make an order which—                                             Photographs.
      (a) requires a constable to take a photograph of the person
           to whom the exclusion order relates or to cause such a
           photograph to be taken, and
      ib) requires that person to go to a specified police station
           not later than 7 clear days after the day on which the
           order under this section is made, and at a specified
           time of day or between specified times of day, in order
           to have his photograph taken.
   (2) In subsection (1) “ specified ” means specified in the order
  made under this section.
    (3) No order may be made under this section unless an appli­
  cation to make it is made to the court by or on behalf of the
(^person who is the prosecutor in respect of the offence leading to
  the exclusion order.

    (4) If the person to whom the exclusion order relates fails to
  comply with an order under this section a constable may arrest
  him without warrant in order that his photograph may be taken.

    36.— (1) In this Part “ prescribed football m atch” means an prescribed
  association football match of any description prescribed by football
  order made by the Secretary of State.                          matches.
    (2)    The power to make an order under this section shall be
  exercisable by statutory instrument subject to annulment in
  pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.


    37.— (1) The Secretary of State may by order provide for Extension
  sections 30 to 35 to apply as if—                                to other
       (a) any reference to an association football match included events?8
            a reference to a sporting event of a kind specified in
            the order, and
       (b) any reference to a prescribed football match included
            a reference to such a sporting event of a description
            specified in the order.
     (2) An order under subsection (1) may make such modifica­
  tions of those sections, as they apply by virtue of the order, as
  the Secretary of State thinks fit.
    (3) The power to make an order under this section shall be
  exercisable by statutory instrument, and no such order shall
  be made unless a draft of the order has been laid before and
  approved by resolution of each House of Parliament.
                                          Public Order Act 1986
24

                                                  Part V

                                     M   iscellaneous a n d   G   eneral

                   38.      ( 1) It is an offence for a person, with the intention—
Contam ination
of or                 (a) of causing public alarm or anxiety, or
interference
with goods            (b) of causing injury to members of the public consuming or
with intention
o f causing                using the goods, or
public alarm or          (c) of causing econom ic loss to any person b y r e as o n o f the
 anxiety, etc.               goods being shunned by members of the public, or
                         W) of causing economic loss to any £ ™ n by r e a s o n *
                             steps taken to avoid any such alarm or anxiety, rnju y
                             or loss,
                  to contam inate or interfere with goods, or m ake it aP P «arthat
                  M ods have been contam inated or interfered with, or to placd
                  f o S s which have been contam inated or interfered with or
                  which appear to have been contam inated or interfered w ith, !
                  TpSe K           £ o d s of that description are consumed, used, sold
                  or otherwise supplied.                                      .
                     (2) It is also an offence for a person, with any such mtentio


                  has done, any of the acts mentioned in that subsectio .
                     (3) It is an offence for a person to be in possession of any o
                  t h f foflowfng L c l e s with a view to the commission of an
                  offence under subsection (1)—                                  .       .
                        (n\ materials to be used for contaminating or interfering
                        W “ T g o o J s or making it appear that goods have been
                               contaminated or interfered with, or
                         (h) eoods which have been contaminated or interfered with,
                               o i which appear to have been contaminated or inter-
                               fered with.                              . .
                      (4) A person guilty of an offence under this section is liable—
                         (a) on conviction on indictment to imprisonment for a term
                               not exceeding 10 years or a fine or both, or
                          (b) on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term not
                                exSSding six months or a fine not exceeding the
                               statutory m axim um or both.
                             Tn this section “ g o o d s ” includes substances whether
                   n a ® a lo r m n S t u r e d fnd whether or not incorporated m or
                   mixed with other goods.                                   .
                      (6 )     The reference in subsection (2) to a person claiming t o t
                   retain acts have been committed does not include a person who
                   S ^ o o d faith reports or warns that such acts have been, or
                   appear to have been, committed.
                        Public Order Act 1986                   c. 64                  25


    39.— (1) If the senior police officer reasonably believes that P a r tV
  two or more persons have entered land as trespassers and are Power to direct
  present there with the common purpose of residing there for trespassers to
  any period, that reasonable steps have been taken by or o n leave land,
  behalf of the occupier to ask them to leave and—
       (a) that any of those persons has caused damage to pro­
            perty on the land or used threatening, abusive or
            insulting words or behaviour towards the occupier, a
            member of his family or an employee or agent of his,
            or
       {b) that those persons have between them brought twelve
            or more vehicles on to the land,
  he may direct those persons, or any of them, to leave the land.
    (2) If a person knowing that such a direction has been given
( which applies to him—
       (a) fails to leave the land as soon as reasonably practicable,
             or
       (b) having left again enters the land as a trespasser within
             the period of three months beginning with the day on
             which the direction was given,
  he commits an offence and is liable on summary conviction to
  imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months or a fine
  not exceeding level 4 on the standard scale, or both.
    (3) A constable in uniform who reasonably suspects that a
  person is committing an offence under this section may arrest
  him without warrant.
     (4) In proceedings for an offence under this section it is a
  defence for the accused to show—
        (a) that his original entry on the land was not as a tres­
             passer, or
        (b) that he had a reasonable excuse for failing to leave the
             land as soon as reasonably practicable or, as the case
             may be, for again entering the land as a trespasser.
© (5)    In this section—
       “ land ” does not include—
                 (a) buildings other than—
                    (i) agricultural buildings within the meaning of
                          section 26(4) of the General Rate Act 1967, 1967 c- 9-
                          or
                    (ii) scheduled monuments within the meaning of
                          the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological 1979 c. 46.
                          Areas Act 1979;
                 (b) land forming part of a highway ;




                                                                                   I
                 c> 64                   Public Order Act 1986
26

                      occupier ” means the person entitled »                   ,of
     Pa r t V             land by virtue of an estate or interest held by him ,
                    “ property ” means property within the meaning of section
                           10(1) of the Criminal Damage Act 1971,
1971 c. 48.
                     “ senior police officer ” means the most senior in rank of the
                           police officers present at the scene ;
                     "trespasser”, in relation to land, means aperson who <s
                           a trespasser as against the occupier of the lan d ,
                     “ vehicle ” includes a caravan as defined in section 29(1)
                           of the Caravan Sites and Control of Development Act
1960 c. 62.
                            1960;
                 and a person may be regarded for the purposes of this section as
                 having^hepurpose of rlid in g in a place notwrthstandmg that he
                 has a home elsewhere.
                    Ati        m crhedule 1 which amends the Sporting Events (Con-
 Amendments,                                   1985 and Part V of the Cnmmal
 repeals and
 savings.         Justice (Scotland) Act 1980, shall have effect.
 1985 c. 57.         (2) Schedule 2, which contains miscellaneous and consequen­
 1980 c. 62.
                  tial amendments, shall have effect.
                     ™ The enactments mentioned in Schedule 3 (which include
                     (3) The enac™        , cuhiect matter of this Act but already
                  enactments related to the subject maiiei «           specified in
                  obsolete or unnecessary) are repealed to the extent specmea in
                  column 3.
                      (4) Nothing in this Act affects the common law powers in
                   England and Wales to deal with or prevent a breach
                   peace.
                      (5) As respects Scotland, nothing in this Act affects any
                   power of a constable under any rule of law.

                      41.—(1) This Act shall come into force on suchi day as the
     Commence­     Secretary of State may appoint by order made by statutory
     ment.
                   instrument, and different days may be appointed for different
                   provisions or different purposes.
                       (2)    Nothing in a provision of this Act applies in relation to
                    an ® S en « c^ Z i? ted or act done before the p r o v e n comes
                    into force.
                         n* W here a provision of this A ct com es into force for certain
                    o u S o « only t o references in subsection (2) to the p r o v e n
                    S S e n S s to it so far as it relates to those purposes.

                         42.    ( 1) The provisions of this Act extend to England and
     Extent         Wales except so far as they—
                        (a) amend or repeal an enactment which does not so
                             extend, or
                         Public Order Act 1986


          (b) relate to the extent of provisions to Scotland or Northern      P art V
               Ireland.
      (2) The following provisions of this Act extend to Scotland—
         in Part I, section 9(2) except paragraph (a) ;
         in Part II, sections 12 and 14 to 16 ;
         Part I I I ;
         Part V, except sections 38, 39, 40(4), subsections (1) and (3)
               of this section and any provision amending or repealing
               an enactment which does not extend to Scotland.
       (3) The following provisions of this Act extend to Northern
    Ireland—
          sections 38, 41, this subsection, section 43 and paragraph
                6 of Schedule 2.

^     43.   This Act may be cited as the Public Order Act 1986.            Short title.
28                c. 64                 Public Order Act 1986


                                        SCHEDULES
Section 40 (1).                              SCHEDULE 1
                                            S p o rtin g E v e n ts

                                                   P a rt I

                                          E n g la n d a n d W a le s
                                            Introduction
1985 c. 57.         1. The Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc.) Act 1985 shall
                  be amended as mentioned in this Part.
                                                  Vehicles
                    2. The following shall be inserted after section 1 (offences in con-
                  nection with alcohol on coaches and trains)—                          '
                  “Alcohol on     1A.—(1) This section applies to a motor vehicle
                  certain other which_
                  vehicles.                                    ,                 ,   ^ , .
                                   (a) is not a public service vehicle but is adapted to
                                         carry more than 8 passengers, and
                                    (b) is being used for the principal purpose of carry­
                                         ing two or more passengers for the whole or part
                                         of a journey to or from a designated sporting
                                         event.
                                 (2) A person who knowingly causes or permits intoxi­
                              cating liquor to be carried on a motor vehicle to which
                              this section applies is guilty of an offence—
                                    (a) if he is its driver, or
                                     (b) if he is not its driver but is its keeper, the ser­
                                          vant or agent of its keeper, a person to whom
                                          it is made available (by hire, loan or otherwise)
                                          by its keeper or the keeper’s servant or agent,
                                          or the servant or agent of a person to whom it
                                          is so made available.
                                 (3) A person who has intoxicating liquor in his posses-,
                               sion while on a motor vehicle to which this sectiotty
                              applies is guilty of an offence.
                                  (4) A person who is drunk on a motor vehicle to which
                              this section applies is guilty of an offence.
                                 (5) In this section—
                                     “ keeper ”, in relation to a vehicle, means the per­
                                         son having the duty to take out a licence for it
 1971 c. 10.                             under section 1(1) of the Vehicles (Excise) Act
                                          1971,
                                   “ motor vehicle” means a mechanically propelled
                                         vehicle intended or adapted for use on roads,
                                         and
                               Public Order Act 1986                  c. 64


                     “ public service vehicle ” has the same meaning as in
                         the Public Passenger Vehicles Act 1981.”.         1981

                               Fireworks etc.
    3. The following shall be inserted after section 2 (offences in con­
  nection with alcohol, containers etc. at sports grounds)
 “ Fireworks 2A.—(1) A person is guilty of an offence if he has an
             article or substance to which this section applies in his
             possession—
                  (а) at any time during the period of a designated
                       sporting event when he is in any area of a
                       designated sports ground from which the event
                       may be directly viewed, or
                  (б ) while entering or trying to enter a designated
                        sports ground at any time during the period of a
■                      designated sporting event at the ground.
"                 (2) It is a defence for the accused to prove that he
                had possession with lawful authority.
                   (3) This section applies to any article or substance
                whose main purpose is the emission of a flare for purposes
                of illuminating or signalling (as opposed to igniting or
                heating) or the emission of smoke or a visible gas; and
                in particular it applies to distress flares, fog signals, and
                pellets and capsules intended to be used as fumigators
                or for testing pipes, but not to matches, cigarette lighters
                or heaters.
                   (4) This section also applies to any article which is a
                firework.”.

                                Licensing etc.
       4. The following shall be inserted after section 5—
    “ Private     5A.—(1) In relatio n to a room in a designated sports
    facilities for ground.—■
    eventsf           (a) from which designated sporting events may be
                            directly viewed, and
a                     (ft) to which the general public are not admitted,
™                sections 2(1) (a) and 3(1) (a) of this Act have effect with
                 the substitution for die reference to the period of a desig­
                 nated sporting event of a reference to the restricted period
                 defined below.
                    (2)     Subject to any order under subsection (3) below,
                 the restricted period of a designated sporting event for the
                 purposes of this section is the period beginning 15 minutes
                 before the start of the event or (if earlier) 15 minutes before
                 the time at which it is advertised to start and ending 15
                 minutes after the end of the event, but—
                       (a) where an event advertised to start at a particular
                             time on a particular day is postponed to a later
30             c. 64                    Public Order Act 1986


     Sch . 1                          day, the restricted period includes the period in
                                      the day on which it is advertised to take place be­
                                      ginning 15 minutes before and ending 15 minutes
                                      after that time, and
                                (ft) where an event advertised to start at a particular
                                      time on a particular day does not take place,
                                      the period is the period referred to in paragraph
                                       (a) above.

                               (3) The Secretary of State may by order provide, in re­
                            lation to all designated sporting events or in relation to
                            such descriptions of event as are specified in the order ■
                                  (a) that the restricted period shall be such period,
                                        shorter than that mentioned in subsection (2)
                                        above, as may be specified in the order, or
                                  (ft) that there shall be no restricted period.
                              (4) An order under this section shall be made by statu-®
                            tory instrument which shall be subject to annulment in
                            pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.
               Occasional      5B.—(1) An occasional licence which is in force for
               licences.    any place situated in the area of a designated sports
                            ground, and which would (apart from this section) autho­
                            rise the sale of intoxicating liquor at the place during the
                            whole or part of the period of a designated sporting event
                            at the ground, shall not authorise such sale.
                               (2) Where the sale of intoxicating liquor would (apart
                            from this section) be authorised by an occasional licence,
                            its holder is guilty of an offence if he sells or authorises the
                            sale of such liquor and by virtue of this section the licence
                            does not authorise the sale.
                               (3) A person is guilty of an offence if he consumes
                            intoxicating liquor at a place, or takes such liquor from
                            a place, at a time when an occasional licence which would
                            (apart from this section) authorise the sale of the liquor
                            at the place does not do so by virtue of this section.

               Clubs.         5C — (1) Subsections (3) and (5) of section 39 of th e(
1964 c. 26.                 Licensing Act 1964 (clubs), and subsection (4) of that
                            section as it applies to subsection (3), shall not apply as
                            regards the supply of intoxicating liquor in the area of a
                            designated sports ground during the period of a desig­
                            nated sporting event at the ground or as regards the keep­
                            ing of intoxicating liquor for such supply ; but subsections
                            (2) to (5) below shall apply.
                               (2)    During the period of such an event at the ground,
                            intoxicating liquor shall not be supplied by or on behalf
                            of a registered club to a member or guest in the area of
                            the ground except at premises in respect of which the
                            club is registered.
                                 Public Order Act 1986                                        31


                     (3) A person supplying or authorising the supply of in­       S ch . 1
                  toxicating liquor in contravention of subsection (2 ) above
                  is guilty of an offence.
                     (4) A person who, during the period of such an event,
                  obtains or consumes intoxicating liquor supplied.m con­
                  travention of subsection (2 ) above is guilty of an offence.
                     (5) If intoxicating liquor is kept in any premises or place
                  by or on behalf of a club for supply to members or their
                  guests in contravention of subsection (2 ) above, every
                  officer of the club is guilty of an offence unless he shows
                  that it was so kept without his knowledge or consent.
Non-retail          5D.—(1) During the period of a designated sportmg
sales.           event at a designated sports ground, intoxicating liquor
                  shall not be sold in the area of the ground except by sale
^                by retail.
*         ■          (2) A person selling or authorising the sale of mtoxica-
                  ting liquor in contravention of subsection ( 1) above is
                  guilty of an offence.
                     (3 )   A person who, during the period of such an event,
                  obtains or consumes intoxicating liquor sold “ “ ?,'
                  travention of subsection ( 1) above is guilty of an offence. .

                                       Supplementary
      5. In sections 2 and 3, after subsection (1) insert—
           “ (1A) Subsection (1)0) above has effect subject to section
         5A(1) of this Act.”
      6. In section 7(3) (power to stop and searctivehrcte),;
    service vehicle (within the meanmg ofscctioi l o I to A c g            ms
    “ or a motor vehicle to which section 1A of this Act applies .

      7       (i) Section   8   (penalties) shall be amended as follows.
    (2) In paragraph (a) after “ 1(2)” there shall be inserted “ or
<AlA(2)”.
W (3) In paragraph (6) after “ 1(3)” t h ^ shall be              ;;
  1A(3) ”, after “ 2(1) ” there s h a l l inserted . 2A(1) and after
  “ 3(10) ” there shall be inserted , 5B(2), 5C(3), 5D(z) .
      (4) In paragraph (c) after “ 1(4)” there shall be inserted
    1A(4) ”.
      (5) At the end there shall be inserted—
         “ (d) in the case of an offence under section 5B(3), 5C.(4) or
              5D(3), to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale,

              (e) in the case of an offence under section 5C(5), to a fine not
                   exceeding level 1 on the standard scale. .
                                                                                             I




              C.                      Public Order Act 1986
32


     SCH. 1
                                             Minor amendment
                 o     c~('tif>n '?C9 '\ (notice varying order about sale or supply of in-
              toxicatiS ^ q u S S           have^effect, and be * t a i always to have had
              effect, as if in paragraph (b) ‘ order read notice .

                                               P a r t II

                                              Sc o t l a n d

                                             Introduction
                 9 Part V of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 1980 (sporting
3980 c. 62.
               events : control of alcohol etc.) shall be amended as mentioned m
               this Part.
                                               Vehicles
                   10. After section 70 there shall be inserted the following—          {
               “Alcohol on     70A.—(1) This section applies to a mot°r J ^ c l e
               certain other w jjjch js not a public service vehicle but is adapted to
               vehicle®.     carry more than 8 passengers and is being operated for
                            the principal purpose of conveying two or more Passen­
                            gers for the whole or part of a journey to or from a
                            designated sporting event.
                                (2) Anv person in possession of alcohol on a vehicle
                            to which this section applies shall be guilty of an oSence
                             and liable on summary conviction to impnsonment for a
                             period not exceeding 60 days or a fine not exceeding level
                             3 on the standard scale or both.
                                 (3) Any person who is drunk on a vehicle to which
                             this section applies shall be guilty of an offence and
                             liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding
                             level 2 on the standard scale.
                                 (4) Any person who permits alcohol to be earned on
                             a vehicle to which this section applies and
                                  (a) is the driver of the vehicle, or
                                  (b) where he is not its driver, is the keeper of the
                                       vehicle, the employee or agent ofthekeepera
                                       person to whom it is made available (by hire#
                                        loan or otherwise) by the keeper or the keepers
                                        employee or agent, or the employee or agent of
                                        a person to whom it is so made available,
                              shall, subject to section 71 of this Act, be guilty of an
                              offence and liable on summary conviction to a tine not
                              exceeding level 3 on the standard scale. .

                      11. In section 71 (defences in connection with carriage ofalcohol)
                   for “ or 70 ” there shall be substituted , 70 or 70A(4) .
                     12. In section 75 (police powers of enforcement) for “ or 70 ”there
                   shall be substituted “ , 70 or 70A ”.
                                                                                       33
                        Public Order Act 1986

                                                                              SCH. 1
   13 In section 77 (interpretation of Part V)—
     (a) the following definitions shall be inserted in the appropriate
          places            ^ reiation to a vehicle, means the person
            havmgkS T d » ^ o take out a licence for i, nnder secnon          ^ ^
             1(1) of the Vehicles (Excise) Act 1971 ,
               “ motor vehicle” means a mechanically P o l l e d ve­
            hicle intended or adapted for use on roads , , ana



           1981” ; ”.
                              Fireworks etc.
     14.—(1) After section 72 there shall be inserted the following—
^ ‘ Possession    72A.—(1) Any person who has entered ^possession
(m f fireworks area of a designated sports ground and s         P        .
  etc. at      aLe; controlled article or substance at anytim e dining the
  3E *          period of a designated sporting event stall be guilty of an



              o ^ t ^ a .r * / p o ^ v e r « e             g r o i sbif, be
              guilty of an offence.
                 f3> A person guilty of an offence under subsection (1)
              or (2) above shall be liable on su i^ ary co n v ic tio n to
              imorisonment for a period not exceeding 60 days or to a
              finenot exceeding level 3 on the standard scale or both.
                       lt shall be a defence for a p e r s o n charged with
              an offence under subsection (1) or (2) above to show
               that he had lawful authority to be in possession
               controlled article or substance.
                  (5) In subsections (1) and (2) above “ controlled article
               or substance ” means—                            .            .
                     (a) any article or substance whose mam purposet is
   *                      the emission of a flare for purposes of illumi-
  S                       nating or signalling (as opposed to igniting or
                           heating) or the emission of smoke or a visible
                           gas • and in particular it includes distress flares,
                           fog signals, and pellets and capsules intended to
                           be used as fumigators or for testing PiPes> but
                            not matches, cigarette lighters ^or heaters , and
                      (£>) any article which is a firework.”.
       O) In section 75 (police powers of enforcement) at the end of sub-
     p a S S P a S U * («) t t e e shall be inserted-
            or
                   (iii)     a controlled article or substance as defined in
                 section 72A(5) of this Act .
34               c. 64                     Public Order Act 1986


Section 40(2).                                  SCHEDULE 2
                                            Other Amendments
                          Conspiracy and Protection of Property Act 1875 (c.86)
                    1.—(1) In section 7 of the Conspiracy and Protection of Property
                 Act 1875 (offence to intimidate etc. with a view to compelling another
                 to abstain from doing or to do an act) for the words from “ shall ”
                 to the end there shall be substituted “ shall be liable on summary
                 conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months or
                 a fine not exceeding level 5 on the standard scale or both.”.
                   (2) And the following shall be added at the end of that section—
                        “ A constable may arrest without warrant anyone he reason­
                      ably suspects is committing an offence under this section.”.

                                  Prevention of Crime Act 1953 (c.14)                 ^
                   2. In section 1 of the Prevention of Crime Act 1953 (offence to have
                 offensive weapon) at the end of subsection (4) (offensive weapon
                 includes article intended by person having it for use by him) there
                 shall be added “ or by some other person

                               Civic Government (<Scotland) Act 1982 (c.45)
                   3.—(1) Part V of the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982
                 (public processions) shall be amended in accordance with this para­
                 graph.
                   (2) In section 62 (notification of processions)—
                      (a) in subsection (1)—
                                 (i) after “ below ” there shall be inserted “ (a) ” ; and
                                 (ii) at the end there shall be inserted—
                              “ ; and
                                     (b) to the chief constable.” ;
                         (b) in subsection (2)—
                                   (i) in paragraph (a), after “ council ” there shall be
                                inserted “ and to the office of the chief constable ” ;    {
                                   (ii) in paragraph (b), for “ that office ” there shall be
                                 substituted “ those offices ” ;
                         (c) in subsection (4)—
                                    (i) after “ area ” there shall be inserted “ (a) ” ; and
                                    (ii) after “ them ” there shall be inserted—
                                 “ ; and
                                       (b) intimated to the chief constable,” ; and
                         (d) in subsection (12), in the definition of “ public place”, for
                              “ the Public Order Act 1936” there shall be substituted
                              “ Part II of the Public Order Act 1986 ”.
                        Public Order Act 1986                                   35


  (3)    In section 63 (functions of regional and islands councils in Sch . 2
relation to processions)—
      (a) after subsection (1) there shall be inserted
                 “ (1A) Where notice of a proposal to hold a pro­
              cession      been given or falls to be treated as having
              been given in accordance with section 62(1) of this Act
                 (a) if a regional or islands council have made an
                      order under subsection (1) above they may at
                      any time thereafter, after consulting the chief
                      constable, vary or revoke the order and, where
                      they revoke it, make any order which they were
                      empowered to make under that subsection ;
                 (b) if they have decided not to make an order they
                      may at any time thereafter, after consulting the
-a                     chief constable, make any order which they were
                      empowered to make under that subsection. ,
      (b) in subsection (2) after “ (1) ” there shall be inserted       or
          (1A)” ;
      (c) in subsection (3)—
                (i) in paragraph (a)(i), after “(1)” there shall be inserted
             or (1A) above ” ;
                 (ii) in paragraph (a)(ii), for “ such an OTder there
             shall be substituted “ an order under subsection (1) above
             or to revoke an order already made under subsection (1)
             or (1A) above ” ;
                 (iii) at the end of paragraph (a)(ii), for “ and” there
             shall be substituted—
                    “ (iii) where they have, under subsection (1A) above,
                          varied such an order, a copy of the order as
                          varied and a written statement of the reasons for
                          the variation ; and ” ;
                 (iv) in paragraph (b), after “ (1) ” there shall be in­
              serted “ or (1A) ”, and after “ made ” where third occur-
<£)          ring there shall be inserted “ and, if the order has been
™            varied under subsection (1A) above, that it has been so
              varied ” ; and
                  (v) at the end of paragraph (b) there shall be inserted—■
              “ ; and
                  (c) where they have revoked an order made under
                       subsection (1) or (1A) above in relation to a
                       proposal to hold a procession, make such
                       arrangements as will ensure that persons who
                       might take or are taking part in that procession
                       are made aware of the fact that the order has
                       been revoked.”.
36             c. 6 4                     Public Order Act 1986


     Sch . 2      (4) In section 64 (appeals against orders under section 63)—
                    (a) in subsection (1) for the words from “ against ” to the end
                           there shall be substituted—
                                 “ against—
                                   (a) an order made under section 63(1) or (1A) of
                                        this A ct; or
                                   (b) a variation under section 63(1A) of this Act of
                                        an order made under section 63(1) or (1A),
                              in relation to the procession.” ;
                     ( b) in subsection (4) after “ make ” there shall be inserted “ or,
                            as the case may be, to vary ” ; and
                     (c) in subsection (7) after “ order ” there shall be inserted “ or,
                            as the case may be, the variation of whose order ”.
                  (5) In section 65 (offences and enforcement)—
                        (a) in paragraphs ( b) and (c) of subsection (1), after “ (1)” th e r^
                             shall be inserted “ or (1A) ” ; and
                        (b) in paragraphs ( b) and (c) of subsection (2), after “ (1) ” there
                              shall be inserted “ or (1A) ”.
                   (6) In section 66 (relationship with Public Order Act 1936)—
                     (a) for “ the Public Order Act 1936 ” there shall be substituted
                          “ Part II of the Public Order Act 1986 ” ;
                     (b) in paragraph (a), for “ or order made under section 3 ”
                          there shall be substituted “ under section 12 ” , and “ or that
                          order ” shall be omitted ; and
                     (c) in paragraph (b), “ or order under the said section 3 ” shall
                          be omitted.
                                    Criminal Justice Act 1982 (c.48)
                  4. The following shall be inserted at the end of Part II of Schedule
                1 to the Criminal Justice Act 1982 (statutory offences excluded from
                provisions for early release of prisoners)—
                                       P ublic Order A ct 1986
                        27. Section 1 (riot).
                        28. Section 2 (violent disorder).                                   i
                        29. Section 3 (affray).”.
                                   Cable and Broadcasting Act 1984 (c.46)
                   5.—(1) The Cable and Broadcasting Act 1984 as it extends to
                England and Wales and Scotland is amended as follows.
                  (2) Omit section 27 (inclusion of programme in cable programme
                service likely to stir up racial hatred).
                  (3) In section 28 (amendment of the law of defamation), at the
                end add—
                   “ (6) In this section “ words ” includes pictures, visual images,
                gestures and other methods of signifying meaning.”.
                        Public Order Act 1986                     e. 64               37



   (4)      In section 33(2), in the definition of “ relevant offence ” omit Sch. 2
 “ an offence under section 27 above or ”.
    6.—(1) Section 27 of the Cable and Broadcasting Act 1984 as it
 extends to Northern Ireland is amended as follows.
    (2) For subsections (1) to (5) substitute—
         “ (1) If a programme involving threatening, abusive or insult­
       ing visual images or sounds is included in a cable programme
       service, each of the persons mentioned in subsection (2) below is
       guilty of an offence if—
             (a) he intends thereby to stir up racial hatred, or
             ( b) having regard to all the circumstances racial hatred is
                   likely to be stirred up thereby.
        (2) The persons are—
           (a) the person providing the cable programme service,
(A         (b) any person by whom the programme is produced or
 ^               directed, and
           (c) any person by whom offending words or behaviour are
                 used.
         (3) If the person providing the service, or a person by whom
      the programme was produced or directed, is not shown to have
      intended to stir up racial hatred, it is a defence for him to
      prove that—
            (a) he did not know and had no reason to suspect that
                 the programme would involve the offending material,
                 and
            (b) having regard to the circumstances in which the pro­
                 gramme was included in a cable programme service,
                 it was not reasonably practicable for him to secure
                 the removal of the material.
         (4) It is a defence for a person by whom the programme
      was produced or directed who is not shown to have intended
      to stir up racial hatred to prove that he did not know and had
      no reason to suspect—
            (a) that the programme would be included in a cable
                  programme service, or
            (b) that the circumstances in which the programme would
                  be so included would be such that racial hatred would
                  be likely to be stirred up.
         (5) It is a defence for a person by whom offending words or
      behaviour were used and who is not shown to have intended
      to stir up racial hatred to prove that he did not know and had
       no reason to suspect—
            (а) that a programme involving the use of the offending
                  m a te rial would be included in a cable programme
                  service, or
             (б) that the circumstances in which a programme involving
                  the use of the offending material would be so included,
38               c. 6 4                   Public Order A ct 1986


     Sch. 2                     or in which a programme so included would involve
                                the use of the offending material, would be such that
                                racial hatred would be likely to be stirred up.
                         (5A) A person who is not shown to have intended to stir
                      up racial hatred is not guilty of an offence under this section
                      if he did not know, and had no reason to suspect, that the
                      offending material was threatening, abusive or insulting.
                         (5B) A person guilty of an offence under this section is
                      liable—
                           (a) on conviction on indictment to imprisonment for a term
                                 not exceeding two years or a fine or bo th ;
                           (b) on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term
                                 not exceeding sik months or a fine not exceeding the
                                 statutory maximum or both.”.
                    (3) In subsection (8) (consents to prosecutions), for the words
                 from “ shall not be instituted ” to the end substitute “ shall not H
                 instituted except by or with the consent of the Attorney General
                 for Northern Ireland.”.
                    (4) In subsection (9) (interpretation) for “ ‘ racial group ’ means
                 a group of persons ’’ substitute “ ‘ racial hatred ’ means hatred against
                 a group of persons in Northern Ireland ”.
                     (5) After subsection (10) insert—
                          “ (11) This section extends to Northern Ireland only. .
                              Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (c.60)
                    7.    In section 17(lXc) of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act
                  1984 (entry for purpose of arrest for certain offences) in sub-
                  paragraph (i) the words from “ 4 ” to “ peace) ” shall be omitted
                  and after sub-paragraph (ii) there shall be inserted—
                                “ (iii) section 4 of the Public Order Act 1986 (fear or
                              provocation of violence); ”.
Section 40(3).                                  SCHEDULE 3
                                                   R e p e a ls

                          Chapter          Short title                  Extent of repeal

                  13 Chas. 2.        Tumultuous Petitioning       The whole Act.
                    Stat 1. c. 5.     Act 1661.
                  33 Geo. 3.         Shipping Offences Act        The whole Act.
                    c. 67.            1793.
                  57 Geo. 3.         Seditious Meetings Act       The whole Act.
                    c. 19.            1817.
                  5 Geo. 4. c. 83.   Vagrancy Act 1824.In section 4, the words from
                                                         “ every person being armed ”
                                                         to “ arrestable offence ” and
                                                         from “ and every such gun ”
                                                         to the end.
                   2 & 3 Viet. Metropolitan Police Act In section 54, paragraph 13.
                     c. 47. .   1839.
                   2 & 3 Viet, City of London Police In section 35, paragraph 13.
                     c. xciv.   Act 1839.
                         Public Order A c t1986                          c . 64               39


                                                                                    Sch . 3
    Chapter              Short title                  Extent of repeal
 3 Edw. 7.c .ccl. Erith Tramways and Im­ Section 171.
                    provement Act 1903’.
 1 Edw. 8 & Public Order Act 1936.          Section 3.
    1 Geo. 6. c. 6.                         Section 4.
                                            Section 5.
                                            Section 5A.
                                            In section 7, in subsection (2)
                                              the words “ or section 5 or
                                              5A ” and in subsection (3) the
                                              words “ , four or five ”.
                                            Section 8 (6).
                                            In section 9, in subsection (1)
                                              the definition of “ public pro­
                                              cession ” and in subsection (3)
                                              the words “ by the council of
                                               any borough^ or district or ”.
      8             Middlesex
                 Geo.  6.      County Coun­ Section 309.
▼ c.xxi.             cil Act 1944.
  1967 c. 58.       Criminal Law Act 1967. Section 11(3).
                                             In Schedule 2, paragraph 2(1)
                                               0b).
 1968 c. 54.       Theatres Act 1968.         Section 5.
                                              In sections 7(2), 8, 9(1), 10 (1)
                                                 0a) and (b), 15(l)(a) and 18(2),
                                                 the references to section 5.
  1976 c. 74.      Race Relations Act 1976.   Section 70.
                                              Section 79(6).
  1976 c. xxxv. County of South Glam­         Section 25.
                 organ Act 1976.              In Part I of Schedule 3, the
                                                 entry relating to section 25.
  1980 c. 62.      Criminal Justice (Scot­    In section 75(e)(i), the word
                    land) Act 1980.              “ or ” at the end.
  1980 c. x.       County of Merseyside Act   In section 30(2), paragraph (b),
                    1980.                        the word “ and” preceding
                                                 that paragraph and the words
                                                  from “ and may make” to
                                                  the end.
                                               In section 30(5), the words “ in
                                                  the said section 31 or ”•
                                               Section 31.
                                               In section 137(2), the reference
                                                  to section 31.
   .980 c. xi.     West Midlands County        Section 38, except subsection
                    Council Act 1980.             (4).
                                               In section 116(2), the reference
                                                  to section 38.
   1980 c. xiii.   Cheshire County Council     Section 28, except subsection
                    Act 1980.                      (4).
                                                In section 108(2), the reference
                                                   to section 28.
   1980 c. xv.      Isle of Wight Act 1980.     Section 26, except subsection
                                                   (4).
                                                In section 63(2), the reference
                                                   to section 26.
   1981 c. ix.      Greater Manchester Act      Section 56, except subsection
                     1981.                          (4).
                                                In section 179(2), the reference
                                                    to section 56.
40             c . 64                          Public Order Act 1986


     Sch . 3
                   Chapter                     Short title                        Extent of repeal
               1981 c. xxv.         East Sussex Act 1981.                Section 29.
                                                                         In section 102(2), the reference
                                                                          to section 29.
               1982 c. 45.          Civic Government (Scot­              Section 62(10).
                                     land) Act 1982.                     In section 63(3)(a)(i), the word
                                                                           “ or ” at the end.
                                                                         In section 66, in paragraph (a),
                                                                           the words “ or that order ”,
                                                                           and in paragraph (b) the
                                                                           words “ or order under the
                                                                           said section 3 ”.
               1982 c. 48.           Criminal Justice Act 1982.          In Part I of Schedule 1, the
                                                                           entries relating to riot and
                                                                           affray.
               1984 c. 46.          Cable and Broadcasting               Section 27.
                                     Act 1984.                           In section 33 (2), the words “an
                                                                           offence under section 2ft
                                                                           above or”.                   ™
               1984 c. 60.           Police and Criminal Evi­            In section 17(l)(c)(i) the words
                                      dence Act 1984.                      from “ 4 ” to “ peace)
               1985 c. 57.           Sporting Events (Control            In section 8, the word “ and ”
                                      of Alcohol etc.) Act                 at the end of paragraph (b).
                                      1985.
                                     PRINTED IN ENGLAND BY W. J. SHARP, CB
                             Controller and Chief Executive of H er Majesty’s Stationery Office and
                                            Queen’s Printer of Acts of Parliament
                          Public Order Act 1986




          LONDON: PUBLISHED BY HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
546461)                        £4-40 net
                           ISBN 0 10 546486 4
