D.O.B

D.O.S. 4.5.89.

TRKtU BY CT/LJ/

FILE :



On Saturday morning 15th April 1989, 1 travelled with scrae friends by car dc*m

to Sheffield to Hillshrough Ground to watch the saari. final betwaen Liverpool and

Nottingham Forest.



We left Liverpool at about 11.30a.m. in the morning and arrived by the ground at

about quater past 3.00.



We walked up to the ground and arrived at the ground at 14.30 there was quite a

few peqple there but we got in through the turn stiles.



we walked into the ground threw the tunnel and we made our way to the front of

the standing area and about 5 foot away from the fench.



In fact my picture was in the Daily Mirror cn Monday 17th April.       We stood there

for a while until about 3.00 O'clock when the Match kicked off.    All of a sudden

there was a serge forward but unlike a ■rnrmal match the crush did not subside



A douple of lads in front of me climbed over the fench were on the police pushed

these two lads straight back into the gafceetsand back into the ground landing on

their       of the people who were already being crushed.



The crush carried on and police then dpgxbflpri that it was deadly serious so they

opened the gates until the police allored peqple to get out onto the pitch to

escape at this point I was still being crushed and poo men tried to full me

cut but unfortunately I was trapped against a cotqale of other peqple in foant

of me.



I couldAt   speak or beaMah because of the r crush and I felt faint.
At about 10 minutes later the growd started to ease off and I regained my breath



   brother who was in frait of we clintaed over the fench and looked to see if I was

fek.



The next thing that I knew I was dragged back by scmeoof the supporters who were

behind ne over the bodies and towards the back after seeing all the people who vere

crushed bodies lying all around the ground and clint>eover the fench into the next

pen.



I r-Hn*vari out onto the pitch threw the enclosure ofi the left hand side and sat dcwn

on the pfcich crying.



I nust have sat there about half an hour before finding my friends and leaving the

football ground.



We left the ground at about 4.30p.m. and made our way backkto the car and because the:

       were so great outside the Aocal telephones we decided to use the telephones

situated at the service stations on the Motorway.



We arrived about 7.30p.m. back at Liverpool and I went straight hone. I awoke on

the Sunday noming i had terrible pains in my chest so I went to Broadgreen Hospital

were 1 was examined and 1 was told that 1 had bruised ribs.



Hie Dr. told me to take tablets for the pain and if it got any vorse to #o and see

my G.P.



I seemed to be cfc during the week until the 'Thursday evening 20th fpril 1989, when     I

went to Carvers Nighclub on the Wavertree High Street, I started to loose my breath

and began sweating very badly and I had to leave early.



On the Friday morning I went to see my G.P. who vs Dr*         of
and. he suggested to roe that this was a result of iny shock and iny nervousness. .



Ify Solicitors has advised me to sefckadvice from a Counsellor and I will do that

if I feel any worse £ will do this.
