STATEMENT OF



D.O.B. |
       ________

P.O.S. 15.5.89.

TAKEN BY GT/LJ/CLAIM




Oq   Saturday morning 15th APril 1989, X travelled with   6   friends of a Sunspan Coach

to Hillsborough to watch the semi final of the F.A. Cup Challenge between Liverpool

and Nottingham Forest.



Vfe left Birkenhead at 8.00a.m. and arrived at Sheffield at about 13.45hrs that day.



On arrival we went and bought same chips and waited   1 5 ) to   the ground   arrived outside:

the ground at approximately 14.25.



Vfe queued outside the outer gates and then eventually after about 10 minutes or

so we entered and there was absolute chaos.    The police did not appear to what was

going on or what to do.    I only notice four policeman that was three on horseback

and one on foot and he was stood just by the tum-stiles.



I got into the inner circle at about 14.50 and ws stood getting our breath and

watching fans climb over the rails and pass their tickets to the police.



Vfe then walked through the tunnel in the enclosure B and straight through to the

front of the ground just behind the goal were ws found same room by the railings,

©lis was about 14.55.



Within 3 minutes I was pinned against the fence and the pressure started to increase

rapidly.



 There was a little lad infront of me and I was crushed into him farcing the breath

 out of him.
Hie lad who was with I                (tried to pull me up ty ny hand because at this

time he had clinbed onto the railings.



Unfortunately, his hand had slipped out of mine and he couldn't do this.



A man behind me shouted don't move it's hurting and he was digging his nails into my

back.   At this point all I could do was shout at the police to cpen the gate and

eventuallythis became to hard and I gave up.



 I though at that tine I not going to get out of here alive and looked over towards

 the gate, eventually the police cpened the gate and that is all I can remeirtoer seeing



 I can only assune that I was pulled out through the gate unconscious because I came

 around by the half way line with two policeman stroking my face after lying me in the

 recovery position.



 I had to sit there far a while with my head between my knees to try and re-gain

 composure and get my breath back.



 After a While I walked away and stood up and walked over to vrtiere I last seen

 He was still perched on the railings and was helping people out of the ground by pullin

 them up.



 Once he had seen me he junped dawn and came over to me and then walked back with me

 up to the half way line we were we swilled ourselves.   |
                                                         ____|kept on telling me that

 I was pale and I should sit down and try and relax a bit.



 I continued to feel faint and infact still did when ws left the ground at about 16.30hx

 after the crowd had subsided.



 When we got out of the ground we tried a nurtoer of telephones but none were available,

 as the crowds were far to large.
3



We eventually made our way back to the coach whereon the driver ctecided that he would

call in at one of the service stations for us to be able to use the telephone.



We arrived hone at about 20.30hrs and went for a couple of pints before going to my

(Mi house.



I wake cxi Sunday morning about 11.00 O'clock and felt so sore that my mother took ne

with my brother to KArrow Park Hospital.



At the Hospital the Doctor examined me and said that     I had crush injuries and gave

me a collar.    He signed me off work for a week and told me to relax.   On Tuesday

18th .April 1989, a Mr.                   who was the Ccninunity Worker fran

      came to see me.     He talked to me for a nutber of hours and what I had seen

and this appeared to help me.     he also called again on Thursday 20th April 1989,

the same day that the Vicar fran                   Jlso arrived.



On Mcxiday moming 24th APril 1989, I decided to go back to work to get things out

of my mind.    I wark for a week and three days but felt so bad on Wfednedday 10th

M&rch 1989,    that I had to go to the Hospital at KArrow Park again.



I had pins and needles in my arm and I couldn't move it.     Hie Doctor said that my

shoulder was still damaged and ijave me another collar to try and take sane of the

pressure off my neck.



On Friday morning 12th May 1989, I had to go again to my Doctors this tine I went to

see my G.P. Dr.           of                       he sent me again to Arrow Park

Hospital and dene same ex-rays.



The EX-ray department took Ex-rays of my body and hips up to my neck infact 7 exprays

in all and I have to go back to my G.P. On Friday 19th May 1989, for my results.



I would just wish to add that if I sit for too long I get pains in my hips and if I
walk far any distance I get terrible pains in my chest and sidss.   I also find that I

new get out of breath when I walk and my arm also beccmes numb causing me distress

and the pins and needles are unccmfartable.
