                JONES, KEHOE and OTHERS

                              and

                         WRIGHT




                   SKELETON ARGUMENT
              On behalf of 6 Appellants and
              9 Respondents    (Plaintiffs in
                    the Court below)




The Parties



These appeals arise out of sixteen "test actions" heard

and determined by Hidden J. at Liverpool,a reserved

judgment being given on 31st July 1990.         Ten Plaintiffs

succeeded, six failed in their actions.         All six losing

Plaintiffs appeal, as does the Defendant in respect of

nine out of the ten actions he lost.       For the sake of
clarity all fifteen Plaintiffs before the Court of Appeal

will be hereinafter referred to either simply as

"Plaintiffs" or as "Plaintiff/Appellants" or "Plaintiff/

Respondents" as the case may be, and the Defendant as

"Defendant" albeit that in six appeals he is Respondent

and in nine the Appellant.




The Primary Facts.



1   .    On Saturday, 15th April 1989, a semi-final of

the F.A. Cup was played at Hillsborough, the ground of

Sheffield Wednesday F.C.     The Defendant was employed

to provide policing for the match and was responsible

wholly or mainly for crowd control.




2.       The Defendant knew that:



(a)      the match   would attract a capacity crowd?


(b)      Liverpool had been allocated the north and

          west ends of the ground? the west (or Leppings

          Lane) end was behind one of the goals and was

          divided into a seated section    (the West Stand)
above and a standing terrace fallow; the terrace

was divided into five pens; Nos. 3 and 4 pens

were immediately behind the goal;



the likelihood was that many of those sitting

in the west and north stands would have friends

and relatives in pens 3 and 4?



the match was being televised by the BBC for

a recorded screening that evening, but that the

system was that the BBC ran a mid-day preview
                                                   #



programme “Saturday Grandstand" and that the

studio would go "live" to any ground where there

were television cameras for contemporaneous

comments;



in the event of the studio going to the ground

"live", scenes at Hillsborough would be seen

contemporaneously as they happened by millions,

and in particular by tens of thousands of viewers

in Liverpool and elsewhere who had friends and

relatives at the match either to their knowledge

at the Leppings Lane end or at some unknown

location in the ground and therefore possibly at

the Leppings Lane end?
(f)      scenes at the ground would be broadcast live

          on radio, and in both live and recorded form

          on television.




3.       By reason of   the admitted negligence of the

Defendant pens 3 and 4 became overcrowded and from

about 2.40 p.m. progressively more dangerously so, until

at about 3.10 p.m. ninety five spectators in those pens

lay dead, and many others injured.




4.       These events   and the subsequent rescue operation

and the aftermath of the tragedy were seen by other

spectators as they unfolded, by millions on live television

and later on recorded television; in the case of the

aftermath by relatives and friends who travelled to

Sheffield from Liverpool or elsewhere to search for and/or

identify the bodies of their loved ones, and were heard

live on the radio by millions.   The bodies of the dead

were taken to a temporary mortuary in the ground and the

scenes there were, as a natural, probable, unavoidable

and foreseeable consequence of mass deaths, horrific.

Identification of bodies was not, as in the case of a

road accident, a confirmation in clinical surroundings.
of a known death, but part of the process of actually

discovering who was dead.




5.           As a result of seeing or hearing of the tragedy

and its aftermath the sixteen Plaintiffs suffered a

psychiatric illness      (in most, if not all, cases post-

traumatic stress disorder or "PTSD").



                           SCHEDULE A


                   Successful Plaintiffs


Plaintif f        Relationship     Means of knowledge       Fate of
                  to victim        or “proximity"           victim


Copoc A.          mother            Saw on live t.v.        Dead

Copoc H.          father            Saw on live t.v.
                                    and identified body     Dead

Hankin            wife              Saw on live t.v.        Dead

Hennessey         sister            Saw on live t.v.        Dead

Hough             sister            Saw on live t.v. and
                                    identified body          Dead

Jones, Stephen brother              Saw on live t.v.         Dead

Mullaney          mother            Saw on live t.v.         Injured

Spearrit          brother/          Saw on live t.v.      Injured
                  uncle             and identified bodies       dead

Harrison          brother           Saw from West Stand      Dead

Pemberton         father            In coach in Hills­       Dead
                                    borough car park,
                                    saw on live t.v.
                                    Searched ? identified
                                    body
                          SCHEDULE B


                  Unsuccessful Plaintiffs



Plaintiff       Relationship    Means of knowledge          Fate of
                to victim       or “proximityM               Victim


Alcock          brother-in-law Saw from West Stand          Dead
                               Identified body

Coldicutt       friend           Saw from West Stand        Injured

Jones,          sister           told; heard aftermath      Dead
Catherine                        on radio, saw recorded
                                 t.v.

Kehoe           grandfather      heard on live radio        Dead
                                 saw recorded t.v.

O'Dell          uncle            Saw from West Stand        Safe

Penk            fiancee          Saw live t.v.              Dead


N.B.     Underlining denotes reason or reasons for failure.



Further Facts



Only one witness, a consultant psychiatrist was called

(by the Plaintiffs) .      All other evidence was agreed.

This included facts contained in the proofs of evidence

of the Plaintiffs themselves, statements from two police

officers and Chapters 1-5 inclusive of the Interim Report

of the Inquiry into the disaster chaired by Taylor L.J.
The Judge*s Findings



1   .     The Judge, for the purposes of the judgement,

made a finding       (by assumption) that each Plaintiff had

suffered a psychiatric illness and that such psychiatric

illness was caused by the Defendant's actions.




2.        The Judge held that each Plaintiff had to

establish:



(i)       that       the Plaintiff comes within the range .of

             persons to whom the Defendant owes a duty of

             care;



(ii)      that       the Defendant has breached that duty of

             care to the Plaintiff?



(iii)     that it was reasonably foreseeable that such

             a breach would cause damage to the Plaintiff.



(Of course    (ii)    was admitted by the Defendant.)



After reviewing the decided cases in all common law

jur isdic tions he further held that:
      3.        Insofar as (i) above was concerned he extended

      the lines at present drawn which 'Do not extend beyond

12D   the spouse or children of the Plaintiff'   to brothers

47E   and sisters,   and to parents (see Storm v Geeves,

48B   Tas. S.R. 252) but no further.




      4.        The basis of this finding was the immediate

      nuclear family and the fact that siblings "grow up

48E   together through their years as tiny tots on into their

      teens and further on into adulthood.   It is the normal

      course of events that they are extremely close within

      the family".




      5   .     In dealing with foreseeability the Judge held

      that two further matters fell for consideration



      (i)       the relationship in time and space between

                the Plaintiff and the scene of the original

                "negligence"? and



39C   (ii)      the medium through which the Plaintiff became

                conscious of the original negligence.
        gb           The Judge held that those in the West Stand

        complied with the requirements of proximity of time

5 1E    and space,    as did a Plaintiff (Pemberton) who, being in

        a coach in the club car park, and having been informed

        of the disaster, switched on the t.v. in the coach,

        then searched for his son, and later discovered and

        saw his body in the temporary mortuary.     No reasons

        were given for these findings.     The Defendant does not

        appeal the decision in favour of Pemberton.




        7   #        The Judge excluded from the required degrees

        of proximity one Plaintiff (Kehoe) who heard news of

  52F   the disaster on the radio and later saw recorded t.v.

        footage      and another (Jones, Catherine) who learned of

        deaths at the match whilst shopping, then listened to

  53A   the radio and much later saw recorded t.v. footage.




        g%            The Judge further held that those Plaintiffs

        who saw live t.v. coverage of the disaster and its

         immediate aftermath were within the required degrees

        of proximity.
*




                                     10




         The Submissions of the Plaintiffs.



         The Appeals by the Defendant



         9.          The Defendant from his Notice of Appeal appears

         to make complaints in three separate categories.




         10.           In respect of relationships   he complains that

         the   Judge should not have extended the relevant

         categories to brothers and sisters.     The further apparent
                                                                          #

         complaint in respect of an uncle is misconceived;       the

         Judge in terms excluded uncles from the relevant category.




         11.           The Plaintiffs' submissions   will be more fully

         developed     below but are that not only   was the learned

         Judge justified in making this finding but did not go

47E to   far enough.     His reasoning for including brothers and
50G
         sisters (and, obiter, sons and daughters) was impeccable

         and will be adopted and relied on.     His reasoning should

         have led him further down the line.




         12          In respect of 'proximity' the Defendant
        complains that those who witnessed the scenes on live

        t.v. should not have been included in the relevant

        category.




        13.         The Plaintiffs' submissions will be that the

53-61   reasoning of the learned Judge should be upheld with

        such refinements as will be considered below.




        14.         The Defendant's third complaint relates to

        inadequate proof of causation.    This complaint is

        fundamentally misconceived; the learned Judge dealt

8E-9E   fully with this problem at the outset of his judgment;

        the case of each successful Plaintiff will have to be

        remitted for a hearing to assess quantum and the Plaintiffs

        accept and have always accepted that causation may be

        re-opened as an issue in every case as to part or

        the whole of the psychiatric illness suffered.    At that

        stage the Plaintiffs may introduce amplified medical

        evidence.




        The Appeals by the Plaintiffs.


        15.         The primary submission of the Plaintiffs is that
relationship and proximity are not discrete aspects

of foreseeability, but. that in considering whether

a psychiatric illness may be caused to a plaintiff

by his 'negligence' to a third party a tortfeasor should

consider the two aspects both separately and inter­

linked and further linked with the foreseeable results

of the negligence.




16.        The Plaintiffs submit that if it is reasonably

foreseeable that the negligent act or omission will

result in a scene of carnage even an unrelated bystander

would be liable.     If on the other hand, only mild injury

is foreseeable even a brother might not be able to

recover.




Relationships.



17.        It follows from paragraph 16 that in some

circumstances a bystander might retover, and that

therefore there is no category of relationship which

either on grounds of general principle or policy should

exclude a plaintiff.
                           13




18.        Where the negligent act or omission will

foreseeably lead to death without surrounding

circumstances rendering the death more likely to "burn

into the brain" then it may be necessary to restrict

on practical grounds the categories of relationship.

However, the learned Judge's 'nuclear family' no longer

fits the living patterns (and never fitted emotional

ties)   in England and Wales.




19.        Many couples now live together and have families

without marrying; despite the learned Judge's extolling

of the relationship between siblings,    a close emotional

tie between grandparents and grandchildren is more usual

among ethnic minorities the extended family is more

common than the nuclear family; the affianced may be

scarred for life by the death of the betrothed;

passionate though platonic friendships are legendary.

The nuclear family is too narrow a category to be applied

in this context in ithe present social climate.




Proximity.



20           The 'aftermath' includes the search for a
■>ne"; indeed a stranger who searches

ody may recover as a rescuer; to deny

i.ias an emotional tie lacks logic and




 is a distinction between identification

:he fact of death is known, and

,s   the culmination of a search -

'a the circumstances will foreseeably be

' ].aintiffs will rely on the dissenting

     J. in -Chester v-'Waverly Corp. -[1 939]

reproved by Hidden J.) .




     intiffs will consequently submit that

 suffered in part or in whole from PTSD

^veiling to Sheffield to find out whether

 vas alive or dead and who witnessed

o .be etched in the brain and memory (a

 the illness)    should be entitled to recover.




     iiould be no fixed rules or categories
The principle should be reasonable foreseeability?

consequently there is no reason to exclude in all cases

recorded t.v.




24.       It is not reasonably foreseeable that orally

imported news of death will cause PTSD, which requires

a scene to be recalled by the mind's eye in the future;

if the news is imparted so graphically that PTSD results

then such a description is not reasonably foreseeable

and/or is a novus actus interveniens.




25.       Again, if after hearing news of the death, a

plaintiff switches on the t.v. to watch the recorded

footage of the disaster, this might be a novus actus;

but if, before learning of the death, the plaintiff

watches recorded footage to try to ascertain the fate

of the loved one - and later learns of the death - this

is analagous to a search.   It may well be that in such

circumstances a friend or distant relative might find

it difficult to succeed.




26.       Snnnar” cf Submissions.
                            16




(i)    a    tortfeasor whose act or omission has caused

       death or injury to a third party (or was likely

       to cause such death or injury) will be liable

       in damages to a plaintiff provided that



       (a)       the   plaintiff has suffered a psychiatric

                 illness; and



       (b)       it was reasonably foreseeable that the

                 plaintiff would suffer such an illness or

                 a psychiatric illness of some sort as

                 a result of the death-, injury, actual or

                 feared of the third party; and



           (c)   the   psychiatric illness has been caused by

                 the death or injury actual or feared.



(ii)   in considering reasonable foreseeability a Court

       will take into account



           (a)   the   relationship if any between the third

                 party (or "victim") and the plaintiff;



           (b)   the   proximity in time and place between

                  the plaintiff and the tortious act ,
                      17.




              including the medium through which the

              plaintiff is proximate to the act;



        (c)    the nature.of the foreseeable consequence

               of the tort.



(iii)   In considering (ii)(a) above a Court will

        balance the relationship with the two other

        factors, so for example a stranger may require

        close proximity in time and place and a fore­

        seeable scene of horror and carnage; a mother or

        wife may recover though.proximity .is close

        neither in time nor space and there is but

        unsubstantiated fear of death or serious injury.



(iv)    In considering (ii) (b) above a Court should

        take account of the natural instinct not only to

        rescue those demonstrably in danger (e.g. down

        a gas filled well, or trapped beneath a railway

        carriage) but to search for a missing person,

        most particularly where there is a close

        relationship between searcher and missing

        person; and further take into account the

        circumstances in which, foreseeably, a victim

        may be found, e.g. floating in a ditch, or
                        18




       in a temporary mortuary, or a hospital bed.

       Therefore, where to a tortfeasor's knowledge

       the consequences of his tortious act or omission

       are likely to be shown on t.v.   (e.g. Hillsborough)

       or foreseeably the aftermath will be televised

       (e.g. Clapham train disaster, Zeebrugge) a Court

       should take account ofthe natural instinct of a

       relative to watch recorded t.v. footage to

       ascertain if a loved one is safe.



(v)    In considering   (ii) (c) above a Court should

       weigh in the balance the nature of the scene

       foreseeably likely to be viewed by the plaintiff)

       a petrol tanker driver who negligently crashes

       into a school playground at playtime causing an

       explosion and fire must foresee that even a

       pregnant fishwife who happens to be passing may

       suffer a psychiatric illness.    He cannot be held

       to foresee that the same lady will develop an

       illness by watching recorded t.v. footage.



(vi)   In a consideration of (i) - (v) above policy has

       no place.   A sensible application of the principles

       to any given set of facts will in practice

       restrict the number of actions which can be
                         19




        successful, and the damages recoverable for the

        totality of the Hillsborough   'nervous shock'

        cases will probably fall short of those

        recoverable by one or two paraplegics in a

        road accident.



(vii)   The Plaintiffs, in support of the above

        submissions, will rely on the flow of the

        common law.   It is submitted that from Victorian

        Railway v Coultas (1888) 13 Ap Cas 222 (the

        source of the stream) to the speech of Lord

        Bridge in McLoughlin v O'Brian    [1983] App .Cas

        140 (the deepest and widest stretch of water

        so far, and on which the Plaintiffs will

        particularly rely) the stream has flowed in

        an inexorably straight direction gradually

        widening the scope of the action for "nervous

        shock".   Insofar as any of the test actions

        being appealed seeks to go beyond the ratii

        decidendi of the majority in McLoughlin v

        0'Brian (which is not conceded)   it is

        submitted that the Court of Appeal should

        float along with the current rather than seek

        to dam the stream or scramble for the bank.



        "The law has developed step by step and is
is still developing" Attia v British Gas [1987]

3 AER 455 per Dillon L.J. at page 457H.
JONES, KEHOE and OTHERS

and

WRIGHT




SKELETON ARGUMENT
On behalf of 6 Appellants and
9 Respondents   (Plaintiffs -in
the Court below)
