statement of

Address:

D.O.S. 20/4/89



I travelled with friends on a coach to Hillsborough Football ground to watch

the Liverpool -v- Nottingham Forest Semi final.   I arrived at the ground at

about 2.15 p.m. on Saturday 15th April 19§9.   I apprxached the Leppings lane

end of the ground and every-thing appeared to be O.K..



I walked in through the turn styles and handed in my ticket and retained

my stubb.   I walked in through the tunnel and made my way to the middle of

the crowd to try and get a better view of the pitch.     .Just after kick off

there was a large crush obviously caused by people coming in at the rear.

I was pushed sideways and forward until I ended up against the railings

on the left hand side of the ground towards the fitch.    I was being

crushed by the crowd and couldn *tbreathe. My face and body was forced
         the
against!/railings and I thought that I was going to die. My chest

Was hurting really badly.   I may have blacked out because the next thing

that I knew I was being taken out of the crush by two men on either side

of the railings.



I staggered onto the pitch and headed over to where I thought that my

friend was.    This time there were dead bodies lying all over the pitch

around me it was all that I could do to avoid standing on them.      I

eventually found my friend and we were standing around looking to see

if we could help but it was no use.   At 4.15 p.m. I told my friend

that I was leaving the ground and to get in touch with my parents because

they were probably worrying about me if they had seen this on the television.



I walked out of the ground and to the nearest house      that I could find and

telephoned my parents and said that I was alright arid still alive.



I got back to the ground and found my friend and we sat there discussing

what had happened and feeling glad to be alive.
      It was about that time that instructions came over the tannoy to

  n.iy that the match had been abandoned and that could we return to the

  coaches to be accounted for which we did.




  The coach eventually left Sheffield after waiting about 1 hour to

 see if anymore would return and wwe eventually arrived home at Liverpool

 at 8.30 p.m.      I have been in pain with my chest since Saturday,     my

 chest is bruised and I cannot sleep due to depression and nightmares.

 I feel absolutely shattered and cannot eat.      I thought that I would

 get over this and eventually I had to go to the Royal Liverpool

 Teaching Hospital Casualty department on the 19th April 1989 because

 I could take no more pain,




When I arrived there they examined me and said that I was badly bruised
                                             to
on my legs, arms and chest and told me to go/the G.P. locally which I

rim    doing later on this afternoon.   My losses are as follows



14y Contact lens £50.00

Shoes value         £15.00

Money               £30.00 in £5.00 notes

Watch               £30.00

Personal Hi-fi      £35.00.
