                                                 OFFICE O F H.M. CORONER FOR            MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                                        W ATERY STREET
                                                          S O U T H Y O R K S H IR E
                                                                                        SHEFFIELD
                                                                   (W e st D istrict)
                                                                                        S3 7ET
              S T E F A N L. P O P P E R , LL.B., B.MEO.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                                      CORONER


                                            Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721          121 h .Septemfe^r .1 9 . 89,

        SLP/JT/PAD


        Hillsbor 6 ugn Steering Committee,
        c/o Castle Chambers,
        Cook Street,
        Liverpool,
        L2 9SH.


        Dear Mr. Fraser,


        Thank yo,u' for your letter of the 29th August 1989.,

        I :fear this letter will not be very helpful. This is not deliberate.
        It is just the nature of the subject matter which we are discussing.

        I am in great difficulty in trying to give you some guidance as to
        the possible resumption of the Inquests.

        Unless the D.P.P. were to indicate to me that on reflection, he does
        not wish me to postpone holding the Inquests (a course of which I think
        is highly unlikely) I think that no decision regarding timing can be
        taken until after the file has been prepared by the West Midlands Police
        and considered by the Director of Public Prosecutions.

        Once that has happened,                               the timing of the Inquests will depend upon the
        decision of the D.P.P.

        If we assume that the D.P.P. were to bring serious charges, then the
        position regarding the Inquests would be governed by Section 16 of the
        Coroners Act 1988.  It is quite possible that in those circumstances,
        I would wish to take say the medical evidence before the criminal trials
        and then adjourn under the provisions of Section 16 Coroners Act 1988..
        This would have the advantage as far as the family were concerned that'
        they could obtain the appropriate death certificates.  Whether it would
        be possible at that stage to take any other non- controversial evidence
        e.g., location of the deceased, would be a matter which I would have
        to consider.

        In the circumstances envisaged (i.e., the serious charges being brought
        by the D.P.P.) it is quite likely that as is my normal practice, I would
        not resume the Inquests after the conclusion of the criminal trial.

        Another possibility which you mention is that only minor charges might
        be brought.  In those circumstances I would normally expect to conclude
        my Inquests before these were dealt with at the Crown Court.  I must
        however draw your attention-to Rule 27 of the Coroners Rules where
        there appear to be provision for the D.P.P. to request the Coroner to
        adjourn any Inquest though the offences charged do not fall within the
        ones specified in Rule 26 (3) of the Coroners Rules.


R86G6
                                                                                        C o n t 1d
                                         OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR                MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                                   W ATERY STREET
                                                    S O U T H Y O R K S H IR E
                                                                                   SHEFFIELD
                                                             (W e st D istrict)
                                                                                   S3 7ET
      S T E F A N L. P O P P E R , LL.B., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                                CORONER


                                    Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721            12th...September                 1 9 ...89..



Mr. Fraser (cont'd)


You will of course appreciate that the scope of the Inquests may be
quite different depending upon the decision of the D.P.P. and that
consequently the preparation and location for the Inquests will have
to be considered carefully.  I anticipate that there Will have to be
some period of time after the D . P . P 1 s ’‘-decision before the necessary
arrangements can be made.

I am not in a position to say anything definitive btft' I would hazard
a guess that it is highly unlikely that'*it-*Would be pbssible”to
resume the Inquests before Easter of next year, which as you have
reminded me is the time scheduled for the civil trial.    A much more
realistic guestimate could be Autumn. 1990 but this could be wildley
out.
                                                                                    *
                                                                                                , r   ♦’   ♦   *


I agree with you that it would be very difficult if not impossible
for the Inquests and the civil trial to run at the same time.

Whilst I quite understand that you and your colleagues are anxious
to get the civil aspects out of the way, you may perhaps have to
consider whether that action might not have to be postponed, not only
because of clashing with the Inquests, but also because it may be that
the Judge might not wish to deal with the matter until the criminal side
of this has been completed.  This as you will appreciate is outside my
field but it is a point which has occurred to me.

Regarding documentation, I understand that a great deal of work is
being done by the West Midlands Police in respect of thfe 95 deceased
and the files are being prepared for me.

You will however appreciate that until I have seen the files and have
had an opportunity to consider them, it would be most unwise of me to
indicate whether I would be prepared to release any of the information
contained therein.

On the whole, it is not my practice to release documentation to the
parties prior to the hearing of the Inquest.
                                                1




I am in any event reluctant to in effect conduct the Inquests so to
speak, out of court.

I do not think that it would be right (even if I had the documentation
to hand) for me to release the contents either in whole or in part of
the files whilst the criminal investigation is underway.

You have also raised a very interesting point that the release of
documentations to the bereaved might necessitate equivalent release
to other interested parties.  This in itself presents considerable
problems for me.

                                                                                   C o n t 1d
3
                                                 OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR               MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                                          W ATERY STREET
                                                          S O U T H Y O R K S H IR E
                                                                   (W e st D istrict)
                                                                                          SHEFFIELD
                                                                                          S3 7ET
              S T E F A N L. P O P P E R , LL.B., B.MED.Scil, B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                                      CORONER


                                            Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 736721          1 2 t h .. .S .ep.t e m k & r ....198.9


        Mr. Fraser (cont1d )



        I appreciate the point which you make with regard to the use of
        documentary evidence.  The position with regard to that is covered
        in Rule 37 of the Coroners Rules.

        Regarding transcript of our meeting I am sorry that we *Taave not yet
        let you have a copy, this has been solely due to the fact that we
        have been under very heavy pressure.  I expect to forward the
        transcript to you shortly.               >

        I do not in any way consider your letter improper.     I -fully appreciate
        your desire to co-operate and to make the conduct of the Inquests as
        simple a n d (convenient as possible and quite rightly to minimise the
        pain and trauma to the bereaved*

        As I have said right at the beginning, I fear that this'letter has
        not been particularly helpful but at the present time I do not think
        that I can do much else.



        Your^1 ^incerely,




           M. C




R8606
