STATEMENT OF




Will say:

I have three sons,                being the middle one.

Over the last few years           has enjoyed football and has been a

season ticket holder at Anfield over the last year.

He got a ticket to go to the semi-final game at Sheffield and he went

off with his friends.




I saw the trouble on the t.v., I was then frantic.

i was constantly calling the telephone number shown on

the television but couldn*t get any response.,    The brother of the two

friends with my son eventually came and told me that they had rang up and

were safe and eventually           arrived home safe.




Since this incident,           has been unnaturally quiet and withdrawn for

periods which are completely alien to him.    A couple of weeks after the game

there was a parent's evening at school and one or two of the teachers told

me they had noticed a change in           at school and about a week after

that another teacher rang m e up about his altered character at school.




On a couple of occasions there were incidents where he has kicked out at

doors and he has been far less patient with his younger brother than he used

to be.




I consulted a counsellor on Helpline about him who seemed to think that he

would be alright eventually.




I feel angry as to what my boy waB exposed to, the risk to his life and

what he saw.   I feel that a boy of his age would give little or any thought

to death but this incident has made my boy think about it and he talks about
2   ..

it.      I consider that in a way he has lost part of his childhood by this

terrible experience.




I was no t too happy about him going to the match and thought very

carefully about giving permission for him to go, bot because of any thought

of what did happen, but because of possible violence towards him but my brother

v;ho is a transport policeman said I shouldn’t worry as they would be escorted

by police to the ground and back to the coach and there would be little

prospects of violence towards him.     He also said that there would only be

Liverpool supporters in one area of the ground where my boy had received his ticket

for.
