STAT



D.O.B

P.O.S. 15-5-89-

TAKEN BXCT/LJ/

FILE NO



I travelled with friends to Hillsborough to watch the semi-final of the F.A.Challer

Cup between Liverpool - v - Nottingham Forest.



Wfc left Warrington at 10.30a.m. on that morning in a hired car and arrived at

Sheffield at 13.05.



Wte walked straight up to the ground and arrived at the ground at 13.30hrs.



Tfe stood on a bridge waiting for a crowd to subside for about half an hour until

we were moved by a mounted policeman who approached us and told us to go the ,

ground.



We walked up to the ground and queried up outside the B turn —stiles for about

30 minutes until the police opened the gate on the right of the turn stiles*



Hie crowd poured threw the gates and I was farced through the tunnel Land left canto

the Terraces       just behind the barrier.



'frie following serges in the crowd farced me to the bottan left of the enclosure

and up against the fence.



I clintaed up and over the fence onto the next section and perched on the fence

culling people out of the crush. My friend also clintoed cut and got onto the

pitch.



T      inbed onto the pitch and started to help the injured people.   One lad I sat

with for 10 minutes or so who was injured and distressed.     Soon afterwards iny friei
approached with a hoarding and helped me to carry him to the antoulance



I then used the same hoarding to ferry a nuifoer of injured people to the nedical

services.   My friend and I went back to the enclosure ware my friend was on his back

with his face covered, I approached him but I was told by the policeman to leave him

that he was dead.



W 2 put him on a hoarding and carried him to the Gym under the stands.    I then wonder*

about in a daze because   of the shock that I had seen.



At one point I walked over to a camera man and showed him my ticket to prove that it

hadn't been checked and my family told me that they saw me on the television that

evening.



Oice I had found nry friend after about 20 minutes we then made our way outof the groin

towards- the. car, and on the way a rattan let us used her telephone to ring heme and let

the family no that I was ok.



I got to the car about 17.30hrs and arrived heme at about 8.00 O'clock that evening. 3

went into work on the Manday on 17th APril 1589, and tried to return to a normal life.



Hcwsver, on the Vfednesday morning after the reports on the radio that there were pecpl

looting bodies I broke dewn and I was sent to the Wbrks Medical Department.



Otoe Vforks nurse and the Safety Officer then cane to calm me cfcwn and took me off my

job and put me on a lighter one.

                                                                                    *




03 returning heme that evening after telling my wife what had happened she rang the

help line nuntoer and a social worker cane out to see me.
                                                                           i.




He w ; very helpful and understanding and I am still seeing him once or twice a week.
■the following Friday a forthnight after the match        I went   to see my G.P. who is
                                            r who prescribed tranqulisers to me because
              of                1




I couldn't sleep and my stcmach was bad.


I   a l s o   wish to add that since this incident I have terrible headaches and without

tranqulisers I         find it very difficult to sleep.
