STA3EMEOT OF


D.O.B.
D.O.S. 18.5.69,
TAKEN BYCT/UJ/CLMM
FILE NO           illsborough


Cki Saturday 15th April 1989, I travelled in a hired car with 5 friends to Hillsborough
to watch the      final of F.A.Challenge Cup between Liverpool - v - Nottiggham Rarest


We left Penkieth at 11.30a.m. and arrived at Sheffield outside the ground at 14.4Ghrs.


Gn arrival there was crowds everyviiere and ope form of guening whatsoever. At first
we waited in the wrong area and we were being crushed so badly that we moved and
realised that we had been in the wrong plaoein any event.


We eventually got through the tunnel at about 14.55hrs and made our way to the middle
of the enclosure and realised that we couldn't move. He were being crushed from all
sides and I had to force ray head up to try and breath. I cculd only gain the odd cup

of air and I thought that I was going to pass out.


I realised at this point that if I stayed there any longer I would have certainly
passed but I managed tdth the help of anyother supporter to force ray way up and caiMd
across the head of the pecple in the crush tcwards the front v*2re I vrould climb over

the fench.


When I arrived at the front I tried to pull myself up and onto the fence but in ray

weak state it took me a muter of trys.


Eventually I did get onto the fence and drop down onto the pitch as soonas I did this
                                                                                      e
a policeman came over to me and punched rae in ray ribs shouting abuse at me causing m
to fall down onto the pitch in pain through .exhaustion


When I eventually looked up an a daze I could see the peole who were being crushed up
against the fence who ware obviously either dead or dying and other screaming for
help.



I reA&ised what was happening and had to look away and eventually a lad r a over to
me and asked we if I was Ok.

I answered by saying that I was acing and exhausted and eventually after gaining a
form of ocnposure I began to look for my friends to see if they were ok.


1 eventually found |       |and he started asking about his brother who had been with ne

in the grcund but unfortunately I efia not Jjnow what had happened to them as we had
bene sjfelit up in the earlier crush.


Vie   feared the umst £ o e > him and we could see peole dying cn the pitch we were
obviously disraught.


Nevertheless, we continued to look for him until about 16.3Ghrs but to no avail


Vfe eventually decided to go back to the car and cn leaving the ground we spotted
another friend of ours who had seen          s brother      and told 12s that he was ok.


On arrival back at the car all the lads were there and we hund around for about
an hour and a half to try and telephone home.


We left Sheffield at about 19.00 Erssand arrived back heme at Itenketh at about
20.0Ghrs.



On arrival back in Benketh we decided that we wanted to have a drink but I cannot resoe
remember what was said inside the puto as we were all in a daze atrthat time.


I eventually went hone that evening at 12.06 hrs and I did not sleep as I was too upset


On the Sunday morning I went with my friends to the CathraaJ since I wish to show ray
                r


respects to those vto had dies and at this point we did not know vrfiether or not if
any our friends had also been killed in the diaster.


On the Monday morning I telephoned work and told them that I was going to the Hpspital
which I did.


I went to Warrington general Hospital at 13.00hrs wire the nr. examined me and ex-rayed
he   and told ne that I was badly bruised internally and they prescribed pain killers.


I wish to add that I still think about these incidents and find it difficulty to
caic to terms with it even now. I had feo stay off Mark seven working days and blame

this on the incident prescribed above.
