acamsENT of



D.OH. 16.5.89.

D.O.B.

TAKERS BYGT/U/

FILE NO                iillsborough



On   1 5 th   April 'i989, I had travelled with ray friends by hired car to Hillsborough

to watch the semifinal of the F.A. Challenge Cup final betweem Liverpool - v -

Nottingham fTarest.



We left Liverpoool at 11.00a.m. that moniii»y and arrived just before 13.0Qhrs at

Hillsborough.


Outside there was lots of people around in no organised form and so there appeared

no form of queuing.



X rag eventually allowed into the ground at about 14.55hrs just about the tine

that they opened the gates the police and the crush forced me forward through the

tunnel and into the enclosure.



At this tise I was about 10 -12 foot frcra the fench infact my photograph appeared

on the Daily Mirror on Monday 17th April 1989.



With in a minute or so I had been farced further tcwaras the front and I was unablt

to breath.
                              t *'1   -.   .   .'.'V   ;



 I was very nearly unconscious when a lad picked me up and passed me over a fench

were another lad and a policeman had me out and onto the pitch.



 I lay on the pitch trying to get ray breath untila couple of people came over ana

 got He to sit up and put my head between my knees.
  / • • • • • • * • • • * «   •




After a while I felt as t£jfaogh 1 could walk so I stood up and lookedaroundfor a

while looking around for friends, I did this for about an hour.



I could see bodies being carried out and saw people trying to resusitate pecple but
with no look.



I eventually found my friend and because we could take no core we left the football

ground at about lG.30hrs once the Ambulances and morTica! staff cleared.



We went back to the car and travelled hcxoe arriving in Liverpool at about 19. OOErs

were X went straight hate add straight to hea.



All that night I kept on waking up because of nightmares and I didn't sleep very well,



On Sunday momign I avroke and sat around the house in a daze and triedto read the

papers.         But I felt constantly upset and unable to eat.



Ch the Monday rooming I went into work to try and get things out of iny mind the

instants that had happened on the Saturday.



Both of ray friends pointed out to me my photograph in the Daily Mirror and this

made me feel ill.



Since the above event I have not been able to sleep at all, or felt like going to

wark hcwever, I attmepted to continue my routine, but because of ray state of mind

I was late on a number of occasions for wo^.



On 20th April 1999, I received a letter frcra ray iiiplqyer stating that ray tin?*

keeping had to inprove or I would risk loosing my jet).



I was still in a bad state of mind and could not make any effort to inpocve this

so subsequently a received a further warning letter of 28th APril 1989, that

stated if I was late once more I would be dismissed.
On 5th Hay 1989, ny boss told me that I had been lamd off and that I know I would
not have been for ray latest - poor time keeping.



tty Solicitor has advised me to go and see ray Dr, wto is Dr, |          ~|pf

      — --- \I
             __________1        311   appointment on 17th toy 1989, to do this.
