                                                   D.O.S. 20.6.89


 STATEMENT OF




 LIVERPOOL




 On Saturday 15th April I travelled with my friends, Thomas Hilton, Stephen
 Robinson and Derek Richards by coach to Hillsborough to watch the Semi-Final
 of the F.A. Challegne Cup final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forrest.


- The coach left Liverpool at 10.30 a.m. and arrived at Sheffield at 1430 hours.


 We walked upto the ground and arrived at the ground at 1440 hours were we notice
 how crowded it was and infact split up due to the pushing and shoving.


 We all ended up entering the ground at three difference turnstiles and upon
 entering I noticed that a girl was crushed against the wall and tried to make
 a bridge with my arms accordingly.


 This' was to enable her to gain access to the ground which she did.


 When I was through the turnstiles I walked through the tunnel and into the
 Leppins Lane enclosure.     I was met by a wall of people and was carried through
 the tunnel by crowds of shoving and rushing people.    My feet were bearly touching
 the ground.


 I became aware that the players were on the pitch but did not realise that
 the match had started.     I realised how bad the crush was and fought to wind
 my way through and towards the front were the exit gate was.


 Just as I got by the gate I put my hand up to be pulled out of the ground and
 then went unconious.


 The next thing I new was that I was staggering around on the pitch just behind
 the goal.     My knee was hurting because of the crush and I was in so much pain
 I fell to the floor.     A St, John's ambulance man came over and tried to walk
 me around; but I had to sit down has the pain became unbearable.      I then blacked
 out again.


 The next thing I knew was that I was being carried out of the pitch on a hoardinf
 and was being taken to the Nottingham Forrest end and layed down were I was
told I would be taken to hospital


I decided that I did not wish to wait there any longer and that my friends
may need my help and also that there was a number of dead bodies around me.


I got up and walked over towards leppins Lane and shaw two lads struggling
with a strecher, so I helped them to carry this lad towards the sports hall.


Once into the sports hall I ruffled the lads hair who we had         been carrying
saying to him he will be alright, you will be seen to in a minute.        We laid
him down and the two lads covered his face up knowing that he was dead.


I eventually walked back to the Leppins Lane end to look for my friends and
found Derek.   We decided to make our way back towards the coach and on doing
this we awaited for a while before making our way home.


On the way home we stopped off at Barnsley were we telephoned our parents and
we arrived at Liverpool at about 2100 hours.      Hy parents picked me up from
Kirkby and took me straight to our house.


I rang the helplines a couple of times, to see if Stephen had been found but
unfortunately he had not.


Eventually I received a telephone call at*2.00 a.m. from Stephens Sister to
                                            ,                    0


tell me that he had been identified and was dead.


This shoke me. I did not go to see a     Doctor   for two weeks because I      was shocked
and did not want to talk about it to anyone.


I eventually saw my Doctor who told me that my condition would        take time to
heal and informed me that the reason for my jaw being sore was        that they were
probably crush injuries.


Mr. Doctors name is Dr.               I was given two weeks sick leave to try
and get over it.


I wish to add that I made a statement to the West Midlands Police regarding
my experiences and I have also been seeing a Social Worker.     The Social Worker's
name is                    and he is working for the diaster committee concerned
with Hillsbourough.   I have seen Mr.              twice already but I will have
to go back to see him again shortly as I still feel very upset
