STATFMF-NT OF THOMAS HILTON

                                            ]
D.0.B.

D.O.S. 8*5.89,

FJLF.                   □


On the 15th April 1989,     I travelled with my friend                  and

STeven Robinson (deceased     ) to Sheffiled to watch the semi-final of the F.A.Chellei

Cup between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest at Hillsborough.




We left. Liverpool at 10.30 a.m. from                and stopped just

outside Sheffield for a couple of pints.        On returning to the coach we

went straight to the ground and arrived at 1440 hours.




We noticed lots of people milling around outside of the ground in a

disorganised fashion.     We stayed int he queue for about ten minutes and

despite the crush we got in through the turn-styles at approximately 1450

hours.




I retained my ticket stub and walked straight through into Section A at

which point I realised that J was in the wrong section and J came back

out to find my friends who had been with me on entrance.




J was then pushed by the crowd rushing through the gate that had

been opened into Section B at about five past three.

J then found myself being forced towards the front up to about five foot

from the rails et the front of the enclosure.




After the ensuing crush J eventually pulled myself up onto the railings and

over gaining escape to the pitch.




I then noticed that my nose was hurting and suspected that it was broken

realising that I had banged it against the fence in trying to escape.
A joliceman walked over and took me to the first aid post as he

spotted me crying and noticed I was obviously distressed whereupon J

fainted.




I lost all track of time at this point but when I came round J was taken

by ambulance to the Sheffield Northern General Hospital.




J was then taken to a room where I had several cups of tea and talked

over the events     with other supporters.

I telephoned my mother fro:ii there to let her know J was alright and was

informed that the hospital had organised a number of mini buses to take

us back to Liverpool at 1830 hours.

I arrived back at Anfield at about 2045 hours and gotra taxi to

       pub in                                             returned.




On entering               I then found out that Steven Robinson was missing

but continued to ring his home to see if he had arrived.        WF waited

in the pub until about 10.30 p.m. that evening and went home to telephone

his family.     I was m o r m e d that his family had gone to Sheffield because

they could not get through on the emergency telephone number that had

been given out by the radio and television.




I went to bed that evening, woke up early the next morning and just lay ther

till about 9 o ’clock when my other friend _________________telephoned me to

say that Steven had been killed.
Steven had been a very clo^e of friend, J also fell sorry for his

family and felt helpless.




<




                              He took my name and telephone number so

the police could get in touch to relevent statements.     I eventually appeared

on two of the police lists,    the bereaved and also the injured lists and

the West Midlands police visited me to take the relevant statements*

the two officers names were D.C.          and D.C
