STATEMENT OF

HOME ADDRESS:

D.O.B

STATEMENT FOR FILE




On Saturday morning 15th April 1989, I travelled down

to Hillsborough with eleven (11) of my friends.



We arrived at Sheffield at approximately 12.50 pro and my fl'iends had a

couple of pints.     I could not have anything to drink as I was driving

on that date.



We eventually walked up to the ground and arrived at the ground at

14.40 hour j.



Outside the ground there was mayhem and only two police horses guiding

and shoving people into and through the turn-stiles.



I eventually gained access to the ground at about 14.55 hours and walked

through the tunnel.    As I did so I looked behind and I could see the

gate being opened so I moved to the left of the ground and was shoved

towards the front about 2—3 foot from the fence.



People were climbing all over my head and my shoulder was a foot step

in order to climb over the fence.    On seeing this another supporter

tried to get me out by pulling me but I was trapped in the crush.



I eventually gained some room to move and I pitched a child over the fence to

safety.   I continued helping people in trying to get out and then after

about 10 minutes I attempted to Blimb over the spiked fence myself.



On doing this my jeans were ripped by the spikes but I managed to avoide

being impaled on the fence by being helped over.
Once on the pitch I met a couple of other lads and helped carry the

dying and dead bodies acorss the pitch .into the medical services.



I tried to res usitate some people but to no avail and a policeman

cair.e over and informed me that they were dead.



I was verycconcemed and frightend for my brother who was 21 and as I

had taken him there I felt responsible for him.    I looked everywhere

for him but couldn't find him at all.    Eventually my friends came

over and told me that they had found him and he was o.k. and he would

meet us later on.



I left the ground at 5 o'clock through the exit at the main area.



What I aaw there was horrific and will remain with me tor the rest of

my life.   There were bodies strewn all over in lines some «irth covers

over their faces and some just laid out.



 I eventually went home with my friends and arrived at my girlfriend's

 at 9.30- 10*00 pm that evening.



 Since this incident I have found that I cannot sleep, I have nightmares

 I cannot talk about thissto anybddy and find that I am now feeling tired

 because of the stressful situation I have been through.



 I would like to add to this statement that on arriving at the gpaund there

 were no Stewards present whatsoever and the police had no idea how to control

 the crowd.
