3TATF:'FUT Or

D.O.B.




FI IF




On Saturday morning, 15th April 89 I travelled by Barnes

Coaches 1o Sheffield with ;ny friend               to watch the

se/ni-final of the F.A.Chellenge Cup between Liverpool arid I'tottingham

Forest at Hilleborough.




We left Liverpool si 1] a.m. and arrived in Sheffield at around 1330




On arrival at Sheffield we walked around town looking at the shops

until about. 1405 hours when we walked into the ground.




The crowd outside was disorganised but at this, time there was no pushing

or shoving.

W   walked straight through the tunnel and into enclosure B where we stood

for a while waiting for the match to start.




After a while the pushing started from the rear and edged us towards the

front and over to the righthand side fencing.    This was about ten foot

from the fence jurat in front of the barrier .




As the crowd grew worse I was crushed constantly until I was gulf.mg and

gasping for air.   By this time by friend and I had been separated and he

had been pushed elsewhere in the crowd.

J think J may have blacked out because when J came around or realised what

was happening two men had grabbed me by the shoulders and arms and stanr^ed

dragging no out towards the back, over the bodies of people who had been

crushed.
J was pulled up by other supporters into the stands where J stayed

in a daze for about ?0 to ?5 minutes.

The officials announced over the tannoy that the game had been cancelled

and we had to wait the ambulanced to clear the area before we were allowed

out of the ground.




Once outcide of the ground J made my way via the rear exit where they

had laid out all the people who were injured snd dead.

I made my way back to the coach and this was about 1730 hours.

I waited on the coach to return home after the driver had suggested that

we would telephone from a service station.

My friend telephoned his mother who rang his grandmother and she in

turn passed on a message to my mother to let her know we were alive

and okay.




I arrived home at about 2115 hours and was informed that I was flushed

and appeared to be trembling.




My brother is an ambulance driver and checked me over for any initial

injuries such as broken bones etc. and checked me suggesting that. J was

in shock.




I was exhausted and went straight to bed and slept through until early

Sunday afternoon.




All I did on that day was rest and tried to get the previous days occurrances

out of mv mind.




On Monday morning, I awoke with my arms legs, ribs and spine hurting

tremendously.     I had a terrible headache and felt nauseaus so I decided

to go to my G.P. who is Dr.|         | of I           I,
 Th* doc1°r «xarained «e and said I was in shock




A couple of days later my .other noticed a line across ,;,y s ,OIl1sch which


W8S brUiS#'5'   1 Can °nly thinK lhiS "       *>ave been caused by ,„y 8l0n» ch
being forced against the barrier by the crush.


I an s u n   having bad headache, and I had to take a coufJe of day.

off college which is
                                    College   lo try arid recover.



J wi&h to add that my clothes
                                were filthy on ;„y arrival home and my t r a m !
shoes were completely ruined.
