  h - 1   •       I
j > ' t Vis.



   ?V - /U v Vi
Gregson & Ashton
S o licito rs

                                                                                                                 PLEA SE REPLY TO
D R G rantham
M C J B aden
                                                                                                                QUEEN AVENUE.
I L Wright


                                                                                                                8th June 1989*


                                                                                                                 Our reference
                                                                                                                                 MCJB.KS.CUNNINGHAM.
Hillsborough Steering Committee,                                                                                Your reference
c/o Castle Chambers,
Cook Street,
Liverpool.
L2 9SH.


Dear Sirs,


RE: David Cunningham.


Further to your recent letter we enclose herewith a copy of the statement taken
at the enquiry from Mr. Cunningham.

Yours faith




                                        20 Queen Avenue
                                        Castle Street Liverpool L2 4 T X
                                        Telephone 051*236 6120                                                    192 Smithdown Road
 47 Liverpool Road
                                        Queen Avenue office only:-                                                Wavertree
 Great Crosby                                                                                                     LiverpoolL15 3JT
 Liverpool L23 5SD                      DX 14148 Liverpool
                                        Fax 051-255 0952                                                          Telephone 051*236 6120
 Telephone 051-924 6444
                          R eg u late d by th e L aw S o ciety in th e c o n d u c t o f in v e s tm e n t b u sin ess
     r£rf£NT OF MR. DAVID CUNNINGHAM of
                                                                           V
                                                                               s


                                                                                   \
Date of Birth :




We went to the Semi Final at Hillsborough on Saturday     (5th April. We travelled          in
a friends car, eight of us travelling together in two     cars.We arrived near
Hillsborough at 2.30.    We did not go the main traffic   route as we had to pick a friend
up   in St. Helens and went through Manchester and the    route which took us near         to
Barnsley.    We parked the car roughly at 2.30 and sat in the road and had some sandwich
which we had brought with us.     We walked along the main road which leads to the
compound in the Leppin^ Lane end.     There was hardly a policeman in sight along the
main road which was extremely crowded, the only police that I was aware of was
actually in the compound once we had got into it.     There was no attempt whatever to
check tickets as we were leading up to the ground and when we got into the compound
we were not filtered in any way and the police appeared to be making no attempt to
keep anyone out of the compound which was absolutely heaving with people.              There were
about A or 5 turnstiles leading into the ground with what I estimate to be between
A and 5,000 people trying to get in.      Bear in mind that at this time it was 2.A5 or
2.55.   The police were trying to push people back towards the back of the compound
but at the same time they were not stopping anybody from coming into the compound so
the situation was worsening by the minutes.      The police had not organised anybody
into queues as is normally the case at football matches.      Leading into the turnstiles
there were double bars pressumably to organise people into queues.      There was no.
attempt whatever by the police to organise queues within the compound there was
simply a melee of people all gathering up inside the compound and as I state there
was no attempt whatever to stop further people coming into the compound and the
pressure was slowly and surely building up.      It was as bad outside the compound as
it was inside the compound.     The easiest thing to do at that stage would have been
either to stop people coming in or to ensure that a number of people went out until
people were safely through the turnstiles.      As I say the only evidence of police
presence were those on horseback inside the compound itself.      It took about 5 minutes
for me to be pushed and shoved towards the turnstile and I actually at one stage
got trapped on the entrance part to the turnstile and was being crushed against a
metal bar there.    I would doubled up while I was outside and had lost my breath.
Once inside I went to the toilet and saw one of my other friends (we had all become
separated outside) he then went to the toilet, the lighting was very poor and I am
not sure that there was any lighting at all.      By this time it was 2.55 as I remember
              Liverpool Goal Keeper warming up before the kick off.    There were no
     rds at all within the compound on the inside of the stand directing anybody
a n d again, there did not appear to be any police at all.   There may have been any
but I was certainly not aware of them.      I managed to get down the tunnel   and was
just getting to the end of it when they     must have opened the gate and the pressure
from behind me was enormouse and I was literally carried forward.       It was already
packed inside but with the weight of numbers coming from behind I was literally
carried forward and ended up on a crash     barrier being pressed and pressed and pressed
against it.     Within seconds of me arriving on the bar I was aware of people calling
to the police asking to be let out saying that it was Heysel all over again.       The
police simply stood there and told everybody to move back,      there was one policeman
and a woman PC casually totally calmly telling everybody to push back they seemed to
be totally oblivious of the seriousness of the situation.      I have been back to the
ground since the accident and the bar where I was appeared to be about 10 feet from
the front of that particular part of the compound.     As is probably well known now
the situation could have been avoided if stewards and police had been present at
the entrance of the tunnel to direct people to the other two segments of the ground
which were relatively empty.     It seemed an eternity before the police actually realised
the seriousness of the situation.


My friend                 was trapped on the front of the bar by his stomach, his leg
was trapped around    the stantion atthe bottom.   The bar was right   across my pelvis,
I could hardly breath.     I was being supported by the people in front of me who were
being pressed back    onto the bar, I asked my friend to helpand push me off the bar
but he slipped and    then I lost him.   I was aware of people saying that I was going
blue and some people called out to help me off the bar as they could see that I was
turning blue.     I do not remember how I got off the bar and I think that I might have
lost consciousness for a few minutes.     Once I got off the bar I remember trying to
keep my head up for air and being incredibly crushed and moving.       I felt something
under my feet and I looked down and found that I was standing on two men who were
lying still.     They did not appear to be dead but they had just given up and were
lying still.     I felt terrible about this but there was absolutely nothing that I could
do there simply was not enough room (I understand that at this stage people who had
got at the front were trying to pull the fencing down and were telling the police what
the problem was but again they took no notice and stopped them trying to pull the
fencing down the people that can give evidence of this are
                    and            of                which is in                   address
m                    to follow)) I eventually was carried to the front and saw a space
of about 2 feet which seemed like a desert in comparison.      I tried to climb up the
fence but in doing so was kicked in the face and the cheek by someone else who was
trying to climb up ahead of me, after a while I managed to get to the top of the
fence and somebody must have seen me lying on top of it as by that time I was physical!
        ionally exhausted.   Someone lifted me onto the pitch and I lay there and
  mediately became aware of a burning sensation right across my pelvis.   This had
obviously been where I had been crushed against the bar.   Somebody brought an
advertising hauding as a makeshift stretcher and put me on it and carried me over
to the left hand corner flag area just in front of the north stand down at the
Nottingham Forrest end of the ground.   I noticed that when I was lying on the grass
immediately after having been lifted off the fence that it was 3.45.   I have obviously
been just over 45 minutes.   Everywhere around me there were people being resussitated,
dead bodies, people in shock, the scenes were absolutely dreadful, I was there for
about 30 minutes in the midst of all this watching it get worse all the time.    I told
the people not to take me as there were worse people or people in a worse off situation
but after about 30 minutes
