 STATEMENT OF




 D.O.S. 5.5.8S




 ON Saturday morning, 15th April SS J travelled with my friend I

         by special train from Liverpool to Sheffield to watch the

 semi-final of the F.A.challenge cup between Liverpool and Nottingham

 Forest at Hillsborough.




The train left at 10.30 a.m. and arrived approximately 12 o ’clock.



We walked around town for a while and looked at the shops and eventually

we met some people who had organised a coach to the ground,      WF climbed

aboard the coafch and arrived at the ground at about 1440.




The crowd outside was chaotic, there was no organisation and it was just

a mass of people milling around.




Eventually, we got into the ground through the turnstiles at about 1455

hours.   We walked through the tunnel and into enclosure bay.     At first

the crowd appeared to be just as a normal game but after about two

minutes or so we realised it was becoming dangerous.




At this time I was standing    about 15 feet   from the front fence just

behind the goal.   The surge   from the back packed   us closer and tighter

together crushing the breath out of us.    At this time my friend was

being carried away by the crush and towards the front.      The crushing

became worse and people started screaming and crying.      WE were all shouting

to the police to open the gates, this proved to no avail.




Eventually, about ten minutes later, the gate was opened but because I was

too far away, I couldn't ascape the crush.     I was being forced nearer and
  2•••

  nearer the front fence*




  Within a couple of minutes I was forced all the way up J     ne fence and

  felt as though I was going to die.    At this point I almost passed out.




  I summoned all my strength together and climbed the fence only to

 find that my legs were still being crushed and because of this T fell

 back into the crowd.




 I thought I would have one last go ofclimbing out so I climbed up onto

 the fence and hung there.    After what seemed like a lifetime, two policemen came

 over and hoisted me out by the arms and although this hurt it was still a

 great; relief.




 T got onto the pitch and collapsed.    At this point I went completely

 unconcious and the next thing I knew was that I was being slapped in the

 face by some supporters who were trying to help me.    I couldn't

 breathe and the supporters called over the St.John's ambulance who

 asked me if my ribs were broken.    Because of the pain I pointed at my ribs and

 shook my head.    The St.John's amubulance people then stretchered me across

 the pitch and lay me down by the dead bodies.




I became hysterical but nobody attended to me and T must have laid

there for about 10 minutes.




An ambulance came and took me to the Royal Hallisham Hospital at about

half past three.




On arrival at the hoppital I was examined and my reathing was so eratic

it took about three or four injections over a couple of hours to calm me

down.




At this point T was asked if there was anybody I wanted to be informed

of my presence in the hospital and T gave them my mother's and father's
 phone number.   They received thin message at about 6.30 p.m.



 About 10.30 p.m. the doctor cane down and examined me agaii       decided

 to send me for x-rays on my chest, and ribs.




 I was kept in overnight after being told I wa3 badly bruised internally.




 At 1? p.m. the next day a specialist came to see me and said he was prepared

 to let me go home if T would see a social worker.




 This T did arid spoke to the social worker for about an hour.   I found this

helpful and felt a little relieved after talking about the experience.




I was subsequently released at 4 o ’clock after being held back to \ s e Margaret

Thatch P.M.   f.ty family had travelled down to pick me up in their car and I

returned to Liverpool and arrived home at 6.15 p.m.




I stayed at home that evening and tried to relax and get the situation out of my

mind but found that I could not sleep and was still distressed.




On Monday morning, 17th March 89 I went to see my D.P. Dr. I         II




The doctor gave me a quick examination and took my blood pressure which he

said was low and asked me how I felt generally.   I told her that I still feiht

bad and she subsequently signed me off work for a week.




I went back to work the following Monday, 24.4.89. and am at present still at

work.




T wish to add the events on that day will always be at the back of my mind and

I am still having nightmares regarding this.




I blame the lack of organisation on behalf of the police, and the ground
4.. .

ground for all the events described above.
