  Statement of

  D.O.B.

  D.O.S. 9/6/89




 On Saturday morning 15th April 1989 I travelled with my two friends

               and            Ln my car to Hillsborough to what the

 semi-final of the F.A. Challenge cup between Liverpool and Nottingham

 Forrest.




 We left Liverpool at 11.30 a.m. that morning and arrived at Sheffield

 about 1.30 p.m.     On arrival at the ground we decided to walk there

 from the car and we must have got there for about 2.00 p.m.     On

 arrival my friends went into a different section and I started queuing

 at approx. 14.00 hours.     Because of the lack of organisation I

eventually moved onto another side about 14.45 p.m. and the Police at

this point opened the gates.      I inished inside the ground and was carried

by the crowd in through the tunnel and into section B.




Once inside Section B I was forced down and towards the front of the

the enclosure to about 4ft from the fence.




Just as the players came out there was a massive surdge forward and I

started to cry out for help and i was shouting to the people around

me "HELP, HELP, I CANNOT BREATH,I AM GOING TO DIE".      Everyone around

was in the same stressed situation and could not help me.      I then

shouted to the Policeman who was standing in front of the crowd

but my voice was weakening due to the breath being crushed      but of me

and the Officer appeared to do nothing.     After about 20 mins a gap appeared

in the crowd and there were bodies scattered all over the steps.      I then fell

b;r:kvards and passed out.    The next thing that I remember is waking up

r n   the pitch and a Policeman and woman were lifting my t—shirt and undoing

my jeans in order that they could feel my stomach and told me to take deep

breaths.
I must have lay there fore about 10 minutes and I tried to stand up but

as I did I became light headed and again fell to the ground.     I eventually

stood up but my legs and arms were hurting so I limped around to try and

find my shoe which had been lost in the crush.   A policeman and Police

woman came up to me and helped me around the ground and told me to lie down

and she wrapped a blanket around me*



i was then taken by ambulance to Hallersham General Hospital in Sheffied.




The Doctors there sent me for X-Rays and examined me.     They told me that

my arm had been strained and that my groin appeared to be strained.



On looking at the X-Rays the doctor sent out for one of his colleagues to

come and have a look at these   and confirm his opinion.     The two Doctors

then asked me to urinate and asked me that if this hurt in the future I

should go and see my own G.P. at home.   I was discharged from the hospital

at about 7.30 p.m. that evening after my friends had come to meet me.



On arrival at the car I realised that I could not drive because I was

in so much pain and I also felt light headed.    My friend drove the car

home for me.



We left Sheffield abut 8.30 p.m. and arrived in Liverpool about 10.00 p.m.

and went to my friends house where I had a glass of coke.      I went home

and went straight to bed that evening and relaxed all day Sunday but my

back was hurting quite badly at this time.



On Monday morning and I awoke I decided that my back was hurting so badly

 and went to see my Doctor who is                of

She told me to stay off work for one week and gave me some pain killers

 which I was to take if I started to feel anymore pain.
                                                                                *
A was in pain for a couple of days after the visit but on Friday the pain became

so unbearable I had to go to Walton Hospital.   This I did at 12.00 p.m. on

the Friday.   The Doctor examined me and said that I had a groin strain with

torn fibres and said that I should take at least another week off before

going back to work.   All the following week I was still in pain and

decided to go back to the Doctors and said that I could not stand this

any longer and that I was having difficulty in walking.




She signed me off for another two weeks and said to return to see her on

Monday 15th may which I am going to do.



i am still unable to drive or stand and can only walk if I take the

pain killers and even then not for too long.



I wish to add that in the crush I lost my training shoe Diadora - to the

value of £50.00
