Statement of

 Address:

D.O.B.

D.O.S. 2/5/89




I am a season ticket holder with Liverpool F.C.



I attended the Hillsborough Stadium on Saturday 15th April 1989

for the Liverpool and Notts Forest Football match.



I had in my    possession a ticket for the Leppings lane standing at Hillsborough.

The price of this ticket was £6.00.



A friend of mine hired a car and the two of us went to Hillsborough together.



As soon as we arrived in Sheffield we parked up and went to a local chippy

to buy some lunch



We ate our lunch on the way to the ground entering the stadium at approx.

2.00p.m., I cannot give the exact time but I know that we were in plenty

of time before the kick off.



tty friend and I were still together when we went through the turn styles.




I would say that the crown situation outside the turn styles at the

Leppings Lane end was nothing out of the ordinary for any other matches

that I have ever attended.



My friend and I passed throught he turn     styles without incident, we passed

through the underground tunnel through the stands.    We made our way around

the stand until we reached the position about half way down the stands on the
                                 *

right looking at the goa.     We decided that this was the position that we would

take up to watch the match.     We did not go down any further that it is traditional
 that the young kids because they are smaller go down to the front where they

 have a better view whilst the lads and the adults stand further back.



 By 2.30 p.m., it because obvious that there were far too many people in

the Lepping Lane stand area it which I was confined.



I would like to say immediately that I am quite aware that there was a

"wing" both to my left and right but we could not got to those because

of the wire fencing.



There was no way of getting into the other totally empty areas of the standing

area and we were not directed into them.



I cannot recall ever seeing a uniformed officer inside the standing

area.



Last year, I was in the same area of the same standing area for the semi­

final.   Again we had over crowding, and I was pulled up into the stands

from below by other fans.



I can say, that as an experienced man I am often used to pressure that

is bodily pressure in the standing area as a result of the crush.



The crush always eases after a few seconds.



However on this occasion pressure started to built before the kick off

and kept oh building and did not drop away.   I districtly remember

Peter Beardsley hitting the cross bar and that is the last recollection

that I actually have until I found myself on the pitch.   My recollections
        are not entirely clear but I seem to recall being carried forward

        in the rush out of the stands onto the pitch.



       I cannot say where it was when i actually caught my breath whether it

       was just inside the standing area or when I got onto the pitch.       I

       remarter trying to help someone and someone grabbed hold of me to pull me

       out as I needed help which I felt that i did not need at that time.



       I remember seeing a young lad who was clearly dead.     When I felt

   a little better, and realised that there was a shortage of stretchers.

   I was one of the lads who can be seen on the television going to the

   advertisement hordings on the outside of the pitch pulling them

   free and handing them to     other lads to use as stretchers.



  I met up with my friend on the pitch and after we got together we

  managed to make our way out of the ground, back to the car and

  returned to Liverpool straight away.      We could, not stop and telephone

  our parents because there were big queues outside the phone boxes we

  just decided to get home as quickly as we could.



 I do suffer from bronchitus, but after this incident I-spat up

 blood for about 48 hours.      That has never happened to me before.

 i did not suffer any bruising that I can recall.



 Since this incident. I have found it extremely difficult to sleep.

I have consulted my G.P. and he has prescribed Temazapam.



I have been taking that regularly from the 15th and have been on

a course of penicillin for my chest .




P 11    °f the nlghtmarR is seeing i"     sleep seeing this young lad

          saw after he had been crushed to death.     I had   been asked

by my young daughter to take h e r A °              “ 'was n o t \ he toy
I




    4 ..................




    that I saw but the daughter.



    After we had got onto the pitch, and I was recovering, we were by a

    T.V. Monitor.          We could see what was happening   on the monitor but

    thought that this was just a recording of what had already taken place.

    We did not realise at the time that it was still going          on.   Thinking

    back about it, although logically that there was probably not a lot that

    I could have done to help in my mind I still feel upset and frustrated

    because X was not able to do . more to help*
