D.O.S. 26.5.89

D.O.B.




On Saturday morning Ihe Ibi.h Api'i.1. 1989 I travelled by mini-bus to Hillsbourugh

to w-il. h the Somi-l'inal of the F.A. Challenge Cup between Nottingham Forrest and

Livero* o l .




I trav. lied with my friends from            ^ub in                  Leaving at 11.30 a.m

and ar> iving at the ground at about 1430 hours.




Outside the outer gates we were all crushed and eventually after about 15 minutes

we werf allowed in and went towards the turnstiles.




We the i queued up to go towards the turnstiles, but it was like one massive lock

of people.


t

The FoJ. ioe.;then waived us over and under the barrier and urged us to go through

the con ertina gate.'




There was a lot of shuffling and I was pushed into the runnel and down towards

the front in a matter of seconds.
                                                         .   .   '   i         :
I was forced into the barrier,   that is the barrier ajacent to the barrier that

collapsed




All of a sudden I was then forced towards the front and up against the railings




I could not breathe and only remained up-right because of other supporters pushed

against me.
     (
This continued for about lr> minutes until the crush subsided and I then helped

another supporter rarrv mi. Mi" body of a man whose face was purple and appeared

cloud.    A.:; wo p u t     this    muu <lo^n a P o l iceman started to pump his chest, and at this

sift '   ’! r o u J d   t .oko n o m o r o ,   o u d w a l k e d away.                                 •




I w e n t out of the ground past all the bodies strewn everywhere and climbed into

the ttiini. bus to see if my friends were o.k.                           At that time my friends were

looking for me in the ground and did not arrive back until about 16.45 hours.




We If’ft Sheffield after my friends had returned at 16.55 hours and went home.




We called to a service station to telephone our friends and family to tell them

we were o.k.




We arrived home at 1 8 .4 5 h ou rs and I went t o                                 inhere my f a m i l y was

waiting for us.




I'wus -.5]locked a n d ’could not believe what ha d happened.                       I did not sleep that

night” a'nd I have not slept very much s i n c e , to the extent that I have lost

about 10 pounds in weight.




I intend to go to the Doctors this evening, as I have now made the break and act­

ually come out of the house.




I have not been able to get out over the past couple of days because of my

feelings and when I do leave the house I have to be accompanied.                                 Infact my

friend,                            had to bring me here today




I have my own flat but have had to stay with my parents because of my emotional

state and I need their company.
