  HOME ADDRESS:

  P.O.S.   24.04.89

  D.O«B«

  STATEMENT FOR FILE:




 On Saturday 15th April 1989, I travelled to Hillsborough to watch

 the semi-final of the F.A. Challenge Cup between Liverpool and

 Nottingham Forest.     I arrived at the ground at about 1.30 pm.



 Outside the ground there was a fair sized queue but not too dense.

 I walked in through the tunr-stiles through the tunnel and into

 the Leppings Lane enclosttre 'B*.   I noticed that it was quite packed

 just behind the goal and as time w 'Grit by this was becoming more tight.



 I have followed Liverpool to home and away matches for as ;ong as I can

 remember but I have never seen it this packed.



 I was standing behind the left hand barrier about 10 feet from the fence.



It was about five past three (3.05. pm) when the te ms were about to

kick-off when the right hand barrier gave way and the ensuing serge

forced me forwards and sideways.



At this time I fell to the floor and the crowd were falling on to me.

I was being crushed and cou|dn,t breath and thought I was going to die*

The person raised his body, as I was trying to stand somebody grabbed

hold of my sweatshirt and ripped it off my back.    By this time the

gates had not been opened.    ;



All of a sudden, the gate opened, the forward rush proceeded and

because the barrier had given way nearly all the people that were lying

on the ground were trampled on, incidentally, people who were in front

of the barrier that had broken and crushed.
    the gate onto the pitch in enclosure 'B* was kept closed at all times

    unlike the other gates in enclosures 'A* and 'O'.       There were no

    means of escape to the pitch         all other than over the spiked railings.



    The police and ambulance people were dragging people from the rfloor

    and out onto the pitch but this route was also being used as a maand

    of escape for people avoiding the crush.



    These people were hindering the medical services in their effor to

    ensure quick medical attention.



    The police were standing around whilst people were screaming for help.

    Host of them seemed to be sondering around not knowing what to do or

    how to help, people were suffocating and dying and I could take no

    more.   I rushed forward standing on the bodies of other people to help

people shouting at the policc to come and give 'assistance.



Eventually a police man came over and I started passing him bodies.          He

was grabbing them by the head and shoulders and placing them on to theepitch.



I must have dragged at least 15 people out before the police told me to get

out and get on to the pitch and make roan for the aedics afterwards that

I realised that most of the people X had passed out were dead.



Once I had got onto thpipitch I started assisting the other supporters

passing out conscious bodies and attempting to place them into the

recovery position but in most cases this was too late as they had already

            At one point I picked out a little lad whose ribs had been totally

crushed, he just felt like jelly,          I passed him to a medic who told me it

was no use trying to revive him as he was already dead.



I stayed on the pitch in sho^s, I could not believe what had happened
                                  <




but tried to put my feeling®          to one side whilst I ferried fans on

advertising boards across the pitch and to the St. Johns Ambulance People.
i
I eventually left the ground at about 16.40 hours and tried to ring

home but it was totally impossible.



I eventually arrived home at 7.45 pm and that was the only time that

my parents knew that I was alive.



I would like to add that last year I was as the semi-final held at

the same ground.   As we were approaching the ground and the Leppings

Lane end we were met by a cordon of police mounted and on foot who

checked our tickets before we approached these turn—stiles.   Inside

the ground it was totally packed behind the goal but the difference

butween last years and this years match and the incidents that have

occurred appeared to me to be that somebody opened that gate to let

the outside crush into an already packed ground.



All last week I was shocked and impossible to live with, my whole

personality had changed, there was great concern as I am a serving

member of the H M Forces I          I



I was in grief for the people who had died and also feeling tremendous

guilt for not being able to do nothing more.



I cannot sleep and have been drinking to excess just to try and help

W 2 forget.



I do not think I will ever forget the scenes that day or the screams

of the injured and dying for the rest of my life*



All this for a game of football.
