On Saturday 15th April 1989 I travelled from Liverpool to Hillsborough

to watch the Liverpool -v- Nottingham Forrest semi-final.



We arrived at the ground at about 13.30 to 13.45 and everything appeared

to be O.K.   I joined the queue about 6 or 7 people went through the turn

styles and 1 put my ticke£ in and fcetained the stubb.    I made my way

to the middle of enclosure B in the Leppings Lane standing area.     At

this time there were quite alot of people there but nothing unusual for

a semi final.   It remained like this until just after the kick off.



As soon as the players kicked off I realised that we were being pushed

forward a number of people had dome in at the rear and I fell forward

and was trying to protect a young child who was in front of my who

was being shielded from the crushingg crowd.    1 did this until 1 was

forced against the fence and could do no more to help the child.



Ky chest was forced very tightly against the fence and is bedly

bruised and 1 could not breathe and 1 must have lost conciousness

and the next thing that 1 knew 1 was lifted out of the crush by a

Policeman and a Police woman.    All that I could hear was screams

of people shouting help 1 am dying help me please.



I was hoisted on the pitch where I collapsed for about 20 minutes

St. JohnSs Ambulance man then approached me and asked me for help.

Although 1 was feeling very weak 1 did carry a body using an advertising

board as a stretcher and tied to avoid stepping of other people who were

obfasiously dead.   We placed the man down and 1 just sat down fan the pitch

and cried.



1 realised that 1 could teka no sore 1 did not know what time it was but

I walked out of the ground and made toy way to the coach park and returned

to home to Liverpool at 7.30 p.m. 10 went straight homef stayed in and
2



feeling glad to be alive. I was badly shocked and did not go out to my

doctors or the hospital for fear of wasting their time.



Iam goingtfco the hospital tomorrow to have my ribs and back looked at as

I am still in alot of pain.




Signed         ......



In the presence of
