SEATfcMLET OF




P.O.S. 16.5.69.

TAKES'} BY GT/L3/

FILE NO r   --      n shorcugh



On Saturday noming 15th APril 1989, I travelled with my frrenos by Barnes Travel

to Sheffield to watch the semi-final of the F.A. Challenge Cup between Liverpool

- v - Ifottingham Barest.



We left Liverpool at 11.00a.m. fahat morning and arrived at Sheffield at about

14.10hrs.



Cfi arrival we walked up to the ground arrived at the ground at 14.25hrs and there

was no queues present whatsoever it was just mayhem, everyman      for himself.



We eventually entered the ground through the turnstiles on the lefthana side ana

walked through the tunnel into the right enclosure.



We started off in the middle because of the crowd but because      it was tightvemove,

near the front to the left about 4 foot frcm the fence.



Oust after the        cane out it went absolutely hhywire I was being crushed and

my chest was hurling so much that I couldn't breath.     I had a pain in my sdtoach

and I felt quite ill.



I noticed people clinbing out at this point only to be thrown abck by the police

standing at the prasniter fence.



A girl who was standing by me was screaming and crying tut ncbody could do anythin

to help her.



After a while           started to get out.   A gab appeared and a lad infrait of me
said that there was scmebody on the floor, I realised that I was standing on whoever

it was so a few other supporters and myself decided to help this young lad but

unfortunately, he was dead.



I then just wanted to get out 7 oeyld t*ke it no longer so I walked to the front

and climbed over the fence onto the pitch.



Vtfiilst on to the pitch I sat down and i had a cigarette to try and calm my nerves dcwn

but a lad walked up tone and said 'Come on give us a hand1.



We walked ever to the enclosure and started helping people out.    A lot of these people

were having difficulty Jbeeathing so I was telling than to put their heads against

and between their knees and to try and relax whilst 1 loosen their clothing.



After we got about 6 or so people out 1 was in a daze and 1 couldn't find any

antoulances anywtere.   We looked for scne strechers to try and ferry these people but

couldn't find aHJf so we walked up to the hoardings and started pulling them down to

use them.



We carried about 6 people to tv: .^rherside of the pitch wsre the medical services

were sate of *£iich were dead, infact a policeman was stood there saying 'Alive or

dead1, and pointing left or righ to which ever answer t%e gave him.



Eventually 1 just had to sit down on the pitch and vonited 1 felt sick and unaell and

1 was crying.



I soon noticed sate St. John's Anbulance girls where hysterical.      On approaching then

1 reliised      that these girls were crying because they couldn't help anymore than they

did and felt useless.     1 tried to comfort than but they were in much the sane positxdo

as I was.
                                                                           j




I than started running around like a lunatic trying to find my friends this was

because I had realised that i had forgotten about than in all the mayhem.      I eventually
3



I eventually found them and they cane onto the pitch to see if I was Ok,



Vie eventually left the ground at 14.45hrs after the ambulances had cleared

and on leaving the ground vent into a csweet shop to use the telephone.



1 telephoned my girlfriend to let her knew that 1 was alive and tell her that I

w u l d be heme as soon as possible.



We arrived back in Liverpool at 20.20hrs and I went to the pub with my girlfriend



My friends were also there and a nunfoer of than were still crying, 1 couldn&t

take anymore so I went home and went to bed.



On Sunday rooming I woke at about 7.30a.m. and 1 started crying as 1 watched

the reports on T.V.A.M. and what had happened jjhe previous day.



All that day 1 felt terrible 1 went to the pub at dinner time and just cried all

the time that 1 was there so eventually I had to go heme and stayed in the rest

of that day.



On Monday morning 17th APril 1989, 1 went to see iny G.P. Dr.       y£

               because I had pains in my chest and back and 1 couldn't sleep.   She

said that 1 was baQly briaased but the rain thing was that I should talk about my

experiences on the Saturday to try and get it off my chest.



I   telephoned work vrark that afternoon to tell than that 1 wouldn't be in and on

Wednesday rooming 1 decided to go to Anfield.    1 telephoned my friend who works

at John Moores Centre with me and he agreed to cane with me.



(On arriving at the Centre to meet him so that we could go down togethae 1 got into

a lift but unfortunately, I felt so ciai^trcphic       panicked and I had to get

out to the ths st&ars,
We went to Anfield that afternoon and 1 found this to be like hell, but unfortunately

I didn't slee£> that evening either   .      .



CH   Thursday 20th April 1969, 1 went into work in the afternoon and found that my

friend was being buried on the Friday so X had to go hone because 1 couldn't stand

it any longer,



I went to niy friend's funeral on Friday and because I was so upset X still couldn't

go into work.    lhat eveni nf Friday 21st P&ril 19S9, I wsnt to |

with a couple of frienas to try and forget about it, this didn't wark hcwever as

there was so roany pecyle there X wanted to ^    ue ana started crying.   2his wsnt

ofiffor an hour or so until the lads told xaa to have a few scotches which I did and

this clam me down abit.



On the iijnday looming 24th APril 1989, I went into work and they arranged for me to

see a OgmsajLar wbich X did on Thursday 27th AEril 1989, is narae is |

froca Liverpool Personal Services and they are based on Stab&ey Street, this helped

abit and he told tie to ccene back on Thursday 11th Hay 1989, which I did.



I        had to go and see him on Wednesday 24th May 1989, I wish to add that I can

still not sleep and I spend alot of time on my a m in the house crying.      I also

wish to add that on 6th May 1989, the West Midlands police caeie to my house to

take a statement on my experience of that day.
