STATEMENT OF

HOME ADDRESS:

D.O.B.

STATEMENT FOR FILE:




I travelled to Hillsborough on Saturday 15th April 1989 with my

friends to watch the semi-final of the F.A. Challenge Cup between

Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.



V/e arrived at the ground at about 11*45 am and went to a close by

betting office.   We did not stay there for long as we realised that

we should get into the ground to take up our noraal position.



We walked straight in through the tum-stiles, there were no crowds

around and were searched on entrance this was about 12.15 pm.   We

stood talking for a while in enclosure *B* until the tremendous crush

started.

                                                i




At approximately 2.55 pm the crush became unbearable whereupon I was

forced forwards and into the rails.   The people in front of me were

forced tight against the rails and I could not breath.   They were in

a bad way and because I was trapped I could not help them.



I went unconscious and my friend who had hi6 arm free was slapping my face

and telling me to wake up.   I had lost my shoes and people all around me

were screaming and crying.



After what seemed like andetemity I fell back and scrambled towards the

rear of the ground to escape.



There had been a lad with his head on my shoulder and he was obviously

dead so I though I would not survive this.



At the rear I took a couple of deed breaths and staggered out of the ground
shaking and trembling.   As I was standing waiting for my friends a

policeman pushed me aside and said get out of the way.



I went to Walton Hospital on Monday for x—rays and am awaiting the

results.   I would like to add that I am on a Manpower Services scheme

and would be receiving £41«00 per week for my services but at the

present time because I have been laid off work due to ray illness I am

now only receiving £26,00 per week income support,



I am also trying to get the doctor to call as ray back is now so bad that

I can*t get out of the house.



I intend contacting the DHSS at                bo see if they will get

me some money as I have not had any money since coming back from Hillsborough
