                                  STATEMENT


Name:
Address: ____                  Liverpool

Occupation: _
Age I     'ears                       D.O.B.




On the 15th April, 1989, I went to Hillsborough for the semi-final of
the F.A. Cup. I went with three friends,___________ - | _____________
    -------------- -- 1
and |                 we all had tickets for standing at the Leppings
Lane end of the ground.   The tickets cost £6.00 each and had been obtained
from the Anfield Season Ticket Allocation.


I drove the four of us down in my car..        We left Liverpool at 12.00 noon
and arrived at the ground at 2.00 p.m.     I parked in Bradfield Road: this
being the Nottingham Forrest supporters end of the ground, and was the
same place I parked for last years semi-final.        We arrived at Leppings
Lane at about 2.15 to 2.20 p.m. and noticed that there was quite a crowd
at the turnstile.    At this stage the crowd seemed to be out of control.
There were no orderly lines filtering to the ground and turnstiles.
One police horse outside was trying to control the crowd.        When we stood
with the crowd waiting to get in it became very uncomfortable.        As I     1
was with us, she being only a small woman, we decided to stand to one
 side to let the crowd get through.    We stood next to the blue concertina
 gates.   The crowd did not abate, but got worse.      A lot of people were
 standing back to avoid the crush.     At this stage we could not get away.


 I am a regular attender at football' matches.      Normally the Police officers
 make people form lines using Police horses.       Merseyside Police never
 let such a situation arise outside the turnstiles.       I attended the semi-final
 the year before also held at Hillsborough and the Police were far better
 organised then.    The Police the year before prevented the crowds from
 developing around the turnstiles by filtering the crowds well before.
 This year there seemed to be no real organisation and certainly inadequate

 Police manning levels.


 The blue gates were being used by the Police inside the ground to eject
 people who shouldn't have been in the ground.        At one time when the gates
 were opened about 45 to 50 people rushed in.        This must have happened
at about 2.40 to 2.45 p.m.     The reaction of the Police to this was to
try to clear people standing by the gates back into the crowd.        I thought
a Police horse was going to trample spectators and I saw a Policeman
punch a lad in the eye without provocation simply because he would not
move.    The Police were trying to move people into a more dangerous situation
than they were already in, and needless to say they would not move.
We would not move either.     When we refused to move the mounted Police
officer went charging his horse into the crowd.      This obviously did not
make things any better.


In my opinion there were not enough Police officers at the Leppings Lane
end to sort out the problem that had arisen.      It was apparent at 2.30
p.m. that we were not going to get into the ground for 3.00 p.m.


At about 2.50 p.m. or thereabouts the blue concertina gates were opened
by two Police officers.      They said, "Alright lads, come in, in an orderly
fashion."     We walked in without pushing or shoving in an orderly fashion.
There was no one directing us once inside the gates.      The only obvious
entrance was the tunnel.     We just went to the nearest entrance.       It
was not at all obvious that we could filter out to the side terraces.


We went through the tunnel and as we came out on to the terraces, the
teams had just come out on to the pitch.       It must have been about 3 to
4 minutes to three.     We went through in the order of myself,
and


It was congested on the terraces.      This is quite usual; just before kick
off, I would expect it to be congested.       Once out of the tunnel, we tried
to move sideways to the right, pushing through the crowd. I           kas holding
on to me.     I do not know what happened to         after this.


About 2 minutes later the crush happened.       We had managed to push our
way to the right.     As I got further over to the right there was no more
space.    We had managed to get well over to the right, but did not realise
at the time that a 9 foot high spiked fence prevented us from going further
I could see space to the right through the fence.        When we had got further
in we could feel the crush.      I saw a crash barrier to our right and tried
to get in front of it.      I was pulling |    after me and |      [and presumably
        W e   behind her.   At this crash barrier the pressure was very bad;
it was coming not just from behind but from all around.         We managed to
move sideways to a second crash barrier until we got wedged tight,


people were screaming all around us.    There was still motion in the crowd;
                                                                    moved
a sort of twisting.     I got stuck at the barrier and
passed behind me with this motion.     The three of us ended up pinned at
the barrier.     No one could move it was so crushed.     People were walking
on trapped spectators shoulders and heads to escape.        We were cramped
so much that they could not have fallen through. There were other people
sitting under the crash barrier where we were who could not stand up.
One man was screaming, "My legs, my legs".     Other screams were to move
back and to the Police to open the gates.     One Police o f f i c e r Ishouted
to for help just held up his hand to express that he could not do anything.
I was in pain through being pinned on the crash barrier.          I managed
to lift myself up and sat on the barrier.     My feet were off the ground.
It felt like being in concrete which was constricting.          The pain was
so severe that I though I was going to die.        It was the most terrifying
experience of my life.     I was unable to move.


There was a noise which I can only assume was the first crash barrier
we had passed giving away.      When the barrier gave away, it released
 some shoulder pressure and I managed to get over the 9ft fence which
 was close by.    Spectators on the other side of the fence cupped their
 hands through the fence to help me get over.       Two other spectators managed

 to drag I     out over the fence.


 Eventually the Police recognised there were problems and the gates were
 opened, but the gates were so small that it took too long to get people

 out.

 It took me at least 10 minutes to recover enough from the crush to attempt
 to find the others.    I found I    |and|    fairlY quickly, but we could
 find no trace of


 We watched the bodies being taken on to the pitch.       We were there until
 4.30 p.m.     There were no loud speaker announcements until 4.30 when we
 were told that we could leave the Stadium.        We then tried to find
 again.   I returned to the car to see if he had gone there.         When at 5.00p.m
 we still had not found him, we formally reported him missing to the Police.


 At 5.30 p.m. the Police asked us to join them on the Police coach, and
we were taken to Hanmerton Police Station, Sheffield.    As there were
so many of us, they seconded a Boys' Club close by.


We then telephoned our families and I, as the representative of our group,
went to fill out a missing persons form o n ______    We then tried telephoning
hospitals to try to find         We waited from 6.00 p.m. until 1.00
a.m. and then were taken to the sports hall being used as a mortuary
to identify       s body.


I was very shocked at what had happened, particularly the death of my
good friend.   Although I did not attend hospital on the day of the incident,
I did attend The Royal Liverpool Teaching Hospital on the 17th April
as I had been suffering with pains in my chest. I was told that I may
have cracked ribs, but they did not X-ray me.   The pains did not get
any better so I attended my G.P. Dr. I           II                   I Liverpool
   and was sent back to the Royal on the 22nd April for X-rays.     I was
told they could not see anything on the X-rays but thought I could have
internal injuries caused by the crush.    I also had extensive bruising.
Following the tragedy, I had only a couple of odd days off work.     I worked
despite the pains in my chest.




Signed.                                          Dated
