    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF JUDICATURE ‘
    COURT OF APPEAL (CIVIL DIVISION)
    ON APPEAL FROM THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
A   QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION
    LIVERPOOL DISTRICT REGISTRY
    (MR. JUSTICE HIDDEN)

                                              Royal Courts of Justice

                                              Friday 3rd May 1991
B                                   Before:

                              LORD JUSTICE PARKER

                              LORD JUSTICE STOCKER

                                      and

                               LORD JUSTICE NOLAN


    B E T W E E N :



                                 ALEXANDRA PENK              Appellants
D                                 (And Others)              (Plaintiffs)
                                      and

                                  PETER WRIGHT
                        (sued as the Chief Constable of      Respondent
                             South Yorkshire Police)        (Defendant)
    A N D   B E T W E E N :

                                ALEXANDRA PENK               Respondents
                                  And Others                (Plaintiffs)

                                     and

                                  PETER WRIGHT               Appellant
                          (sued as Chief Constable of       (Defendant)
                            South Yorkshire Police)



    (Transcript of the Shorthand Notes of The Association of Official
    Shorthandwriters Limited, Room 392, Royal Courts of Justice, and 2
    New Square, Lincoln's Inn, London WC2).



                               J U D G M E N T


H
 "JR. B. HYTNER PC and MR. T.R.A. KING QC (instructed by Messrs Brian
" 'Thompson & Partners, Liverpool) appeared on behalf of the
     Appellants (Plaintiffs) (Respondents).


MR. W.C. WOODWARD PC and MR. P. LIMB (instructed by Messrs Hammond
   Suddards, Bradford) appeared on behalf of the Respondent
    (Defendant) (Plaintiff).
    LORD JUSTICE PARKER:   We have before us for determination

       appeals in fifteen cases in which the plaintiffs claim to be

       entitled to damages for "nervous shock" alleged to have been

       sustained as a result of negligence on the part of the police

       leading to the disaster at the Hillsborough Football Stadium

       which occurred on the occasion of the F. A. Cup semi-final

       between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest on the 15th April 1989.

       The defendant in each case is the Chief Constable of Yorkshire

       Police.
            I have used the expression "nervous shock" at the outset

       because it has been used in many earlier cases.      It is,

       however, necessary at once to point out that that which attracts

        damages is not the shock itself but any recognizable psychiatric

        illness or disorder resulting from the shock which,     m
D
        appropriate cases, has that effect.      It is nevertheless

        convenient to use the term "nervous shock"     as a term embracing

        both elements which have, amongst others, to be established m

        order successfully to ground a claim of this type.

             At the trial before Hidden J. in July 1990 sixteen cases

        were considered.    Ten of the plaintiffs succeeded and six

        failed.   The six who failed appeal.    The defendant appeals in

        the cases of nine of the ten who succeeded.      Their success is

        however limited.    This is because the issue before the judge

        was, and before us is, a narrow one.      It was and is admitted by

        the defendant that the deaths and injuries suffered by those m

         pens 3 and 4 at the West End of the ground occurred as a result

         of the negligence of the police culminating in the opening of a

         gate known as gate C at the south west corner of the ground when

         pens 3 and 4 were already full.      This action permitted the
H
         masses then outside the ground to gain access to those pens
through a tunnel under the West Stand and create thereby a

developing crush situation which led to the tragic result of

some 95 people being killed and more than 400 being injured,

some very seriously.     It was, further, assumed by the judge,

for reasons which he identified and which are not challenged,

and is assumed before us that each of the plaintiffs did suffer

nervous shock leading to psychiatric illness as a result of the

facts upon which they based their claims.    The issue decided by

the judge and to be determined by us is therefore whether on the

basis of such admission and assumption any and which of the

fifteen plaintiffs who are parties to the appeals are entitled

in law to recover damages should they hereafter prove that they

suffered psychiatric illness from the facts set up.      Any

plaintiff who succeeds in his or her appeal or successfully

 repels the defendant's appeal may therefore yet fail.       All

 questions of causation will remain open.
      The fifteen cases with which we are concerned have been

 described as being test cases, but it is common ground that this

 is not strictly accurate.     They are better described as cases,

 the resolution of which will probably enable most if not all of

 very many other claims for psychiatric illness to be settled by

 agreement.



 The basic background facts.
      Pens 3 and 4 at the west or Leppings Lane end of the

 stadium are immediately behind the goal at that end of the

 ground.      They, their adjacent pens and the West Stand

 immediately behind them together with the North Stand were

 reserved for Liverpool supporters.     The lower seats of the West

 Stand are separated from the pens in front of them by a wall
several feet high.

     The match was an all ticket match and was a sell out.      It

was intended that a BBC television recording of the match should

be broadcast in the evening, but the system was that events at

any ground where there was some significant event would be shown

live on the BBC afternoon programme "Grandstand11.

     In the event live broadcasts of the scene in pens 3 and 4

were shown on television as the crush developed to its

disastrous and horrifying conclusion and, as I understand it,

the scenes or some of them were repeated as recorded news items

from time to time thereafter.

      In addition to those suffering death and injuries in pens 3

and 4 there were of course thousands in such pens involved in

the crush and its horror but who, happily, escaped injury,

either physical or psychiatric.       Many thousands more who

attended the match witnessed what was going on with varying

degrees of comprehension according to their position in the

ground, those in the West Stand, particularly in the front rows,

having the greatest appreciation of the scale of what was

happening.    Many millions more saw what was happening on live

television or thereafter saw what had happened by viewing later

recorded broadcasts.     Amongst those who were at the ground, but

not in pens 3 and 4 or who watched television, there were of

course many who knew or believed that relations or others dear

to them were or might be in those pens and might be amongst

those dead or injured.



The basic facts of the individual cases

A.   The nine successful plaintiffs

      Only one, Brian Harrison, was at the ground.      He was in
the West Stand.     He knew both of his brothers would be in the

pens behind the goal.     He saw the horrifying scene as it

developed and realised that people in the two pens had been

either killed or injured.     When, six minutes after the start,

the match was abandoned he tried to find his brothers.        He

failed to do so.      He stopped up all night waiting for news.

At 6 a.m. he learnt that his family were setting off for

Sheffield.    At 11 a.m. he was informed by telephone that both

his brothers were dead.
     The remaining eight saw the scenes on live television and

heard the commentary.      All were related to persons whom they

knew to be or believed to be in the pens behind the goal.          All

knew that there had been deaths or injuries suffered by many in

those pens.
      The relationships and fate of the relatives were as

 follows:
      Mr. and Mrs. Copoc lost their son.     They saw the scenes on

 live television.     Mrs. Copoc was up all night.     She was

 informed by police officers at 6 a.m. that her son was dead.

 Mr. Copoc went to Sheffield at 4 a.m. with his nephew.          He was

 informed at 6.10 a.m. of his son's death and later identified

 the body.
      Mrs. Mullaney's two sons were both injured.       She knew they

 were at the match.      When watching television she identified

 both in the part of the crowd where there were casualties.          At

 7 p.m. one of her sons telephoned to say he was in hospital.

 She did not hear until 10 p.m. that her other son was safe,

 albeit slightly injured.
       Mrs. Hankin lost her husband.     She knew he was at the

 match and would be at the Leppings Lane end.        She expected he
would be behind the goal.      She watched television at about 3

p.m.   She was not then worried because she thought there was

just crowd trouble in which her husband would not be involved.

Some 15 minutes later she again watched and learned that there

had been deaths and injuries and that there was an emergency

number.     She was informed that her husband was dead at 2 a.m.

       Brenda Hennessy lost her brother.     She watched television

from about 3.30 p.m. and, although she then realized there had

been deaths and injuries in the pens, she was not worried

because she believed her brother to be in a stand seat.

However, at about 5 p.m. she learnt from her brother's wife that

he had a ticket in the Leppings Lane terrace.        At 6 p.m. she

learnt from members of the family who had gone to Sheffield that

her brother was dead.
       Denise Hough lost her brother.      She was 11 years older

 than her brother and had fostered him for several years although

 he no longer lived with her.     She knew he had a ticket at the

 Leppings Lane end and would be behind the goal.       She was told

 by a friend that there was trouble at the game.       She watched

 television.    At 4.4 0 a.m. she was informed by her mother that

 her brother was dead.      Two days later on the 17th April, she

 went with her mother to Sheffield and confirmed an earlier

 identification of the body.      His face was bruised and swollen.

       Stephen Jones lost his brother.      He knew that his brother

 was at the match.      He watched television and saw bodies and

 believed them to be dead.      He did not know his brother was dead

 until 2.45 a.m. when, having gone to the temporary mortuary at

 Hillsborough he found his parents there in tears.

        Robert Spearitt lost a nephew aged 14 and his brother

 suffered severe crushing injuries.        He knew both would be at
the match behind the goal at the Leppings Lane end.       He watched

television from about 3 p.m.   He knew as a result that there

were many dead and injured.     In the late evening he went to

Sheffield.    He found his brother in the intensive care unit in

hospital.     He finally found his nephew in the temporary

mortuary at Hillsborough.



B . The unsuccessful plaintiffs.
     Robert Alcock lost his    brother-in-law.   He was   in the West

Stand, with his nephew (the brother-in-law's son).        He

witnessed the scenes from the West Stand and was sickened by

 what he saw but was not then concerned for his brother-in-law

 whom he believed to be in the stand because, on the way to the

 match, he had swapped a terrace ticket which he held for a stand

 ticket.     Tragically, however, the brother-in-law had, unknown

 to the plaintiff, returned to the terrace.      After the match the

 plaintiff left the ground for a rendezvous with the

 brother-in-law who did not    arrive.   He and his nephew became

 worried and searched without success.     At about midnight they

 went to the mortuary where the plaintiff identified the body

 which was blue with bruising and the chest of which was red.

  The sight appalled him.
       Peter Coldicutt's particular friend, a Mr. Carny, suffered

  minor crushing injuries.     Mr. Coldicutt was in the West Stand

  and knew Mr. Carny would be in the Leppings Lane terraces.

  From the West Stand he could see that there were bodies.       He

  heard a rumour that Mr. Carny had been crushed to death.        As a

  result he did not sleep all night.     He later discovered this

  was not s o .
       Catherine Jones lost a brother.     She knew he was at the

                                   8
                       "°“ia n°” a u y b- “                  “        “ * —                     «     -            ....

                   *•30   p.„.      tB , t t h « .   „   „       d„    lh!>         At      5    15    D m              „




  ««- j'li':~ tsn,tfi,u*•- “«—
      orother.
                     -7



                       At 9 r
                            >
                              .°”



                              ™  ^
                                                                 -



                                      lblng SOmeone wh° Night be her
                            p... h « P,r«nt,
                                                                        -




                                                     tot S h M i l > i a _
                                                                              »     —




         rr in“•
      - « .       ,i«*
                             -
                           ■ «                       -i,t“ ” iy' -                      » - -

              er that n
                      her Vbrother was
                                   ““ dead.                            r*tUr“ d fr"                   Sh-“             -“       “


  «JT~
  thp hnu   j
                   ,n i “h . r“ d ilost
                                    v „ o .a
                                          a “t oy,,r

      *°Y had gone to the match .with his father.
                                                 b m a _
                                                       ola                              ■ “ * -

                                                                                                In the
                                                                                                               «       -



  afternoon the plaintiff heard on the radio that th                                                      y,
  d e a t h s at H i l l s b o r o u g h      He lat                  ^    ^

  ™
 »■
              “   television.
        at th. „a M                 „
                                           He l « . r ,tln
                                           „
                                                                       ,
                                              He later saw scenes of the di«=+-


                                                                     * 1* " “ d “ > « “ “                  sr,nd,<,„
                                                                                                                                ”


       ep,o„.a by                       daughi>r ^           iw                ^            ^

 father were dead.

         John O'Dell was in the West Stand.                                   He knew h -

 - i g h t o n was on the Leppings Lane terraces                                        H                                   ^

 happening.           He went to the rear of the                        Z          St       , 7       ^
his nephew               He «    v,                                                                                         f°r
        «*•              He searched amongst the bodies there and                                                  •
those who staggered out fro* the terraces     H      • aSS1StSd
search    „ ■,                     ^aces.     He continued his
   -h.    He later found his nephew uninjured.

        Alexandra Peak lost her fiance                         C a n p-
                                                             ' Carl Rimmer.                     Thev haH
known each other for
                 for four years and recently became
                                                                            Y
mh m .

           r:irinik-is”
           ,                                 Decame engaged.

                                                                                                               -
L e p p i n g s Lane terraces.      She saw television in her sister's

house and knew instinctively that her fiance was in trouble.

She continued to watch in the hope of seeing him but did not do

so.      She was told at about 11 p.m. that he was dead.

        The above brief facts are taken from an agreed statement

provided for us.
        There can be no doubt whatever that all the plaintiffs

 suffered a period of acute anxiety or fear for the safety of

 someone dear to them until that person was found safe or known

 to be dead, nor can there be any doubt that, where knowledge of

 death came through identification of the body, there must have

 been added distress, particularly in cases where the condition

 of the body was itself distressing.             Further there can be no

 doubt that each one of those who lost the person held dear

  suffered great grief and, if it is different, a sense of loss.

  I have deliberately excluded the details which establish this,

  because it is not necessary to do so for the purpose of these

  appeals and because to do so could only cause further distress

  to the plaintiffs.             X turn now to the law.



  The Law.
          The law as to the liability for damages for nervous shock

   had developed over about a century from a rejection of any such

   claim through a series of stages until it came to be considered

   by the House of Lords in McLgughU n v. 0'Brian [1983] AC 410.

   in that case the plaintiff was at home some two miles from a

   road accident in which, owing to the negligence of a lorry

   driver, his lorry collided with a car driven by her husband in

   which three of her children, George aged 17, Kathleen aged 7 and

      Gillian aged nearly 3 were passengers.          Another child, Michael

                                           10
aged 11, was in a following car which was not involved in the
collision.

     At page 416/417   LordWilberforce said:

    "It is necessaryto state what followed in    full detail.

         As a result of the accident, the appellant's husband
     suffered bruising and shock; George suffered injuries to
     his head and face, cerebral concussion, fractures of the
     both scapullae and bruising and abrasions;  Kathleen
     suffered concussion, fracture of the right clavicle,
     bruising, abrasions and shock; Gillian was so seriously-
     injured that she died almost immediately.

         At the time, the appellant was at her home about two
     miles away; an    hour or so afterwards the accident was
     reported to her by Mr. Pilgrim, who told her that he
     thought George was dying, and that he did not know the
     whereabouts of her husband or the condition of her
     daughter.   He then drove her to Addenbrooke's Hospital,
     Cambridge.   There she saw Michael, who told her that
     Gillian was dead.    She was taken down a corridor and
     through a window she saw Kathleen, crying, with her face
     cut and begrimed with dirt and oil.     She could hear George
     shouting and screaming.     She was taken to her husband who
     was sitting with his head in his hands.      His shirt was
     hanging off him and he was covered in mud and oil.      He saw
     the appellant and started sobbing. The appellant was then
     taken to see George.   The whole of his left face and left
     side was covered.    He appeared to recognise the appellant
     and then lapsed into unconsciousness.     Finally, the
     appellant was taken to Kathleen who by now had been cleaned
     up.   The child was too upset to speak and simply clung to
     her mother.   There can be no doubt that these
     circumstances, witnessed by the appellant, were distressing
     in the extreme and were capable of producing an effect
     going well beyond that of grief and sorrow."

     I have set out the above passage because the detailed facts

are of importance not only for the purpose of determining what

is the true ambit of the decision in the case but because they

can, and in my view, must, be borne in mind in determining the

impact of that case upon the appeals now before this court.

     At pages 418/419 of the report Lord Wilberforce summarised

the position in law as it then stood, saying:

    "Although in the only case which has reached this House
     (Bourhill v. Young [1943] AC 92) a claim for damages in
     respect of "nervous shock" was rejected on its facts, the
     House gave clear recognition to the legitimacy, in
     principle, of claims of that character.   As the result of
that and other cases, assuming that they are accepted as
correct, the following position has been reached:

1.   While damages cannot, at common law, be awarded for
grief and sorrow, a claim for damages for "nervous shock"
caused by negligence can be made without the necessity of
showing direct impact or fear of immediate personal
injuries for oneself.  The reservation made by Kennedy J.
in Dulieu v. White & Sons [1901] 2 KB 669, though taken up
by Sargant L.J. in Hambrook v. Stokes Brothers [1925] 1 KB
141, has not gained acceptance, and although the
respondents, in the courts below, reserved their right to
revive it, they did not do so in argument.   I think that
it is now too late to do so. The arguments on this issue
were fully and admirably stated by the Supreme Court of
California in Dillon v. Legg [1968] 29 ALR 3d 1316.

2.   A plaintiff may recover damages for "nervous shock"
brought on by injury caused not to him or herself but to a
near relative, or by the fear of such injury.    So far
(subject to 5 below), the cases do not extend beyond the
spouse or children of the plaintiff (Hambrook v. Stokes
Brothers [1925] 1 KB 141, Boardman v . Sanderson [1964] 1
WLR 1317, Hinz v. Berry [1970] 2 QB 40 - including foster
children - where liability was assumed)   and see King v.
Phillips [1953] 1 QB 429).

3. Subject to the next paragraph, there is no English case
in which a plaintiff has been able to recover nervous shock
damages where the injury to the near relative occurred out
of sight and earshot of the plaintiff.   In Hambrook v .
Stokes Brothers an express distinction was made between
shock caused by what the mother saw with her own eyes and
what she might have been told by bystanders, liability
being excluded in the latter case.

4.   An exception from, or I would prefer to call it an
extension of, the latter case, has been made where the
plaintiff does not see or hear the incident but comes upon
its immediate aftermath.   In Boardman v. Sanderson the
father was within earshot of the accident to his child and
likely to come upon the scene: he did so and suffered
damage from what he then saw.   In Marshall v. Lionel
Enterprises Inc. [1972] 2 OR 177, the wife came immediately
upon the badly injured body of her husband.   And in Benson
v. Lee [1972] VR 879, a situation existed with some
similarity to the present case.  The mother was in her home
100 yards away, and, on communication by a third party, ran
out to the scene of the accident and there suffered shock.
Your Lordships have to decide whether or not to validate
these extensions.

5.   A remedy on account of nervous shock has been given to
a man who came upon a serious accident involving numerous
people immediately thereafter and acted as a rescuer of
those involved (Chadwick v. British Railways Board [1967] 1
WLR 912).   "Shock" was caused neither by fear for herself
nor by fear or horror on account of a near relative.   The
principle of "rescuer" cases was not challenged by the

                         12
     respondents and ought, in my opinion, to be accepted.   But
     we have to consider whether, and how far, it can be applied
     to such cases as the present."

     With one qualification I respectfully accept and adopt that

summary.   The qualification which it is necessary to make is

that Lord Wilberforce's numbered paragraph 2 overlooks the

decision in Dooley v. Cammel Laird [1951] 1 Lloyds Rep. 271, a

decision of Donovan J. at first instance.      That case was cited

in argument in McLouqhlin's case but was not mentioned in any of

the speeches of their Lordships.      I assume therefore that all

considered it was rightly decided.     The plaintiff was a crane

driver employed by the first defendants who had loaned the crane

and driver to the second defendants for the purpose, inter alia,

of hoisting certain materials weighing 3 2 cwt. from the quay and

lowering them into No. 2 hold of the vessel "Ceramic" which was

being fitted out at the first defendant's yard.      For the

purpose of the operation the materials were loaded into a canvas

and manila sling which was attached to the crane by a rope known

as a snotter.   The materials having been loaded into the sling

the plaintiff hoisted the load from the key and swung it into

position over No. 2 hold.      He knew people were working there.

He could not see into the hold, so, having positioned the load,

he awaited instructions to lower.      Whilst so waiting he saw

that the snotter was about to break.      He started to swing the

load away from the hold and over the vessel's side but before he

could do so the snotter snapped and the load fell into the hold.

He stayed in the crane in case he might be required to hoist any

injured men from the hold.      No—one was in fact injured.    He

suffered nervous shock.      He claimed damages against the first

defendants on the basis that the shock was caused by their

breach of certain statutory regulations and against the second

                                 13
defendant on the ground that it was due to the breach of a duty

of care owed to him.   The plaintiff was held entitled to recover

under both heads, although he was not within the categories set

out in Lord Wilberforce's numbered paragraph 2.

    It will be seen from my earlier recital of the facts that in

each of the cases of both the successful and unsuccessful

plaintiffs the claim went beyond the law as it stood in 1983.

    Of the nine successful plaintiffs one only was at the scene

of the catastrophe but he was not within the category of those

then recognised as being entitled to claim in respect of nervous

shock brought about for fear of another, nor did he witness the

death of his brothers or subsequently identify their bodies.

    Of the remainder of those successful none were at or near

the scene of the catastrophe but were put in fear by what they

saw on television many miles from the scene.    Only four were

within the categories then recognised as being entitled to

claim, and only two identified the bodies of the victims.    One

of those was within the recognised categories but had been told

of death prior to identification, the other was not within such

categories.

    Of the six unsuccessful plaintiffs, only two were at the

scene, none were in the recognised categories, only one

identified the victim's body.

    It is thus clear that for any of the plaintiffs to succeed

involves an extension of the law as it stood in 1983.

    I return to McLouqhlin's case.   That which had to be

considered in that case was whether the plaintiff who was within

the recognised categories was entitled to succeed although she

was not at or near the scene of the accident when it happened.

She had been told of it about one hour later.   She had not then
gone to the scene of the accident but to the hospital where she

had seen her family in the appalling condition described by Lord

Wilberforce.

    Their Lordships, reversing the decision of the trial judge

and the uanimous decision of this court all held that she was so

entitled.   This decision clearly established that neither

presence at or near the catastrophe, nor immediate resort to the

scene on being told, whether as a rescuer or not, are essential

elements of a successful claim but that resort to a hospital to

find what can, as I think, only be described as the immediate

aftermath by a person in a recognised category is sufficient.     I

regard the scene at the hospital in that case as part of the

catstrophe itself for none of the victims had been cleaned up or

attended to.

    Although their Lordships' decision was unanimous there were

considerable differences in approach and substance between them.

Not only have these differences not been resolved by later

decisions of this court and courts of first instance but to some

extent they have, as it seems to me, led to a situation when it

is of vital importance that the law on the subject should again

be reviewed by their Lordships in the light of the facts in the

cases before us.   In Caparo Industries pic v. Dickman [1990] 2

AC 605 for example, a case involving financial damages, their

Lordships, and in particular perhaps Lord Bridge of Harwich,

have somewhat changed direction in their approach to problems of

the ascertainment of a duty of care from that taken by the

majority in McLouqhlin's case.   Furthermore the decisions of

Mantell J. in Hevican v. Ruane (unreported) and Ward J. in

Ravenscroft v. Redeikaktiebeloget Transatlantic reported in The

Times newspaper on the 17th April during the hearing of these
aPP^nls, have gone further in extending the permissible ambit of

                     for nervous shock than has any previous case either in

        la c°urt or in their Lordships' House.

                 the authorities have been extensively reviewed and analysed

bY tllQir Lordships in                 McLouqhlin's case, in Caparo v. Dickman
snd i               ^V\            •
                    tne only previous    case on nervous shock which reached

thei”'   na™ely Bourhill v. Young [194 3] AC 92. They have also
fossu t                   •

      considered in this court in Attia v. British Gas pic [1988]

1 QH 3 04 and in the judgments                of Hidden J. in the present case

 (reported at 1991 2 WLR 814) and of Mantell J. and Ward J. in

                  **t>es referred to above.    It would in my view serve no

USelul Purpose were I to repeat the process in this judgment.                     I

shaH               instead go directly to consider each of the issues which

                  *or determination in these appeals and express my

cone[usi0ns upon them together with brief mention of the basis

UP°n w^ich I have reached such conclusions.


Issuu              i
              c
                     anyone who is not either within the already recognised

catG,jni-i.Gs of parent or spouse of a victim or potential victim

or a 'oscuer bring a claim?

              Hr* Hytner submits that anyone at all can claim, even a

kystnndor if the scene is sufficiently horrific.                    Support for

             a ^iow can be found in particular in the speech of Lord

Bnd<|U jn McLouqhlin's case.                  It is also supported, he submits,

                   decision in Dooley v. Cammel Laird (op.cit) .     I do not

accept              this.     Dooley was the employee of the defendant.   It was
thei't3,nro p lain that a duty of care was owed towards him.
C 'i n y »   I


     ,tai'more he was directly involved in the accident there in
quest |()l.
    For the defendant it is submitted that no extension at all
should be made.

    It is, I think, necessary first to consider the basis upon

which parents and spouses are permitted to claim.        It can in my

view only be on the basis that, normally, the parent child and

the husband wife relationship can be presumed to be so close

that fear for the child or spouse can be reasonably foreseen by

the wrongdoer as likely to result in nervous shock to a parent

or spouse of ordinary phlegm who witnesses or comes upon the

immediate aftermath of catastrophe involving, or which appears

likely to involve, the child or other spouse.        This however is a

presumption and is not based on expert evidence as to the

susceptibility of parents or spouses of ordinary phlegm to

suffer shock followed by psychiatric illness from such

situations.

    In McLouqhlin Lord Wilberforce said at page 422:

    "As regards the class of persons, the possible range is
     between the closest of family ties - of parent and child,
     or husband and wife - and the ordinary bystander.  Existing
     law recognises the claims of the first:  it denies that of
     the second, either on the basis that such persons must be
     assumed to be possessed of fortitude sufficient to enable
     them to endure the calamities of modern life, or that
     defendants cannot be expected to compensate the world at
     large.   In my opinion, these positions are justifiable,
     and since the present case falls within the first class, it
     is strictly unnecessary to say more.  I think, however,
     that it should follow that other cases involving less close
     relationships must be very carefully scrutinised.  I cannot
     say that they should never be admitted.   The closer the
     tie (not merely in relationship, but in care) the greater
     the claim for consideration.  The claim, in any case, has
     to be judged in the light of the other factors, such as
     proximity to the scene in time and place, and the nature of
     the accident."

    Logically and respectfully this must be right but if, as is

inherent in Lord Wilberforce's observation, the basis of the

current qualified categories is relationship and care, two

things appear to me to follow.        First, the presumption in favour

                                 17
of parents and spouses should be rebuttable.   What, for example,

of the mother who has handed over her 16 year old child to

foster parents shortly after its birth, has never seen it or

communicated with it or enquired after it ever since?     It is

submitted that these matters need not and cannot be canvassed.

If a mother in fact suffers nervous shock from witnessing the

death of her child the very fact, it is said, establishes the

correctness of the presumption.   I do not accept this.     The

mother may witness the death of a child without even knowing it

is hers and may suffer nervous shock, not because it was her

child but because she was not possessed of ordinary phlegm.

What also of the husband and wife who are still legally married

but have been parted for years and are well known to hate each

other?

    Secondly, it would on the face of it appear to follow that

remote blood relations or even persons with no blood tie at all

should be let in if they can prove a sufficient degree of care.

A godfather or friend who has taken on the care and custody of a

small baby on the death of its parents and has brought it up as

his own would appear to be every bit as deserving as the parent.

So too one of two people who have lived together as man and wife

for 30 years but have not married because of some legal or

religious impediment or a rooted objection to marriage should

logically be treated in the same way as husband and wife.

    These problems have not hitherto been considered by any

court.   For my part I consider that the presumption should be

rebuttable.   Indeed in practice it must be.   When causation is

being considered it must I think be open to the defendant to

shew, by cross-examination or evidence, that the plaintiff

mother had abandoned her child fifteen years earlier and had not
seen or communicated with it or enquired after it ever since.

Moreover since the question to be determined is whether the

defendant owed a duty of care to the actual plaintiff it must as

it seems to me be relevant to consider any special facts

relating to a plaintiff mother.        It is one thing to say that

what I may call the ordinary mother is owed a duty of care.          It

is quite another to say that a duty is owed to a mother in

respect of whom the facts instanced above exist.

    What then of extension of the categories.        If the basis upon

which parents and spouses is as I believe it to be, it appears

clearly logical at first sight to allow as a claimant anyone,

blood relation or otherwise, to claim if they can establish a

factual close relationship similar to that of an ordinary parent

child or husband wife relationship.

    The matter is however not as simple as this.        The problem is

not the mere equating of the position of the plaintiff in

relation to the particular victim or potential victim. That is

or may be of importance but the root question is whether a duty

of care was owed by the defendant to the plaintiff.        I go

therefore to the classic passage in Lord Atkin's speech in

Donoqhue v. Stevenson [1932] AC 562 at 580:

    "The rule that you are to love your neighbour becomes in
     law, you must not injure your neighbour;   and the lawyer's
     question, Who is my neighbour? receives a restricted^reply.
     You must take reasonable care to avoid acts or omissions
     which you can reasonably foresee would be likely to injure
     your neighbour. Who, then, in law is my neighbour?     The
     answer seems to be - persons who are so closely and
     directly affected by my act that I ought reasonabl to have
     them in contemplation as being so affected when I am
     directing my mind to the acts or omissions which are called
     in question."
                                              (emphasis mine)

     The questions therefore are (a) could the defendant

 reasonably foresee that his acts or omissions would be likely to


                                  19
cause psychiatric illness to the plaintiff and (b) is the

plaintiff someone so closely and directly affected by the act or

omission complained of that the defendant ought reasonably to

have had him in contemplation as being so affected.

    It seems to me to be acceptable to make a p n m a   facie

presumption in favour of a plaintiff parent or spouse in

relation to both questions,   indeed we are bound to do so, but is

it acceptable to do so in respect of other plaintiffs?      Ought a

defendant reasonably to foresee that any other persons of

ordinary phlegm (in addition to rescuers) would be likely to

 suffer psychiatric disorder from shock?     How does the judge

 decide?   In McLouqhlin's case at page 432 this question was

 considered by Lord Bridge of Harwich.     He observed that there

 were two possible approaches.    Either the judge should decide

 the question on expert evidence or "... relying on his own

 opinion of the operation of cause and effect in psychiatric

 medicine, as fairly representative of that of the educated

 layman, should treat himself as the reasonable man and form his

 own view from the primary facts as to whether the proven chain

 of cause and effect was reasonably foreseeable."

      He regarded the first approach as having much to commend it

  but considered it as too late to depart from the second and

  concluded that the best yardstick was the consensus of informed

  judicial opinion.   There is of course no doubt that judges

  recognise that the shock suffered by the sight of horrific

  events may in some cases lead to psychiatric injury and the

  courts are presently to assume reasonable foreseeability in the

  case of the recognised categories, but I see no justification

  for going further and no consensus of informed judicial opinion

  which could justify so doing.    No doubt some persons may suffer

                                  20
such injury but ought a wrongdoer reasonably to contemplate such

persons as being likely to be amongst those affected by his act

or omission?   It is of course true that he must take the

plaintiff as he finds him and that if the act or omission would

be likely to cause some injury to an ordinary person he must

take the consequences if the particular plaintiff suffers

additional harm.    Here however we are in my view considering a

different situation.    The vast majority of ordinary persons do

not suffer psychiatric illness from this sort of shock.     Ought

then a defendant reasonably to contemplate that there will or

may be amongst those so closely and directly affected by his act

or omission some persons other than recognised categories or

rescuers who are likely to suffer such injury.      I do not think

 so.   I would therefore reject the appeals of the unsuccessful

 plaintiffs and allow the appeals in the case of the successful

 plaintiffs who are not within the recognised categories.



 Issue No. 2
       The next major question is whether the effect of watching

 television miles away from the catastrophe can be regarded as

 satisfying the test of proximity.     It was, I have no doubt,

 clearly foreseeable that the scenes at Hillsborough would be

 broadcast both live and as recorded news items later m     the day,

 that millions would be watching and that amongst those watching

 there would be likely to be parents and spouses and other

  relatives and friends of those in the pens behind the goal at

  the Leppings Lane end.   In McLouqhlin's, case Lord Wilberforce

  envisaged the possibility that watching live or simultaneous

  television might satisfy the test of proximity.
        I can see force in the plaintiffs' contention.   On the face

                                  21
of it there may appear to be little difference beteween two

mothers, one of whom is in the West Stand and the other of whom

sees the scenes on television.      There is however in my view a

great difference.   The mother in the West Stand sees only that

which she can see through her own eyes from her position in that

Stand.   The watcher of television sees what the cameras and

producer choose between them to broadcast.     They may, and

probably will, move from one part of the scene to another which

seem best to convey the increasing horror of what was taking

place.    Zoom lenses will be used, not to record and send out

pictures of mangled corpses or dreadfully injured persons, but

simply to demonstrate to the viewer more clearly what was

happening than could be appreciated by an actual watcher.        A

watcher from the far end of the North Stand would, for example,

 see and appreciate far less of what was happening than a

 television viewer 60 miles away or perhaps even hundreds or

 thousands of miles away.   Such a watcher might not appreciate

 that there was anything more than the crowd trouble which

 regretfully occurs all too often at football matches, whereas

 the television viewer would at an early stage realise the true

 position.
     I have said that a viewer of television might well be

 thousands of miles away.   This is by no means fanciful.      If for

 example the final of the World Cup were played at Wembley

 between Korea and Argentina the live television broadcast would

  no doubt go by satellite to millions in those two countries and

  indeed in many other countries.     In those countries those

  watching would probably include parents, spouses, other

  relatives and friends of the players and of fans known or

  believed to be watching the match.
                                 22
of Lords proceeded on the basis that liability resulted from

what the plaintiff had seen on arrival in the hospital on being

told of the accident, not on the information of the accident

which had led to her presence there.

     It appears to me that if it can be reasonably foreseen that

psychiatric illness can result from the shock of being told what

has happened but the defendant is not liable, so also the

defendant is not liable if the injury results from information

conveyed by means of television and its commentary.    If this is

not correct it would, as it seems to me, follow that anyone who

reports, at any rate promptly, the fact of death or serious

injury would be liable for psychiatric illness resulting, as

would the television company.

     What then of the cases where there was subsequently

identification of the body or sight of the injured victim as in

McLouqhlin's case?    It is clear from that case that there may

be liability if the identification can be regarded as part of

the immediate aftermath.   The only one of the present cases

which comes anywhere near an aftermath case is that of Mr.

Alcock who identified his brother-in-law in a bad condition in

the mortuary at about midnight on the same day.    In my judgment

that is not enough.    I would regard it as unlikely and not

reasonably forseeable that a person of ordinary phlegm would

suffer psychiatric injury from viewing the corpse of a

brother-in-law even if badly damaged.

     In the case of all plaintiffs it must be borne in mind that

except in the identification cases the plaintiffs' cases were

based solely on the fear, anxiety and worry, engendered by

watching television and for the possible fate of someone held

high in their affections together with receipt of information as
of Lords proceeded on the basis that liability resulted from

what the plaintiff had seen on arrival in the hospital on being

told of the accident, not on the information of the accident

which had led to her presence there.

     It appears to me that if it can be reasonably foreseen that

psychiatric illness can result from the shock of being told what

has happened but the defendant is not liable, so also the

defendant is not liable if the injury results from information

conveyed by means of television and its commentary.      If this is

not correct it would, as it seems to me, follow that anyone who

reports, at any rate promptly, the fact of death or serious

injury would be liable for psychiatric illness resulting, as

would the television company.

     What then of the cases where there was subsequently

identification of the body or sight of the injured victim as in

McLouqhlin's case?    It is clear from that case that there may

be liability if the identification can be regarded as part of

the immediate aftermath.   The only one of the present cases

which comes anywhere near an aftermath case is that of Mr.

Alcock who identified his brother-in-law in a bad condition in

the mortuary at about midnight on the same day.    In my judgment

that is not enough.    I would regard it as unlikely and not

reasonably forseeable that a person of ordinary phlegm would

suffer psychiatric injury from viewing the corpse of a

brother-in-law even if badly damaged.

     In the case of all plaintiffs it must be borne in mind that

except in the identification cases the plaintiffs' cases were

based solely on the fear, anxiety and worry, engendered by

watching television and for the possible fate of someone held

high in their affections together with receipt of information as

                                24
to the fate of such person.          Assuming, as I do for present

purposes, that each of them did suffer psychiatric illness from

what they-saw or were told, or a combination of both, I do not

consider that the defendant was in breach of any duty of care

towards them for I do not consider such duty existed towards any

of them.


Issue 3.     The place of policy in such cases.
     in    McLouqhlin's   case   Lord Wilberforce,        in   referring   to   the

judgment of this court in that case, said at page 420:

     "I am impressed by both of these arguments, which I have
      onlv briefly summarised.   Though differing in expression,
      in the end, in my opinion, the two presentations rest up n
      a   common   principle,    namely   that,   at   the margin,   the
      boundaries of a man's responsibility for acts of
      have to be fixed as a matter of policy.   Whatever is the
      correct jurisprudential analysis, it does not make any

      jj
      essential
        j
                    difference    whether   one   says,   with
              that there is a duty but, as a matter of P01^ '
      consequences of breach of it ought to be limited at a
                                                                 Stephenson



      c e r S m point, or whether, with Griffiths L..J. , °ne/ ^ s .
      that the fact that consequences may be foreseeable doe:s no
      automatically impose a duty of care, does not do so m fact
      where policy indicates the contrary."
      In that case there was a difference of opinion between Lord

 scarman, who regarded the question of policy as not justiciable,

 and, as I see it, all the other four of the judicial committee

 who with, as I think, different degrees of emphasis regarded it

 as justiciable albeit not such as to bar the remedy in that

 case.      Policy came in, principally, on the "floodgates"

 argument which was considered in that case to be of no weight

  even if justiciable,     (there were other differences which it is

  unnecessary for present purposes to mention).
          As to policy, it is of assistance to refer to the speech of

  Lord Bridge of Harwich in Caparo v. Dickman (op cit) where at

  pages 573/4 he said:
      "      ... What emerges is that, in addition to the
          foreseeability of damage, necessary ingredients in any
          situation giving rise to a duty of care are that there
          should exist between the party owing the duty and the party
          to whom it is owed a relationship characterised by the law
          as one of "proximity" or "neighbourhood" and that t h e _
          situation should be one in which the court considers it
          fair, just and reasonable that the law should impose a duty
          of a given scope on the one party for the benefit of the
          other.    But it is implicit in the passages referred to
          that the concepts of proximity and fairness embodied in
          these additional ingredients are not susceptible of any
          such precise definition as would be necessary to give them
          utility as practical tests, but amount in effect to little
          more than convenient labels to attach to the features of
          different specific situations which, on a detailed
          examination of all the circumstances, the law recognises
          pragmatically as giving rise to a duty of care of a given
           scope.   Whilst recognising, of course, the importance of
           the underlying general principles common to the whole field
           of negligence, I think the law has now moved in the
           direction of attaching greater significance to the more
           traditional categorisation of distinct and recognisable
           situations as guides to the existence, the scope and the
           limit of the varied duties of care which the law imposes.

          This is in my view a clear departure from McLouqhlin and,

albeit in different words, appears to me to put judicial policy

in the van of considerations.         Although the case itself

concerned a claim for financial loss resulting from a negligent

mis-statement, Lord Bridge was at that stage dealing with the

duty of care generally.         Later, when dealing with the specific

question before the House, he cited with approval the words of

Cardozo C.J. in Ultramares Corp. v. Touche [1931] 255 NY 170 at

179       that to hold that there was a duty of care such as there

contended for would subject the defendant to "liability in an

indeterminate amount, for an indeterminate time to an

indeterminate class".         This appears to me to be no more and no

less than the affirmation that it is proper for the courts to

place limits upon a liability which might otherwise arise

because it would not be fair and reasonable to put such a

liability on the defendant.         This appears to me the exercise of

judicial pragmatism which is in my view the same as judicial

                                     26
  policy.

       In my judgment, to put upon the defendant liability not

  merely to parents and spouses but to an indeterminate class

  beyond them for an indeterminate amount would be unfair and it

  would be equally unfair to make the defendant liable even to

  parents and spouses who, far removed from the incident in

  question, happened to watch and hear either a contemporaneous

  broadcast of selective scenes or a later recorded news item.

       I would, therefore, whilst having such sympathy for each of

  the plaintiffs as would lead me if possible to uphold the claim,

  allow all the defendants' appeals and dismiss all the appeals of

  the plaintiffs.

        I should perhaps add that, like Hidden J. in this case and

  Mantell J. and Ward J. in the other two cases cited, I have

   found this matter one of great difficulty.   My concern has

  been, not only to reach a conclusion which, right or wrong I

  hope to have been intelligible, but also to indicate some of the

  difficulties which have not yet been, but urgently need to be,

  considered and resolved by their Lordships.

        Finally I should express my thanks to counsel for their

  valuable assistance.



LORD JUSTICE STOCKER: This appeal is concerned with 15 out of 16

  plaintiffs, whose claim for damages for personal injuries arose

  out of the events which took place on Saturday 15th April 1989

  at Hillsborough Stadium on the occasion of the F.A. Cup

  Semi-final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest Football

  Clubs.    Some 95 people were killed in pens at the Leppings Lane

  end of the ground and some 400 others needed hospital treatment

   as a consequence of crushing injuries due to overcrowding in

                                 27
those pens.     None of the plaintiffs sustained physical injury

in the sense of direct damage to their bodies, but claim damages

for psychiatric illness resulting upon the shock to which they

were subjected in various circumstances which differed in

respect of individual plaintiffs.      For the purposes of the

trial and in this appeal it was assumed that in each case the

shock inflicted upon each caused a recognised psychiatric

illness in the form of post-traumatic stress disorder or

pathological grief and that each suffered from the symptoms of

those disorders.      Thus no investigation was made at trial or

before this court as to whether or not the individual plaintiffs

had in fact suffered from psychiatric illness caused by shock,

a matter which in some instances at least, may have to be

decided.      But the assumption in favour of each plaintiff has

been made and the issue of liability determined upon the basis

of an assumption that psychiatric illness through shock has been

proved to have been suffered.    The assumption was necessary

since the cases before the court have been regarded, for some

purposes at least, as test cases.    The learned judge found that

in the case of ten plaintiffs liability had been proved, but in

the case of six others their actions failed.    The six plaintiffs

who failed appeal against the finding against them, and in the

case of nine of the ten who succeeded the defendant

cross-appeals, contending that they too should have had judgment

given against them.

     The learned judge reviewed the relevant authorities in

detail and with clarity and based his judgment upon a case in

the House of Lords, McLouqhlin v. O'Brian [1983 [ 1 AC 410, in

which their Lordships also extensively reviewed the relevant

authorities and the propositions derived from them.     I have not

                                28
found it an easy matter to decide whether or not the conclusions

reached by their Lordships, which were unanimous as to the

outcome of the case, differed in material respects with regard

to the proper approach to be adopted in future cases in which

psychiatric illness is suffered through fear or apprehension as

to the survival or safety of person other than themselves, or

whether they agreed as to the principles to be applied, but

stated those principles in widely differing terms.      This

distinction is important since upon it depends on the question

whether or not the proper approach to the resolution to each

case as it arises should remain as it has been in this country

in the past by reference to categories of relationship between

the victim who has died or for whom apprehension as to his

safety was felt and the plaintiff, subject to any limitation of

proximity in time and space to the occurrence.      All the cases

hitherto decided in this country and in Scotland were reached by

reference to this "categorisation" approach.     This was clearly

the approach of Lord Wilberforce and Lord Edmund-Davies.       The

alternative approach is that the degree of family relationship

and the time and space factor are not the sole criteria by which

the existence of the duty and the right to recover damages for

psychiatric illness are to be judged, but are no more than two

of the factors amongst many which determine whether or not the

injuries were reasonably foreseeable as likely, having regard to

the conjoint effect of all the relevant factors, the weight to

be given to each being dependent upon the circumstances of the

case under consideration.

     I therefore turn to the McLouqhlin decision.     The questions

raised by that decision seem to me to be (1) what was the issue

that fell for decision by their Lordship's House (2) What was
the basis of that decision?   and (3) How should the decision be

applied in future cases?
     In order to decide what the issue was which fell to be

decided, it is necessary very shortly to state the facts of the

McLouqhlin case.     At about 4 p.m. on 19th October 1973, the

plaintiff's husband and her three children were in a motor car

which was in collision with a motor lorry driven by one of the

defendants.   The plaintiff was at home some two miles from the

scene and at about 6 p.m. she was told of the accident and was

driven by her informant to the hospital to which the victims had

been taken.     She found that her youngest child had been killed

and she saw her husband and the surviving children injured and

in great pain and distress.     It is unnecessary to describe

precisely what she saw, but it was clearly a most harrowing and

distressing sight.     She suffered from psychiatric illness

through the shock of this sight.

     Since the plaintiff was the wife of one victim and the

mother of the others, she clearly fell within the category of

relationship in respect of which the law as it then stood

permitted damages to be recovered if the limitation factors of

 time and space did not debar her.    The trial judge found that no

 duty was owed by the tortfeasor to the plaintiff on the grounds

 that psychiatric illness was not a reasonably foreseeable

 consequence of the careless act of the tortfeasor.     In the

 Court of Appeal, Stephenson L.J. found that the possibility of

 the plaintiff suffering psychiatric illness was reasonably

 foreseeable and that a duty of care was owed, but that

 considerations of policy prevented the plaintiff from recovering

 damages.     Griffiths L.J. also found that the injury was readily

 foreseeable, but that the tortfeasor owed no duty of care since

                                 30
that was limited to those on the roadside nearby and was a

limitation imposed by consideration of policy.   The issue before

their Lordships was concerned solely with the question whether

or not the "time and space" limitation operated to prevent the

recovery of damages by the plaintiff, or whether it fell within

the ambit of previous decisions in any event, or whether those

decisions could properly be extended to include the plaintiff's

visit to hospital as forming part of the immediate aftermath of

the collision.   The House was not concerned, at least directly,

with any extension or modification to the category of

relationship which as a mother and spouse would permit her to

recover damages, subject to the limitation factors of time and

space.    Their Lordships were unanimous that the plaintiff

should recover in such circumstances, though their reasons were

expressed in different terms and may indicate a difference of

view with regard to the proper approach to be adopted in future

cases.   The issue was therefore in a very narrow compass and

concerned the limiting factor of time and space and the question

whether or not that limiting factor was imposed by reason of

public policy.

     The second issue, as to what was the basis of the decision,

requires some analysis of their Lordships speeches.

     Lord Wilberforce accepted as correct the categorisation

approach, that is to say that in order to be entitled to claim

damages a plaintiff had to show proximity in family relationship

between himself and the victim, and proximity in time and space.

     As to the former, Lord Wilberforce said (at page 418 E-F):

    "A plaintiff may recover damages for "nervous shock"
     brought on by injury caused not to him or herself but to a
     near relative, or by the fear of such injury.   So far
     (subject to 5 below), the cases do not extend beyond the
     spouse or children of the plaintiff."
As to the latter limitation, he said   (at page 418 G.):

    "Subject to the next paragraph, there is no English case in
     which a plaintiff has been able to recover_nervous shock
     damages where the injury to the near relative occurred out
     of sight and earshot of the plaintiff.   In Hambrook_v.
     stokes Brothers an express distinction was made between
     shock caused by what the mother saw with her own eyes and
     what she might have been told by bystanders, liability
     being exclude in the latter case."

He also observed (at page 418 H-419 D):
    "4    An exception from, or I would prefer to call it an
     extension of, the latter case, has been made where the
     plaintiff does not see or hear the incident but comes upon
     its immediate aftermath.   In Boardman v. Sanderson the
     father was within earshot of the accident to his child and
     likely to come upon the scene: he did so and suffered
     damage from what he then saw.   In Marshall v. Lionel
     Enterprises Inc. [1972] 2 O.R. 177, the wife came
     immediately upon the badly injured body of herhusband.
     And in Benson v. Lee [1972] V.R. 879, a situation existed
     with some similarity to the present case.  T h e moth er was
     in her home 100 yards away, and, on communication by a
     third party, ran out to the scene of the accident and there
     suffered shock.   Your Lordships have to decide whether or
     not to validate these extensions.

     5.   A remedy on account of nervous shock has been given to
     a man who came upon a serious accident involving numerous
     people immediately thereafter and acted as a rescuer of
     those involved (Chadwick v. British Railways Board [1967] 1
     WLR 912.   "Shock" was caused neither by fear for himself
     nor by fear or horror on account of a near relative.   The
     principle of "rescuer" cases was not challenged by the
     respondents and ought, in my opinion, to be accepted.    But
     we have to consider whether, and how far, it can be applied
     to such cases as the present.
          Throughout these developments, as can be seen, the
      courts have proceeded in the traditional manner of the
      common law from case to case, upon a basis of logical
      necessity.   If a mother, with or without accompanying
      children, could recover on account of fear for herself, how
      can she be denied recovery on account of fear for her
      accompanying children?    If a father could recover had he
      seen his child run over by a backing car, how can he be
      denied recovery if he is in the immediate vicinity and runs
      to the child's assistance?    If a wife and^mother could
      recover if she had witnessed a serious accident to her
      husband and children, does she fail because she was a short
      distance away and immediately rushes to the scene (cf
      Benson v. Lee)?    I think that unless the law is to draw an
      arbitrary line at the point of direct sight and sound,
      these arguments require acceptance of the extension
      mentioned above under 4 in the interests of justice".


                               32
And he observed in the context of the facts of the case then

under consideration (at p.419G-H):

    "I could agree that a line can be drawn above her case with
     less hardship than would have been apparent in Boardman v .
     Sanderson [1964] 1 WLR 1317 and Hinz v. Berry [1970] 2 QB
     40, but so to draw it would not appeal to most people's
     sense of justice.     To allow her claim may be, I think it
     is, upon the margin of what the process of logical
     progression would allow.    But where the facts are strong
     and exceptional, and, as I think, fairly analogous, her
     case ought, prima facie, to be assimilated to those which
     have passed the test."

He then referred to the basis of the decision in the Court of

Appeal upholding the trial judge and the reasoning of Stephenson

L.J. and Griffiths L.J. and observed (at p.420D-E):

    "I am impressed by both of these arguments, which I have
     only briefly summarised.   Though differing in expression,
     in the end, in my opinion, the two presentations rest upon
     a common principle, namely, that, at the margin, the
     boundaries of a man's responsibility for acts of negligence
     have to be fixed as a matter of policy."

He cited the classic speech of Lord Atkin in Donoghue v .

Stevenson and he concluded (at page 420 F to H ) :

     "This is saying that foreseeability must be accompanied and
     limited by the law's judgment as to persons who ought,
     according to its standards of value or justice, to have
     been in contemplation.   Foreseeability, which involves a
     hypothetical person, looking with hindsight at an event
     which has occurred, is a formula adopted by English law,
     not merely for defining, but also for limiting, the persons
     to whom duty may be owed, and the consequences for which an
     actor may be held responsible.   It is not merely an issue
     of fact to be left to be found as such.   When it is said
     to result in a duty of care being owed to a person or a
     class, the statement that there is a "duty of care" denotes
     a conclusion into the forming of which considerations of
     policy have entered.   That foreseeability does not of
     itself, and automatically, lead to a duty of care is, I
     think, clear."

     With regard to the policy argument, he observed (at p.

421A-B):

    "We must then consider the policy arguments.   In doing so
     we must bear in mind that cases of "nervous shock", and the
     possibility of claiming damages for it, are not necessarily
     confined to those arising out of accidents on public roads.
     To state, therefore, a rule that recoverable damages must
     be confined to persons on or near the highway is to state

                               33
    not a principle in itself, but only an example of a more
    general rule that recoverable damages must be confined to
    those within sight and sound of an event caused by
    negligence or, at least, to those in close, or very close,
    proximity to such a situation."
Having reviewed the policy arguments against further expansion

and the reasons why such arguments should not prevail, he said

(at p.421H-422F):
    "But, these discounts accepted, there remains, in my
     opinion, just because "shock" in its nature is capable of
     affecting so wide a range of people, a real need for the
     law to place some limitation upon the extent of admissible
     claims.    It is necessary to consider three elements   _
     inherent in any claim: the class of persons whose claims
     should be recognised? the proximity of such persons to the
     accident; and the means by which the shock is caused.     As
     regards the class of persons, the possible range is between
     the closest of family ties - of parent and child, or
     husband and wife - and the ordinary bystander. _ Existing
     law recognises the claims of the first:   it denies that of
     the second, either on the basis that such persons must be
     assumed to be possessed of fortitude sufficient to enable
     them to endure the calamities of modern life, or that
     defendants cannot be expected to compensate the world at
      large.   In my opinion, these positions are justifiable,
      and since the present case falls within the first class, it
      is strictly unnecessary to say more.   I think, however,
      that it should follow that other cases involving less close
      relationships must be very carefully scrutinised.    I
      cannot say that they should never be admitted. The closer
      the tie (not merely in relationship, but in care) the
      qreater the claim for consideration.  The claim, in any
      case, has to be judged in the light of the other factors,
      such as proximity to the scene in time and place, and the
      nature of the accident.
          As regards proximity to the accident, it is obvious
      that this must be close in both time and space.   It is,
      after all, the fact and consequence of the defendant's
      negligence that must be proved to have caused the "nervous
      shock".   Experience has shown that to insist on direct and
      immediate sight or hearing would be impractical and unjust
      and that under what may be called the "aftermath" doctrine
      one who, from close proximity, comes very soon upon the
      scene should not be excluded.   In my opinion, the result
      in Benson v. Lee [1972] V.R. 879 was correct and indeed
      inescapable.   It was based, soundly, upon -

         'direct perception of some of the events which go to
          make up the accident as an entire event, and this
          includes ... the immediate aftermath   ... ' (p.880)."

 And gives as his opinion (p.422 H) :
     "Subject only to these qualifications, I think that a strict

                               34
     test of proximity by sight or hearing should be applied by
     the courts."

And adds (at p.423A):

    "The shock must come through sight or hearing of the event
     or of its immediate aftermath.   Whether some equivalent of
     sight or hearing, e.g. through simultaneous television,
     would suffice may have to be considered."

     The instant appeals call for consideration of the effect of

"simultaneous television", since many of the plaintiffs suffered

the relevant shock through this medium, and the judge's

conclusion upon the effect of viewing the scenes shown on

television were relevant to his conclusion.

     I do not consider that it would assist this judgment to

attempt to analyse in detail the speeches of Lord Edmund-Davies

(who agreed that policy considerations formed the limiting

factor to the general rule but that no relevant policy existed

to prevent the plaintiff from recovering damages in the case

they were then considering).    In general he agreed with Lord

Wilberforce.   I do not read the speech of Lord Russell as

disapproving the basis upon which Lord Wilberforce expressed his

opinion,   and Lord Scarman seems to have accepted, with Lord

Bridge of Harwich, that the test of "reasonable foreseeability"

should be untrammelled by spatial physical or temporal limits.

He had reservations as to the social consequences of these

matters in a passage to which I will refer in another context.

It is the speech of Lord Bridge which seems to me to give rise

to the main difficulty.    Since the plaintiff founded much of

the argument upon that speech, I must consider it in some

detail.    He observed (at p.432G):

     "Clearly it is desirable in this, as in any other, field
     that the law should achieve such a measure of certainty as
     is consistent with the demands of justice".

At pp. 433F-434A he poses the question:

                               35
   "The question, then, for your Lordships' decision is whether
    the law, as a matter of policy, draws a line which exempts
    from liability a defendant whose negligent act or omission
    was actually and foreseeably the cause of the plaintiff's
    psychiatric illness and, if so, where that line is to be
    drawn.   In thus formulating the question, I do not, of
    course, use the word "negligent" as prejudging the question
    whether the defendant owes the plaintiff a duty, but I do
    use the word "foreseeably" as connoting the normally
    accepted criterion of such a duty.

        Before attempting to answer the question, it is
    instructive to consider the historical development of the
    subject as illustrated by the authorities, and to note, in
    particular, three features of that development.   First, it
    will be seen that successive attempts have been made to
    draw a line beyond which liability should not extend, each
    of which has in due course had to be abandoned.   Secondly,
    the ostensible justification for drawing the line has been
    related to the current criterion of a defendant's duty of
    care, which, however expressed in earlier judgments, we
    should now describe as that of reasonable foreseeability.
    But, thirdly, in so far as policy considerations can be
    seen to have influenced any of the decisions, they appear
    to have sprung from the fear that to cross the chosen line
    would be to open the floodgates to claims without limit and
    largely without merit."

At p .43 6D-E he cites with approval a passage from the speech of

Lord Porter in Hambrook v. Stokes [1925] 1 KB 141:

    "The question whether emotional disturbance or shock, which
     a defender ought reasonably to have anticipated as likely
     to follow from his reckless driving, can ever form the
     basis of a claim is not in issue.   It is not every
     emotional disturbance or every shock which should have been
     foreseen. The driver of a car or vehicle, even though
     careless, is entitled to assume that the ordinary
     frequenter of the streets has sufficient fortitude to
     endure such incidents as may from time to time be expected
     to occur in them, including the noise of a collision and
     the sight of injury to others, and is not to be considered
     negligent towards one who does not possess the customary
     phlegm."
     For the reasons I shall express later, it seems to me that

this passage expresses the rationale of the existing limitation

with regard to proximity of relationship.    It is a passage on

pages 441C-442D in his speech which were relied upon by Mr.

Hytner Q.C., on behalf of the plaintiffs, as indicating that the

proper approach to the problem in cases of psychiatric illness


                               36
are no longer to be decided by categorisation,   but upon more

general principles of foreseeability.   The passage reads:

     "In approaching the question whether the law should, as a
     matter of policy, define the criterion of liability in
     negligence for causing psychiatric illness by reference to
     some test other than that of reasonable foreseeability it
     is well to remember that we are concerned only with the
     question of liability of a defendant who is, ex hypothesi,
     guilty of fault in causing the death, injury, or danger
     which has in turn triggered the psychiatric illness.     A
     policy which is to be relied on to narrow the scope of the
     negligent tortfeasor's duty must be justified by cogent and
     readily intelligible considerations, and must be capable of
     defining the appropriate limits of liability by reference
     to factors which are not purely arbitrary.     A number of
     policy considerations which have been suggested as
     satisfying these requirements appear to me, with respect,
     to be wholly insufficient.     I can see no grounds whatever
     for suggesting that to make the defendant liable for
     reasonably foreseeable psychiatric illness caused by his
     negligence would be to impose a crushing burden on him out
     of proportion to his moral responsibility.     However
     liberally the criterion of reasonable foreseeability is
     interpretated, both the number of successful claims in this
     field and the quantum of damages they will attract are
     likely to be moderate.     I cannot accept as relevant the
     well-known phenomenon that litigation may delay recovery
      from a psychiatric illness.    If this were a valid policy
     consideration, it would lead to the conclusion that
     psychiatric illness should be excluded altogether from the
     heads of damage which the law will recognise.     It cannot
      justify limiting the cases in which damages will be awarded
      for psychiatric illness by reference to the circumstances
      of its causation.    To attempt to draw a line at the
      furthest point which any of the decided cases happen to
      have reached, and to say that it is for the legislature,
      not the courts, to extend the limits of liability any
      further, would be, to my mind, an unwarranted abdication of
      the court's function of developing and adapting principles
      of the common law to changing conditions, in a particular
      corner of the common law which exemplifies, par excellence,
      the important and indeed necessary part which that function
      has to play.    In the end I believe that the policy
      question depends on weighing against each other two
      conflicting considerations.    On the one hand, if the
      criterion of liability is to be reasonable foreseeability
      simpliciter, this must, precisely because questions of
      causation in psychiatric medicine give rise to difficulty
      and uncertainty, introduce an element of uncertainty into
      the law and open the way to a number of arguable claims
      which a more precisely fixed criterion of liability would
      exclude.    I accept that the element of uncertainty is an
      important factor.    I believe that the "floodgates"
      argument, however, is, as it always has been, greatly
      exaggerated.    On the other hand, it seems to me
      inescapable that any attempt to define the limit of
      liability by requiring, in addition to reasonable

                               37
    foreseeability, that the plaintiff claiming damages for
    psychiatric illness should have witnessed the relevant
    accident, should have been present at or near the place
    where it happened, should have come upon its aftermath and
    thus have had some direct perception of it, as opposed to
    merely learning of it after the event, should be related in
    some particular degree to the accident victim - to draw    a
    line by reference to any of these criteria must impose a
    largely arbitrary limit of liability.   I accept, of
    course, the importance of the factors indicated in the
    guidelines suggested by Tobriner J. in Dillon v. Leqq 29
    ALR 3d 1316 as bearing upon the degree of foreseeability of
    the plaintiff's psychiatric illness."

He gives two examples in support of these propositions and

continues (at p.442F-443A):

    "Secondly, consider the plaintiff who is unrelated to the
     victims of the relevant accident.   If rigidly applied, an
     exclusion of liability to him would have defeated the
     plaintiff's claim in Chadwick v. British Railways Board
     [1967] 1 WLR 912. The Court of Appeal treated that case as
     in a special category because Mr. Chadwick was a rescuer.
     Now, the special duty owed to a rescuer who voluntarily
     places himself in physical danger to save others is well
     understood, and is illustrated by Haynes v. Harwood [1935]
     1 KB 146, the case of the constable injured in stopping a
     runaway horse in a crowded street.   But in relation to the
     psychiatric consequences of witnessing such terrible
     carnage as must have resulted from the Lewisham train
     disaster, I would find it difficult to distinguish in
     principle the position of a rescuer, like Mr. Chadwick,
     from a mere spectator as, for example, an uninjured or only
     slightly injured passenger in the train, who took no part
     in the rescue operations but was present at the scene after
     the accident for some time, perforce observing the rescue
     operations while he waited for transport to take him home."

     I have cited this passage at length because it forms the

main basis for Mr. Hytner's argument on behalf of the

plaintiffs, but in view of the issues that were before the

House, it seems to me that Lord Bridge was doing no more than

expressing his logical reasons for rejecting the "time and

space" factors depriving the plaintiff of her remedy and was not

intending thereby to substitute for the category approach

accepted by Lord Wilberforce and in previous authorities for a

more general approach based on foreseeability in which these

factors would be relevant factors amongst many others and not


                              38
themselves decisive as limiting factors for recovery of damages.

He was also concerned in this context with the question of

policy.   It seems to me that had it been the purport of the

passage cited that the "category" approach should be superceded,

then all of their Lordships, and in particular Lord Wilberforce,

would have so regarded it and have made comment, either critical

or approving, on this approach.         None of them did so.   Nor did

Lord Bridge comment in terms upon the speech of Lord Wilberforce

or say that he disagreed with it.

    The approach of Lord Wilberforce was applied by the High

Court of Australia in Jaensch v. Coffey 1984 54 ACC 417.           In
               V




that case Gibbs C.J.(at p.421)        said:

    "Lord Wilberforce pointed out in McLouqhlin v . O'Brian (at
     p. 422) that in deciding on the limits that should be
     placed upon the extent of admissible claims for nervous
     shock it is necessary to consider three elements:   'the
     class of persons whose claims should be recognised? the
     proximity [in time and space] of such persons to the
     accident? and the means by which the shock is caused'.      I
     would agree that these are the relevant elements, and I
     incline to think that the first is of the greatest
     importance.   Where the relationship between the person
     killed or physically injured and the person who suffers
     nervous shock is close and intimate, not only is there the
     requisite proximity in that respect, but it is readily
     defensible on grounds of policy to allow recovery.    There
     are cases which persons who do not stand in any such
     relationship have been held entitled to recover, including
     the case of rescuers (Chadwick v. British Railways Board
     [1967] 1 WLR 912) and that of fellow employees (Mount Isa
     Mines Ltd. v. Pusey supra), but they do not now fall for
     consideration."

     If Lord Bridge was intending to substitute for the category

approach a wider and more general test, he seems to have changed

his view, at least in the context of economic loss,       for in

Caparo Industries pic v. Dickman & Others [1990] 1 AER 568, he

said (at p.574 C-D)   :

    "Whilst recognising, of course, the importance of the
     underlying general principles common to the whole field of
     negligence, I think the law has now moved in the direction
     of attaching greater significance to the more traditional

                                 39
    categorisation of distinct and recognisable situations as
    quides to the existence, the scope and the limits of the
    varied duties of care which the law imposes.    We must now,
    I think, recognise the wisdom of the words of Brennan J. in
    the High Court of Australia in Sutherland Shire Council v .
    Heyman [1985] 60 ALR 1 at 43-44, where he said:

        'It is preferable in my view, that the law should
         develop novel categories of negligence incrementally
         and by analogy with established categories, rather than
         by a massive extension of a prima facie duty of care
         restrained only by indefinable "considerations which
         ought to negative, or to reduce or limit the scope of
         the duty or the class of person to whom it is owed .

     For my part, therefore, I accept that the speech of Lord

Wilberforce in McLouqhlin represents the law in this field      at

the time of that decision and today, since there has been no

reconsideration of that case, in the context of psychiatric

illness, in the House of Lords.        The decision was considered and

applied by this court in Attia v. British Gas pic [1987] 3 AER,

in which issues not related to the facts of this case arose.

It was not suggested that the speeches of Lord Wilberforce and

Lord Bridge differed in principle or led to different

conclusions according to which approach was applied.         It is

not, in my view, a consequence that the law has become fixed or

immobile so as to prevent the category approach from stultifying

the law.    It seems to me that the rationale of limiting the

category of those entitled to recover to spouse/parent

relationship, and the consequent exclusion of relationship

 outside that category, is that the law excludes the latter on

 the basis that with relationships which are more remote, the law

 assumes that such relations will possess such fortitude and

 phlegm as will protect that person from psychiatric injury from

 shock, whereas the close relationship of spouse/parent is so

 basic to all human relationships and reactions that in those

 cases it is reasonably foreseeable that the shock of the event


                                  40
may cause psychiatric illness.         Thus it seems to me that the

"line" at a point which excludes more remote relationship is

fixed as a matter of policy.      It may also be justified by

logical and justifiable grounds apart from policy.         It is at

this point that the flexibility can be achieved by applying the

(obiter) dicta of Lord Wilberforce at p. 422 B-C already cited,

but which I will repeat:

    "Existing law recognises the claims of the first:    it denies
     that of the second, either on the basis that such persons
     must be assumed to be possessed of fortitude sufficient to
     enable them to endure the calamities of modern life, or
     that defendants cannot be expected to compensate the world
     at large. In my opinion, these positions are justifiable,
     and since the present case falls within the first class, it
     is strictly unnecessary to say more.   I think, however,
     that it should follow that other cases involving less close
     relationships must be very carefully scrutinised.    I cannot
     say that they should never be admitted.    The closer the tie
      (not merely in relationship, but in care)   the greater the
     claim for consideration.   The claim, in any case, has to be
     judged in the light of the other factors, such as proximity
     to the scene in time and place, and the nature of the
     accident."

     For example, let us consider the case where the victim's

parents are dead and the victim himself was brought up by

grandparents who have fulfilled the parental role since early

infancy.   A careful scrutiny might, in such a case, involve no

more than the assertion and proof of those facts.        The same

position might be established without difficulty in the case of

other relationships.

    It is argued on behalf of the defendant that such an

investigation might involve prolonged and protracted

investigations which would complicate already difficult cases

and greatly prolong trials.      Such investigation might be

embarrassing.   I agree, and it is at this point that public

policy becomes again relevant.         This problem was expressed by

Lord Scarman in McLouqhlin (at p.4 31A-C):


                                  41
  «... common law principle          the judges to follow the
                                        r   e   q   u   i   r   e   s



   logic of the 'reasonably foreseeable test so as m
   circumstances where it is appropriate,
              I   I          dT tancealthehnaturerof the injuries


    arsr
    foreseeability is to be applied.

    d -BUble ^The "?lo o d g atls'\rS L n f marbe^iagjerated!

    problems if damages f°          narents and children who
    without^seeingSor°hearing the accident, or being present in
    the immediate aftermath^ suffer          powerful case for
    ^ g S o n   s u c h ^ s has been' enacted in New South Wales and
    the Australian Capital Territories."

   Though difficulties due to the inclusion of more remote

relationships than that of spouse/parent may be encountered,

this approach has at least the benefit of a degree of certainty

in the law.           If I    understand Lord Wilberforce's dicta correctly,

he is not suggesting that the existing category of spouse/parent

relationship should be advanced as a category or the existing

line drawn in a different place, but that accepting prima facie

that this category is determinate of the ability to recover

damages, that a more remote relationship might justify departure

 from the rule in any given case where circumstances, after

 scrutiny,    indicate that those relationships give rise to similar

 reaction of love and affection which are attributed to the

 spouse/parent relationship.
     If I am right that the rationale of the present law limiting

 the right to recover damages to those within the parent/spouse

 relationship and the exclusion of more remote relationships is

 based (apart from policy) on a presumption that love and

 affection normally to be expected in the former category is so

 powerful that psychiatric injury through shock is foreseeable,


                                                        42
whereas those whose relationship is more remote can be expected

to withstand the shock without injury is correct, then I would

expect that the presumption can be rebutted in appropriate

cases.   For example, in the case of a mother whose child is the

victim but who had not seen or communicated with such child

since birth who nonetheless claims damages for psychiatric

shock.   This is such an unlikely situation that it need hardly

be considered.   On that hypothesis, on what basis would she be

likely to be Mat the scene or its immediate aftermath” or to

suffer psychiatric illness from shock if she were so present?

If it is necessary to consider such a situation, then it seems

to me that it would be permissible to challenge the basis of the

presumption, at least for the purposes of medical causation.

     In my view, therefore, the law as stated by Lord

Wilberforce requires that the category of spouse/parent be

regarded as fixed, flexibility being given to the law by

allowing as an exception in any given case the claims of more

remote relations, but only if close scrutiny justifies the

extension.    Where such close scrutiny indicates that the

relationship, coupled with the care of the victim, indicates

that the relative should be in the same position, viz-a-viz the

victim as a parent/spouse would have been so to render

foreseeable the conclusion that psychiatric injury might result

from shock to such relative, then in any given case that

relative would be in the same position as a spouse/parent and

would be able to claim damages.     In so far as this may in some

cases greatly complicate and enlarge claims for psychiatric

illness so that policy considerations arise, it does not seem to

me that such policy considerations should be applied by judicial

process, but should be the subject of consideration by

                               43
Parliament and legislation if thought appropriate.
     Whatever the relationship, the consequences must still be

reasonably foreseeable if a duty of care is to be established.

This involves an examination of foreseeability at the time the

careless act giving rise to the duty was committed.      Since a

duty in tort does not arise "in vacuo" but must be related to

the specific plaintiff claiming damages, as against the

defendant who owes the duty, reasonable foresight of the

defendant as tested through the eyes of the reasonable man in

the person of the judge must involve a degree of hindsight

before the question whether or not the consequence of

psychiatric injury was foreseeable, since it is only when the

relationship of the plaintiff to the victim and the identity of

both have been identified in the context of the alleged

negligence, that the question whether or not the consequence is

 reasonably foreseeable can be answered or even posed.     This can

 involve problems of some difficulty.    What has   to be reasonably

 foreseeable is that the shock of the incident might cause

 psychiatric illness to the particular plaintiff identified.       It

 is usually a simple matter to establish whether or not the

 injury to the victim was foreseeable.    What is the position

 with regard to foreseeability where in fact hindsight indicates

 that there has been no breach of duty of care to the victim

 where, for example, he is not in fact injured?      If the question

 of reasonable foreseeability is to be tested, as it must, at the

 time of the negligent act, then it must be irrelevant that no

 breach of duty in fact occurred with respect to the victim.       If

 this be correct, then Mrs. Hanbrook would have recovered damages

  even if, contrary to the fact, none of the children had in fact

  been injured.   Thus, accepting that the classification of

                                44
persons who can recover damages for psychiatric illness are

restricted by the basic principle to cases where the victim and

plaintiff relationship is that of spouse/parent, what must be

reasonably foreseeable is that psychiatric illness may result

from shock from the consequences of the careless act to a person

within that close relationship, and that such a person might be

at the scene or its immediate aftermath.    At first sight such

an approach would exclude all other persons of more remote

relationship.   This approach, however, if correct, would

preclude a person outside the parent/spouse relationship from

recovering, even if they would otherwise be entitled to do so in

the circumstances envisaged by Lord Wilberforce.

     If the facts in any given case justify the conclusion,

foreseeability will have to embrace all those who by reason of

their relationship and care might have such close bonds of

affection as to render them susceptible to psychiatric illness

through shock and that such a person might be present at the

scene or its immediate aftermath.     For the purposes of this

argument I will not consider the contemporaneous television as a

factor relevant to foreseeability, but will consider that factor

when considering the effect of television on the limitations

imposed by the time and space factor.

     Some limitations must be put upon what is reasonably

foreseeable if a duty of care is not to be owed to the whole

world at large which would impose unacceptable burdens on the

tortfeasor and would not accord with the general principles

enunciated in Donovan v. Stevenson.     Mr. Hytner submitted that

since the proper approach to questions which arise in cases of

psychiatric illness through shock is that contained in the

speech of Lord Bridge in which relationship is only one factor,
other factors, such as the magnitude of the event, might

indicate that bystanders should be included as within the ambit

of reasonable foreseeability.   He asserts that bystanders have

succeeded in a number of cases which he cited.     I do not

propose to go through these in detail, since m    my view each

constituted a "rescue" case, with perhaps one exception.      That

exception is the case of Dooley v. Camel Laird & Co. Ltd. [1951]

1 Ll.R. 271, a case decided on Assize by Donovan J.     Mr. Hytner

submits that the plaintiff, who was the crane driver involved in

the incident, was for this purpose a bystander, yet he recovered

damages on the basis that it was reasonably foreseeable that he

might suffer psychiatric illness through shock.     I do not agree

that the plaintiff in that case could for this purpose be

considered a bystander.    He was an active participant m     the

event.   Moreover, the question of the existence of a duty of

 care arose out of the master and servant relationship which

 existed between the plaintiff and the defendant and the question

 whether or not damages were recoverable could have been resolved

 by considerations of the remoteness of damage.     In any event,

 the judge found as a fact that psychiatric illness was a

 foreseeable consequence of the defendant's negligence.       In my

 view, therefore, the categories of person who the tortfeasor at

 the time of the negligent act should reasonably foresee as being

 likely to sustain psychiatric illness is confined to persons who

 he could foresee might be present at the scene or its immediate

 aftermath and who might have that relationship with the victim

 with respect to love, affection and care as to put them in a

  similar position as persons in the spouse/parent relationship,

  in my view, foreseeability of psychiatric illness through shock

  to persons should not be extended to persons who do not have any

                                 46
    family relationships, even if such persons did as a fact

    entertain feelings of love an, affection towards
    If such persons, such as . g a n d e r s ,   are included wxthxn the




    intolerable burden on a tortfeasor.
            To summarise,   in my view, the law is that, save in

     exceptional circumstances, only those within the parent/spouse

     relationship can recover damages for psychiatric shock sustaxn

     b     a Plaintiff not himself involved as a victim.        *i- -xnes

     the category.     The exceptions considered on a case to case

     are limited to relatives who meet the crxterxa of that

     relationship and who are present at the scene or xts » e             xa

      aftermath.     What has to be foreseeable is that someone may

      present at the scene or its immediate aftermath who possesses

         that love and affection which a parent/spouse is assumed          o



         to the victim than a parent or spouse.        It does not seem        me

         that such a formulation causes any particular difficulty          -   x

         is a slight reformulation of the test of foreseeability to mee

         the cases referred to by Lord Wilberforce, not any change or

         addition to what has to be foreseeable in the case of a

          parent/spouse who suffers psychiatric injury by shock,

          judge found that in the case before him brother and sister were

          entitled to recover.     He did so, if I correctly interpre          xs

          judgment, by reference to the circumstances of the Hillsboroug

          disaster and by the relationship which might be expected xn mo

          cases between brother and sister.        He did not carry out any

          close scrutiny by reference to the love and affection in fact             o

H          be attributed to them, having regard in particular to any care

                                            47
(in the sense of custody or maintenance) which they had

performed.     It may be that had such a scrutiny been carried

out, the facts might have entitled them to recover damages and

the extension in their favour be justified under the principles

enunciated by Lord Wilberforce.        I therefore consider that the
                                            e




judge was in error in holding that in the circumstances of the

case before him he could regard the brothers and sisters as

within the relationship which would entitle them to claim

damages.


The effect of television on the limitation of time and space.

     Lord Wilberforce in the McLouqhlin case raised the

possibility that watching live television might be the same as

attendance at the scene or its immediate aftermath and thus

satisfy the test of proximity in time and space.
      In my view, if the relevant television broadcast performed

no function in relation to the plaintiff than communicating the

 fact that an accident had occurred at a place at which the

plaintiff knew that his relative was, it would be a mere

communication of that fact and would place the plaintiff in a

 similar position to that in which he would have been had the

 information been communicated to him by any other media, oral or

 telephonic.    This information could not found a claim based on

 shock since the mere receipt of information with no more could

 not do so.     In that case if it was followed by actions on the

 part of the plaintiff which brought him within the scene or its

 aftermath, then limitations of proximity and space would not

 debar him from recovering damages.
      It is unlikely that any television broadcast would do no

 more than communicate the fact of the accident or disaster,

                                  48
particularly when the occurrence is on an occasion of national

or international interest.      For some years past television has

been available worldwide to a vast number of people.      It is of

course foreseeable that events such as a Football Association

Cup Semi-final would be broadcast by television worldwide, or at

least to a national audience.      It is also foreseeable that a

view of the events broadcast on television would provide at

least as good a view of the events taking place as would be

likely to be obtained by presence at the stadium, and that some

of the events would be seen in close up, slow motion or replay

from a number of different viewpoints.      These factors are

readily foreseeable and they were in fact foreseen by the

relevant police officers concerned.      It would also be readily

foreseeable that those watching television would include

parents, spouses or relatives of those present at the ground.

     Some of these factors themselves indicate that viewing on

television does not equate with presence at the scene.      No

person present can view events more or less simultaneously from

several different viewpoints.     The fact that the television

transmission does so (there were at least four cameras in

different locations at Hillsborough)    in itself requires some

form of editorial or selective process in a decision which

cameras be operated at any given moment.     The broadcast is

likely to, and in this case did, include commentary which may

itself be emotive.   The "zoom" lense enables an incident to be

viewed in close up, even though individual victims are excluded

from such close-ups.
     Moreover, whereas a plaintiff present at the scene or its

 immediate aftermath must ex hypothesi have been fairly close at

hand, the television broadcast may well be viewed worldwide and

                                 49
 thus might be seen by relatives in a foreign country, perhaps on

 the other side of the world.        Thus the time and space

 limitation would be enormously enlarged and might involve close

 relatives who would almost certainly be outside the limitation
 of time and space being brought within it.

      Thus, in my view, television broadcast of the type which it

 seems occurred is not to be equated with the plaintiff being

within "sight or hearing of the event or its immediate

 aftermath" and therefore shock sustained by reason of the

broadcast would not suffice to found a claim.        Such a

broadcast, containing substantial elements of editing together

with a commentary, is in my view a "novus actus interveniens".

     None of the plaintiffs who base their claim on shock

sustained by reason of the broadcast, still less if the

broadcast is repeated, can found their claim on shock from this
source.

     I do not consider it necessary to comment upon the recent

cases to which we have been referred tried by Mantell J. and

Ward J., save to say that if the views I have expressed are

correct, the extensions which were made in those cases would not
be justified.

     Of the successful plaintiffs, all but one saw the scene

live on television.   The one who was present was the brother of

two of the victims.   it thus follows that in my view none of

them was entitled to succeed for the reasons I have endeavoured

to give.   Of the six unsuccessful plaintiffs, each failed on

the basis of relationship.      m    my view, this was determinative

of the outcome and I would reject their appeals.        it follows

that in my view the appeals of the defendant in respect of the

nine successful plaintiffs should be allowed and the appeals of

                                50
   the six unsuccessful plaintiffs fail.

        In reaching this conclusion I am conscious that all the

   plaintiffs, both successful and unsuccessful, suffered very

   genuine grief and distress and have been assumed to have

   suffered psychiatric injury through the shock and horror of the

   events.   They are entitled to universal sympathy in no way

  mitigated by the fact that they are not entitled in my view to

   cover damages in law.



LORD JUSTICE NOLAN:   It is more than two years since the

  Hillsborough disaster occurred, but even now, and even for those

  with no personal involvement it is impossible to contemplate

  what took place without a sense of shock.     Much of the detailed

   evidence of suffering and death is harrowing.    I shall refer to

   it no more than is necessary for the purposes of this judgment,

  but I must start by considering the circumstances in which the

  psychiatric illnesses of the plaintiffs arose.     For this

  purpose I refer to the generic report on psychological

  casualties resulting from the Hillsborough disaster which was

  prepared on behalf of the plaintiffs by Dr. Morgan O'Connell.


                                                                       tA
  When he wrote it, he had examined and assessed 39 cases.      In
                                                                       c
  paragraph 5 he begins his account of what he had learnt from his
                                                                       .1
  examinations and from the interim report of Lord Justice Taylor.
  He says:

       "What was most striking in the history taking was how a
        normal social occasion in a familiar setting, on a fine        .s
        sunny day, should suddenly become a horrific experience and
        almost as suddenly be over.   It was as if it were a worst     i<
        case of nightmare, were it not for the dead, injured and
        bereaved who remained after the event.   The live
        television and radio brought the happenings into the homes,
        clubs and High Streets of those who were not at the match.
        Up to this time I had not been aware of how much football
        is a way of life for families in Liverpool.   This factor,
        I believe, has served to compound the problem, as many who

                                 51
       t h e i r familiarity with the scene
       In paragraph 9, Dr. Morgan O'Connell confessed to great

difficulty in deciding which of the 39 psychological casualt.es

was most affected by his or her experience.                                          He referred m

pa r t i c u l a r to:

      '■The fan »»o„.                                                             S S T * " .   »
       against which his " ® ^ ? ^ t e d ,                               coming from the other side
        grandfather, partial y                                9            qrandson was at th e
        of t h e pitch and    b   e   l   i   e   v   i   n   g   that^his gran          b odies.
        bottom of a pile of h°rrib y m g    ^ levision knowing that
        The wife at home                 behind the goal, and then
        her husband's favouri    P        in the midst of the crush
                              S view the video by the police',


 H e continues:
                                                                        Hnt one had m o r e than one
              sf ^ i ^ c S T i n ^ e S S r i                                      diagnosed suffering
         illness        (
         Pathological Griet.
                                                      ■                                    -p •;«= rr-rief of gre a
          11.   Pathologic31 Grief is g           U k e l y to occur
          duration than no™ ^ ngr„ ^ ' ected and brutal in nature.

          r„*Keax:h.s -
          S p           “ •? S i sjou* h                                      i      .    - • -**“
          Ihe feels was totally unnecessary.

           1 2 . The most common ^ ^ ^ ° | ^ e^ SDIsorder?U aanew concept
           Disorder.           Post Trauma         ,neurasthenia, shell-shock,
           (1980) for an old P ^ e“ (^ U^ i e ? y Disorder.                It
           nastalgia is cl*ssi 1                 t which is outside the range of
           follows on a painful eve                   Disorder includes
           normal human                       W e n t - that is intrusive memories
           w i t ^ a v o i d a n c e ^ f reminders of the experience',

            None of the four individual cases referred to by Or. Morgan

    0 ,connell - the fan, the grandfather, the wife at home, and the

    grandmother - is among the plaintiffs whose cases are before us,

    but the passages which I have quoted from his report are, I

    hope,     sufficient to illustrate the type of psychiatric illness

     resulting from nervous shock with which this case is concerned.

     There is no dispute that "damages are                                     ...       recoverable for


                                                                   52
nervous shock, or, to put it in medical terms, for any

recognisable psychiatric illness caused by the breach of duty by

the defendant"    (see per Lord Denning M.R. in Hinz v. Berry

[1970] 2 QB 40 at page 41).     The problem in the present case is

to identify the limits of the duty of which the defendant is

said to have been in breach.

      The law of negligence has become so refined that it is

difficult to make any general statement without qualifying it:

but this much at least I think is still clear, namely that the

duty of care does not extend beyond what is reasonably

foreseeable.     In many cases, the question of what was

reasonably foreseeable can be approached simply and directly by

establishing what injury the plaintiff has suffered, and how it

was caused, and then enquiring whether that kind of injury, thus

caused, was reasonably foreseeable by the defendant.       In cases

of psychiatric illness caused by nervous shock this approach

must always be of greater difficulty because in such cases

"there are elements of greater subtlety than in the case of an

ordinary physical injury" (see per Lord Macmillan in Bourhill v .

Young 1943 AG 92, 103) and these elements may not be readily          L

predictable.     In the present case, there is the further            ]

difficulty that the learned judge, for entirely understandable

reasons, declined to make findings as to whether the individual       i

plaintiffs had suffered psychiatric illness caused by the act or

omission of the defendant, but assumed that all of them had done

so.   We are driven, therefore, to approach the matter by what

as it seems to me must in any event be the strictly correct

route (since the test for the defendant is foresight, not

hindsight) and ask whether immediately before the crucial acts

or omissions which occurred at Hillsborough on the afternoon of

                               53
                     ‘l 1989 «                      reasonably h,v. be.n « r « ~ n tb.t
    lh. i»th W «                                     ^         ^ =ause n. „ ou, ,M c k
    those acts or omissions

                                                                                                c,nnot
    i.,a i», *. « . —

    . C o nnell in bi.
    by the medical evide
                                        -

                                                 ^^ u        ^
                                                                 a“ “ lprobl„


                                                                            ^
                                                                                            _
                                                                                                          M

                                                                                                    infor-e*
                                                                                                     ^
                                                                                                                » » -




     consensus of judicial opinion .

        n'Brian T1983] AC 410 at p . 432.
                             f i t t e d liability for negligence m
          The defendant has admitte
                    f those who died or were physically injure
     reSPeC              h        rphat is to say, he has admitted that he owed

      them a duty of care, t                             ^                          ^           ^    ^                    „   it

      that their deaths or                                                      ^       ^            ^                    ^
      could reasonably have been fo                                                                      likely to lead
               ■»i acts
      the crucial  acts and omissions would not on y

      to physical injury and death,
                  ■niuries and deaths, then to my m m
       horrifying   3                       ^     reasonably to have

       inevitably follow th                                                             Qf nervous shock amongst

       anticipated m                addition                                            mentally affected by the
       those who were not physically but

       occurrence.
            renC6‘                , „t of the defendant's duty depended upon
               “     ^                      ne   it would be almost infinite.                                    It is well

        —                ^              ^ . a t foreseeability alone, although essential
        settled,             °wev       '                          ^                ^       nQt enough.           In the




G
        familiar wo          r:::/-                                  ..persons who are so
                                            the duty is owed only to pe

         562   *:    z        z     ~       ,    . « —            •    -    «   -                             * o t   “       he
            Cl°Se Y               h V e them in contemplation as being so
            ,.ought reasonably to have              ^   ^    ^

            affected"  when directing his m m
                                    . .nn    This may be paraphrased as
H           which are called in question.
                                                                       54
reducing the extent of the duty from what is foreseeable to what

is "reasonably" foreseeable, but the concept of reasonableness

is elusive.      As I understand the decided cases, the law has

developed not so much by reference to what the defendant's

reason should tell him was foreseeable, but by reference to the

practical limits which the law imposes upon the foreseeable

consequences for which the defendant should be saddled with

responsibility:    see, for example, Caparo Industries pic v .

Dickman [1990] 1 All E.R. 568 per Lord Bridge at page 574.

These limits may be justified either on the grounds of public

policy - for example, so as to avoid the floodgates opening - or

as a matter of fairness and justice to potential defendants.

The word "policy", in the sense of the policy of the law, is

sometimes used to describe the latter considerations as well as

those of public policy in its more normal sense.      I agree with

Mr. Hytner that it is necessary to distinguish between the two

different uses of the word, but I suspect that in most cases

they will largely overlap.    The practical course followed by the

courts has been to restrict the ambit of the duty of care by

placing fairly narrow limits upon the classes of potential

plaintiffs who, in Lord Atkin's words, are "so closely and

directly affected" as to be within the defendant's reasonable

contemplation.    The question in any given case is how "closely

and directly affected" the particular potential plaintiff has to

be.   The possibility of the floodgates opening will depend upon

the breadth of the terms in which that question is answered.

In this country at least, the floodgates appear to have remained

shut in spite of the increasing breadth of the court's approach

to the question of liability, and for present purposes at least

I am prepared to accept Mr. Hytner's submission that they would

                                55
still remain shut if the claims of all the plaintiffs m                   the

present case were upheld.
     Floodgates apart, however, there remains the question

whether the narrower policy criteria of closeness and directness

were satisfied by the plaintiffs in the present case.                    I would

refer in this connection to the speech of Lord Wilberforce in

M ^ n g h U n v. 0'Brian [1983] AC 410 at pp. 421-2 where, after

setting out a number of general limitations on the scope of the

duty of care he continues:

                                           n a t u r a l s 1 capable of
      affecting so wide a range of people, a real need for the
      law to place some limitation upon the extent of the
      IZitUl.                         ^     “ “• S . ' o l S X " ? ‘p a S S X « o , e
      c i S m f s h o u l f b e recognised; the proximity of such persons
      to the accident;           and the means by which the shock is
      caused.”
      Ac;   reaards the class of persons, the possible range is

      ofhusbanfand^tle           °-*
                                   a n d ' t h H ^                         fisting



      them to endure the calamities of m o d e m life, or




       cannot say that they shall never be admitted.  The closer
       the tie (not merely in relationship, but m care) the
       areater the claim for consideration.  The claim, in any
       case has to be judged in the light of the other factors
       such'as proximity to the scene m time and place, and t
       nature of the accident".
       in the present case, the learned judge felt able to extend

  the range to brothers and sisters, but no further.                    He did so

  on the basis of general propositions about the relationships

  within a normal family, with which I would entirely agree.                       But

  in my judgment these general propositions do not provide an

  acceptable answer by reference either to authority or to human
experience.      The decided cases in which damages have been

recovered for nervous shock sustained by a parent or spouse have

all been cases in which the reactions of the particular parent

or spouse have been assumed or proved to have been those which

one would normally expect of an individual in the closest and

most loving of relationships with the person physically injured

or threatened.      What has distinguished the parent or spouse

from the ordinary bystander in such cases has been the depth of

their love and concern, causing them to be affected by nervous

shock even though they were of normal fortitude.      It is, I feel

sure, despite Mr. Hytner's arguments to the contrary, the bonds

of love and affection which Lord Wilberforce had in mind when

envisaging the possibility that those having a less close

relationship than parent or spouse might come within the scope

of the duty of care.      His words "the closer the tie (not merely

in relationship, but in care) the greater the claim for

consideration11    can bear no other meaning.   And, of course, in

a number of earlier cases the possibility had been canvassed

that not merely parents and spouses but relatives or even

friends might be distinguished from bystanders and brought

within the scope of the duty of care - a possibility which could

only be contemplated by    reference to a bond of love or

affection.    For example, in Bourhill v. Young [1943] AC 92 at

page 117 Lord Porter said:

    "The duty is not to be world at large.     It must be tested
     by asking with reference to each several complainant: was
     a duty owed to him or her?    If no one of them was in such
     a position that direct physical injury could reasonably be
     anticipated to them or their relations or friends normally
     I think no duty would be owed   ... ".

     The difficulty lies in defining the degree of closeness

which is sufficient to bring the individual within the same


                                 57
category as a parent or spouse.    Both Mr. Hytner and Mr.

Woodward urged us not to embark on this course, for fear of the

uncertainty which would result.    For my part, I would accept at

once that no general definition is possible.      But I see no

difficulty in principle in requiring a defendant to contemplate

that the person physically injured or threatened by his

negligence may have relatives or friends whose love for him is

like that of a normal parent or spouse, and who in consequence

may similarly be closely and directly affected by nervous shock

where the ordinary bystander would not.      The identification of

the particular individuals who come within that category, like

that of the parents and spouses themselves, could only be

carried out ex post facto, and would depend upon evidence of the

"relationship" in the broad sense which gave rise to the love

and affection.    Proof of causation would require evidence as to

the link between that relationship and the psychiatric illness

sustained.   The evidence might be difficult to obtain, and would

certainly require close scrutiny, as Lord Wilberforce envisaged,

but I see no reason in principle why identification should not

be possible on a case by case basis.      I have in mind such

examples as the grandparents or uncles and aunts who, upon the

premature death of the parents, bring up the children as their

own;   or Mrs. Hinz (see Hinz v. Berry [1970] 2 QB 40) whose

feelings for her foster children were assumed without question

to be the same as those for her natural children.      I have in

mind also the judgment of Burbury C.J. in Storm v. Geeves [1965]

Tas.SR 252 in which he felt able to identify (at page 266) the

brother and sister as well as the mother as coming within the

scope of the duty of care, and was further able to find on the

evidence that whereas the mother and the brother had suffered

                              58
nervous shock caused by the defendant's acts or omissions, the

sister had not.   In the present case itself, I have referred to

Dr. Morgan O'Connell's generic report in which he describes,

amongst others, the case of the grandmother who had effectively

reared her grandson as a son, and who was suffering from

pathological grief.     I have no means of knowing whether in

other respects this lady's case satisfies the conditions for

bringing her within the scope of the duty of care, but in so far

as the extent of the duty depends upon proximity in terms of

personal relationship I can see no reason in principle why she

should be excluded.
     The difficulty remains that neither the plaintiffs' cases

as pleaded nor the judgment of the learned judge depend

crucially and essentially upon the existence of a close tie of

relationship, a special bond of love, between the plaintiffs and

the immediate victims.     Without that link, the necessary

proximity of the relationship cannot be established as a matter

of fact in any of the cases before us.    I do not doubt for one

moment the depth and genuineness of the love and affection felt

 by the plaintiffs for the victims but what is lacking is

 evidence that the closeness of the tie was so similar to that of

 a loving parent or spouse that it was foreseeably likely to

 bring them into the same category.    I cannot agree with the

 learned judge that the line should be drawn around what is

 called the nuclear family.    The criterion is loving care, not

 blood relationship, still less legal relationship.

 Unfortunately, people within those relationships do not always

 care for each other.     Fortunately people outside those

 relationships often care for each other very much.     If the law

 is to reflect these familiar realities it must follow that just

                                 59
 as a plaintiff in my judgment could bring himself within the

 scope of the defendant's duty by establishing a sufficient tie

 of care, so it must be open to a defendant to disprove the

existence of that tie in the case of a particular spouse or

parent.      There is no support in law or in logic for the

proposition that an uncaring parent or spouse should stand in

any different position from a stranger.        It follows that in so

far as the defendant's appeals are based upon the learned

judge's inclusion of all brothers and sisters within the

requisite proximity of relationship I would feel bound to allow
them.

        It remains to consider the questions of proximity to the

accident in time and space, and the means by which the shock was

caused.      In McLoughlin v. O'Brian Lord Wilberforce concluded at

pages 422-3 that a strict test of proximity by sight or hearing

should be applied, that no liability should arise where nervous

shock had been brought about by communication by a third party,
and that:

    "The shock must come through sight or hearing of the event
     or of its immediate aftermath.   Whether some equivalent of
     sight or hearing, e.g. through simultaneous television,
     would suffice may have to be considered11.

        The learned judge held that the parents spouses brothers

and sisters who saw the scenes at Hillsborough on live

television and heard the commentaries upon it should be regarded

as sufficiently close to the accident in time and space to fall

within the scope of the duty of care.        We have not seen the

television programme, and therefore do not know precisely what

was shown, but a reasonably clear idea can be gained from the

statements of admitted facts.        For example, Stephen Jones knew

his brother was at the match and expected him to be standing


                                60
behind the goal, saw the live television pictures coming from

Hillsborough,   saw bodies and believed them to be dead.              Maureen

Mullaney actually saw her sons in a section of the crowd where

there were casualties, though metcifully they survived without

serious injury.      It is easy to imagine the feelings of

appalling anxiety and distress experienced by the television

watchers, aggravated by their uncertainty as to what was

happening, but on the basis of the available evidence I am
                    that they fell w i t h i n the scope of the
 unable to conclude that tney
 defendant's duty of care.        I accept Mr. Hytner's submission

 that the defendant should reasonably have foreseen that the

 scenes at Hillsborough would be transmitted live on television,

 and would b e seen by relatives.         I also accept, however, Mr.

 Woodward's submission that the basis of this cause of action is

 shock in the ordinary sense of that word,           resulting from the

               *-• «   an actual or t h r e a t e n e d physical impact,
  direct perception of an actual
  The defen da nt could,   I think,   re a s o n a b l y expect that the

  tel ev isi on cameras would not show s h o c k i n g pictures of suffering

  b y recognisable individuals.        I b e a r in mind,   of course,     that

  the sight and sound of an incident can be tran smi tt ed and

  reproduced with a vividness which ca n equal,           or even exceed,

  that experienced b y those on the spot.            In the pre se nt case,

  however,   the element of immediate and hor ri fy ing impact on the

   vi ew er does not seem to m e to have b ee n est ab lis he d either as

   being reasonably foreseeable or as h a v i n g happened.            It follows

              ■ j      thP law provides no remedy for those
   that in my judgment the law pruv
                    ,,  _ ost closely related, who w a t c h e d the live
   plaintiffs, even the most closeiy
                           ■      efiil less for those wh o h e a r d the
   tel ev isi on transmissions,   still
                 ^         iafer saw the re co rde d television
   news on the radio or later saw tiie
                                                 conclusion nuist* I
   transmission.   The same apparently ha rs h c

                                        61
think, follow on the alternative and simpler basis that the

damage is too remote for the law to be able to cope with.

     I would not exclude the possibility in principle of a duty

of care extending to the watchers of a television programme.

For example, if a publicity seeking organisation made

arrangements for a party of children to go up in a balloon, and

for the event to be televised so that their parents      couldwatch,

it would be hard to deny that the organisers were under a       duty

to avoid mental injury to the parents as well as physical injury

to the children, and that there would be a breach of that duty

if through some careless act or omission the balloon crashed.

 But that would be a different case.
        Mr. Hytner urged us in relation to all of the plaintiffs to

 have regard to the whole of the facts - the "concatenation of

 circumstances"    as   it has been called - and not to treat a

 single factor such     as personal relationship or the medium of

 communication as being alone decisive.      He referred, by way of

 example, to the case of Harold Copoc.      Mr. Copoc knew that his

 son was at the match and believed that he would be behind the

 goal.     With Mrs. Copoc he watched the television at home from

 3.30 p.m. onwards.      Both were in fear for the welfare of their

 son.     Mr. Copoc made telephone calls throughout the night

 vainly seeking information, until 4 a.m. when he set-off with

 his nephew for Sheffield.       He looked for his son at the

  Sheffield hospital, again without success.      His nephew

  telephoned home, to learn that the police had called bringing

  news of the son's death.      Mr. Copoc went to the mortuary at

  Sheffield and identified his son's body.      Mr. Hytner submitted

  that this traumatic sequence of events was readily foreseeable

  by the defendant.     The aftermath of the initial tragedy

                                   62
continued for Mr. Copoc until the identification of the body.

His case, submitted Mr. Hytner, could not realistically be

distinguished from that of Mrs. McLoughlin.        This, I think, is

probably the nearest of the plaintiff's cases to the case of

Mrs. McLoughlin, but I still feel bound to conclude that it is

on the other side of the line.        When Mrs. M.cLoughlin arrived at

the hospital, to hear that her youngest child aged three was

dead, she found her other children and her husband in a state of

acute distress and still undergoing or awaiting treatment

"covered with oil and mud, and distraught with pain", in much

the same condition as they had been by the roadside.           It was a

situation of the kind which is all too readily foreseeable as a

consequence of a serious road accident.        Even so, Lord

Wilberforce regarded her case as being upon the margin of what

the process of logical progression from case to case would

allow.   If that is right, Mr. Copoc's case must in my judgment

fall beyond the margin of what, as a matter of law, was

reasonably foreseeable.

     This is perhaps another way of saying again that to my mind

the expression "nervous shock", as used in the decided cases,

connotes a reaction to an immediate and horrifying impact.           I

have no doubt that the kinds of psychiatric illness to which

nervous shock may give rise could equally be brought about by an

accumulation of more gradual assaults upon the nervous system,

but the law as it stands does not appear to me to provide for

the latter category.      I fully accept Mr. Hytner's submission

that the foreseeable limits of nervous shock in any given

situation cannot be determined by reference to any one factor.

That is why the normal parent or spouse (and possibly others

with similar personal relationships) must be foreseen as

                                 63
possible sufferers even though only present at the aftermath.

At the other end of the scale, a stranger may recover because

his physical involvement with the horrifying human consequences

of the tragedy are in themselves foreseeably sufficient to

produce nervous shock, even in a person of normal fortitude.

The inclusion of rescuers in the category of those to whom the

duty of care is owed may be supported on this basis.    The same

considerations might apply to someone, such as the "fan"

described by Dr. Morgan O'Connell, who though not a rescuer nor

himself physically injured, was directly and physically involved

in the horrifying incidents which occurred.    But I repeat that

his case is not before us.   Nor are we concerned with the case

of an ordinary bystander.    We are concerned solely with the

relatives and friends who are parties to the appeals before us.

In their cases I agree that the appeals of the plaintiffs must

fail and the appeals of the defendant must succeed.



       Plaintiffs' appeals dismissed.   Defendant's
       appeals allowed with costs here and below, not
       to be enforced without leave of the court.
       Legal aid taxation. Application for leave to
       appeal to the House of Lords granted.




                              64
LORD JUSTICE PARKER:   For the reasons set out in the judgments
   which have been handed down, the six plaintiffs' appeals will be
   dismissed and the nine defendant's appeals will be allowed.

MR. LIMB:   In relation to those cases taken on appeal, it is the
   defendant's application that, given the terms and conclusions of
   all three of your Lordships' judgments the defendant should have
   the costs here and below.   There is one complication; below
   there were 16 cases; before your Lordships in the instant
   appeals there were 15. The order that was obtained below is
   that because the plaintiffs have made common cause, they should
   each bear l/16th of the costs.   In the event, for all practical
   purposes, as to the costs below the most satisfactory disposal,
   in the defendant's submission, should be that they have 15/16ths
   of their costs below.   As to the status of the plaintiffs
   vis-a-vis legal aid, it is understood that all of the plaintiffs
   are legally aided, bar one, possibly two.   I am told certainly
   that Karen Hankin may be legally aided.

LORD JUSTICE PARKER:   All legally aided bar one.

MR. LIMB: The number has risen to two.    Karen Hankin, for the
   purposes of the appeal, is not legally aided and it may be
   better for my learned friend Mr. Hytner to inform your Lordships
   of that.   But in respect of the others the order that the
   defendant would seek is for the costs to be borne by the Legal
   Aid Fund if there is to be no leave to appeal to the House of
   Lords and there may be there the prospect of the final disposal
   of this matter.  But given the terms of two of your Lordships'
   judgments, it is understood that leave may well be granted to go
   to the House of Lords.   If leave is granted, then it is that
   costs be not enforced without leave of the court, those costs to
   be taxed if not agreed.

MR. HYTNER:   The situation is that below a non-legally aided
   plaintiff succeeded and there was no appeal against that
   decision.  That is Mr. Pemberton. The order made by Mr. Justice
   Hidden in relation to the costs was substantially the order, as
   I understand it from Mr. King, who appeared on the costs'
   argument, contended for by Mr. Woodward    So it was the
   defendant's argument which succeeded.   It is along the lines of
   Mr. Justice Hidden's judgment that I now look to see what costs'
   order ought to be made here.

       The appellants Miss Mullaney and Mrs. Hankin are not legally
   aided.   Nor was Mr. Pemberton below, but we can forget him for
   the moment.   In those circumstances it seems to me that
   following the logic of Mr. Justice Hidden's order and your
   Lordships' decision in the appeal the proper order should be
   that in relation to the costs below each unsuccessful appellant
   or respondent should bear l/16th of the costs subsequent to the
   joining of common cause, and, of course, prior to that the costs
   incurred by each individual plaintiff against the defendant up
   to the date of the joining of common cause should be borne by
   each individual plaintiff.   That again was the order of Mr.
   Justice Hidden.

LORD JUSTICE PARKER:    Each plaintiff bears the costs up to joinder
   of common cause.
MR. HYTNER:  Yes, whatever they are, and subsequent to that each
   plaintiff is liable for l/16th of the costs.    In your
   Lordships' court each individual plaintiff should be liable to
   the defendant for l/15th of the costs and in relation to all
   those plaintiffs, save Miss Mullaney and Mrs. Hankin, those
   costs should not be enforced without leave of the court, the
   remaining plaintiffs being legally aided.    My friend has
   referred to the possibility of a stay.

       My Lords, I ask for leave to appeal to the House of Lords.

LORD JUSTICE PARKER:     Is that opposed.

MR. LIMB:     It is not opposed.

LORD JUSTICE PARKER:    I did not think it would be.     Leave granted.

MR. HYTNER:    That being so, I ask for the orders for costs to be
   stayed.

LORD JUSTICE PARKER:     That would only affect surely Miss Mullaney
   and Mrs. Hankin.

MR. HYTNER:    Yes, my Lord, that is right.    Those would be further
   stayed.

       Finally, my Lord, I have two applications to make.  The
   first is for an order for legal aid taxation which is necessary,
   and, secondly, for the convenience of the parties, taxation in
   Liverpool rather than London.

LORD JUSTICE PARKER:   I imagine that there is no opposition to the
   legal aid taxation orders and they will go in the ordinary
   course of all the legally aided defendants.  I also imagine that
   there is no opposition to the taxation taking place in
   Liverpool.

MR. LIMB:     I am instructed that there is no opposition to that
   either.

LORD JUSTICE PARKER:   Have you got anything to say about Mr.
   Hytner's formula for costs?

MR. LIMB:   As to the formula, the success that the defendant had
   below in arguing costs is adopted by the plaintiffs here.   In my
   submission there may be no practical difference between saying
   that each of the plaintiffs, so-called for the purpose of the
   argument, bear l/15th of the costs, where there are 15
   plaintiffs and saying that costs following the event should be
   the defendant's on appeal and below.    It is for that reason,
   for the sake of simplicity, I would  ask that the ordinary order
   be made, namely that the defendant should have the costs here
   and below, subject to the qualifications relating to the number
   of parties before the court.

LORD JUSTICE PARKER:     I am not at the moment clear   how that is
   different.


                                   66
MR. HYTNER:   My Lord, may I assist Mr. Limb.  He may not have
   understood why I put it in the way I did.  My Lord, the reason I
   put it in the way I did is lest, for example, one of the legally
   aided plaintiffs wins the pools and the defendant comes along
   and asks for leave of the court to pursue the costs against him
   or her.  It would be difficult if the order were simply a
   blanket order as the one contended for by my friend.   The way I
   put it is faithful to the fact that there were 15 parties before
   the court.

LORD JUSTICE PARKER:    Strictly speaking, of course, there are 15
   appeals.

MR. HYTNER:   Yes, my Lord.

MR. LIMB:     In the event, the formula suggested is not opposed.

LORD JUSTICE PARKER:   Thank you. We will make the order for costs
   proposed by Mr. Hytner, which will be that as to the costs below
   up to the point when the plaintiffs or respondents, as the case
   may be, took common cause, each plaintiff will bear the costs of
   his own action up to that date.   Thereafter each of the
   plaintiffs will bear l/16th of the costs.   So far as the appeal
   is concerned, the plaintiffs will be liable each for l/15th of
   the costs.   Those costs, the plaintiffs being legally aided,
   will not be enforced without leave of the court.


       As to Miss Mullaney and Mrs. Hankin they are not legally
   aided, but as to the costs ordered against them, there will be a
   stay pending an appeal to the House of Lords.   The fate of
   those costs will then be dependent upon what their Lordships'
   seek to do, this court already having granted leave to go to
   their Lordships' House.




                                   67
