                                                                             54 C O U N T Y R O A D
                                                                             (E N TR A N CE N E S T O N STREET)
      SO LIC IT O R S
                                                                             LIVERPOOL L4 3QL
CHARLES J. BOULTON, LL.B.                                                    MERSEYSIDE
                                                                             T E L E P H O N E : 051-523 1245

                                                                             DATE:

                                                                                 2 5 t h May 1989
                                                                              WHEN CALLING PLEASE ASK FOR:
O U R REF.:       HH.JB.                   Me.431.
Y OU R REF.:

                                                                                       Mi ss Hill
The Hillsborough Steering Committee
C/O Castle Chambers
Cook Street
Liverpool
L2




Dear Sirs

Re:      Miss


We enclose herewith statement of the above namec(ciient and we should
be obliged if you could please note that we represent this Client.

This statement took one and a half hours to take, she was very distra-
and in view of the nature of her evidence and her distress we have
not sent it to her for her to sign.

However, w e feel tha t her evidence may be of interest to the                                            |nquiry.

Yours faitkfully



enc,




 This F i r m is regulated by the L a w Society in the conduct of Investment
 Business.
           ALSO AT: 537 PR ESC O T R O A D , (E N TR A N C E 2 W O O D H A L L ROA D) L IV ER PO O L L13 5UR
                                                  TEL.: 051-259 2591
     E M E R G E N C Y T E L E P H O N E NOS.                051 - 722 - 1906 AFTER HO U RS A N D W EEKENDS
                  of                        Liverpool
 State Enrolled Nurse, will say:-


 On the 15th April 198 9 I went, with my boyfriend
 who is a              at                          to the semi­
 final at Hillsborough, with Nottigham Forest.



 My boyfriend and I had tickets in the Stands above the

 Leppings Lane End terracing.



 I have a young baby              who was born on the

            he was being minded by relatives on the day in
question.



We got into the ground at Sheffield without too much

difficulty, although,       save at the individual turnstiles,

there did not seem to be enough Police Officers outside

the ground to get people in orderly queues.        As we went

through the turnstiles we were both searched by a Policeman

and a Policewoman respectively.



It was apparent, when we were taking our seats in the

stands, that there was something amiss,      in that shortly

before the teams came out, there was a surge forward and

people scrambled out of the terrace area and were seeking

refuge on the grass at the side.



I then saw what appeared to be a body being passed down

over people.
After the teams came out and w e r e warm in g up, there was

 another surge forwards and pe op le we re clearly in discomfort

at t he front of the t e r r a c i n g   .   One lad jumped out and

was tugging at Bruce Grobelar's shirt and then Alan Hanson.

All th e time,    there was quit e clearly, m a y h e m b ehind the

goal, both sides of the terra ci ng were relatively empty.



I then decided that it wa s quite clearly an emergency

and I left the stand and w e n t outside and I saw Police

coming in w h o said that th ey had received a radio mess age
                                                                         r
                                                                         r


to the effect that there was a riot in progress.
                                                                         *


                                                                         .
                                                                         ;




I disagreed w i t h them and I said that I was a nurse and

I wa nte d to help.     I was brought round to the side of

the pit ch w h e r e there was a girl, obviously in great d i s ­

comfort,    it appeared th at the girl's name was I            I



I put a comb in her mo uth to m a k e an airway and I did

all I could for her.



I have since found out that she has been discharged from

Hospital.



Lots of people had been brought on to the pitch,            the Police

were just trying to form a line across the pitch.



The Forest supporters w e r e just chanting abuse and I stopped

a youn g lad going forward to remonstrate wi th them.
 At this stage there was a message to the effect that people

 should get off the pitch.



 I went to the goal mouth area, to the left hand corner

of the goal, and I saw a Doctor and I assisted him in

 cardiac massage and mouth to mouth resusitation.       I did

this for 5 minutes.        There were no drugs however, with

any of the ambulances.       There were no resusitation kits.



I then moved from person to person assisting them and

the next person that I went to was dead.



I then relieved a relative, who was trying to give mouth

to mouth resusitation to one of their family.       I took

over but there was no chance of resusitating this particular

person.



I wo rk ed fro m right to left and pu t something over the

heads of those wh o w e r e quite clearly dead.



I worked with Dr Ashton for a time      (he was the Doctor

from Liverpool who has appeared on television on the night
of the t r a g e d y . )



I was going from person to person doing the best that

I could.      The Police were looking at me, some of then

just idly standing by.       They looked at me as I was crazy.



It was as if they were shell shocked.       Unfortunately the

St Johns Ambulance assistants were quite clearly out of

their depth.
I then went to the Forest end of the ground, I had seen

that some people had been taken on stretchers to that
                                                      *




end of the ground.



One Policeman   asked me whether or not a particular person

was dead, I looked at this person   but he   was quite clearly

dead.



I then went with a Doctor to the gymnasium area, thinking

that there was something that I could possibly do for

the people who had been badly injured.



Initially our   path was blocked by a line   of Police Officers

and we had to   explain who we were before   they would let

us through.



I there met a Doctor in the gym and I asked him what I

could do to help.



He asked me to take over resusitating a man, but, he had

already died.



There were other people outside the gym who were not being

attended to, but there did not seem to be any major injuries

outside the gym,     I just put those people in a recovery

position and I told their relatives what to do.



In the gymnasium there appeared to be lots of bodies all

covered up.
 I asked a Police Inspector where the injured were.



 He showed me and I conforted someone who was concussed.

 I then saw a young boy,   ________   who needed Oxygen and

 I asked the ambulance men to get oxygen but their tanks

 were empty.   Eventually we got a tank that had some oxygen

 in it, but it did appear that the ambulance had been returnii

 from Hospital at this time, with empty oxygen tanks.



 I eventually got an oxygen tank.



 I also needed scissors to open a jacket and I asked the

 First Aid people if they knew where I could obtain scissors.

 They suggested from the First Aid post which was on the

otherside of the ground.    I saw people actually counting

money amidst all this mayhem.     I went over and I asked

them for a pair of scissors and they just looked at me as if

I was mad.      I was so concerned and annoyed that I tipped

over the table with all the money on it.      Eventually a

Policeman gave me a pocket knife, but it was almost impossibl

to use this to cut open somebody's jacket which was necessary
it took me a good 5 to 6 minute.



I then got an oxygen tank from a Doctor who asked me to

make an airway for somebody.



All the time it did not appear that the Ambulance men

did not know the order of priorities and they were asking

me who they should take next to the hospital.
 I then helped somebody else with resusitation for about

 10 minutes.     I was too late however.
                                                                  t




 There   was a lad lying on the floor with a broken leg,

 there were no stretchers and the Ambulance man asked me

 what to do,     I told him to use a chair and to put him

 in a proper position before moving him.



 It was at this stage that the Police Officers produced

 thier mini bus to take the people who had fractures                  to

 Hospital.



 I then came across a man who had         a fractured femur, who

 was screaming both with pain and         despair because he did

 not know where his 14 year old son was and, assured me

 that although he had fallen down, he had pushed his son

 to one side in order that he did         not fall on top of him.



 I tried to tell him that his son         was alright but really
 I did not know.



Ke wanted r,e to go away and find his son but that would
have bt*en impossible.



    o-id not f ’
              md     any splints at all in the ambulance for

this         but eventually I found a very large splint and

I aid the best that I could for h im



I eventually went back into the ground and I met up wit h

m y boyfriend,   people w e r e w a l k i n g around in a daze.
I eventually got back to Liverpool and I went to the Evert on

Match and to the Semi-Final.   I did this on both occasions

just to prove to myself that it is possible to go to a

football match and for there not to be a tragedy.



I have, however, now completely lost all confidence in

myself.



I was to return to work following the birth of my baby,

but I have not been able to do so.



As an S.E.N.   I would be, on occasions,   in charge of a

ward with a pupil and auxiliary nurse.     I would possibly

be in the position of having to be in charge if somebody

had   a cardiac arrest and the fear of not being able to

cope has overwhelmed me.



I have been very tearful since the incident and I feel

that I could never return to work because of what I saw



As a Nurse, I felt it was my duty to do all that I could

to help those in distress and the day in question.
