D.O.B.

d .o .s .   la.s.aj*.

TAKfcW By GT/LJ/

FILE NO                 illsborough



On Saturday 15th april 1989, I travelled toy hired car with iny friena

to Hillsncpciugh too watch the        final of the F.A. Challenge Cup between Liverpool

- v - tofctinghaiu Forest.



We left Liverpool at approximately 11.00 hrs ana arrived in Sheffield at about 14.GGri



On arrivals walked to the ground and notice that the ground was completely crowded

at appraxiaiately 14.15 hrs.



We eventually entered the ground at 14.30 hrs and walked in threw the tunnel into the

enclosure.



On entsance we were pushed by the crowd and I appeared on a photograph in the Today

newspapers a copy of which I have given to my Solicitor.



At about 14.40 hrs the crush was becoming unbearable and ny friend Mr.             began

to panick because he couldn't breath.



Ke was screaming and cost disraught because of this.      I considered that if 1 hadn't

been trying to help him 1 would have passed vout m^se^



There was absolute mayhem in there and although we tried to get towards the one gate

that we could see that had been opened ws were constantly pushed and sfruffed in all

directions.



Eventually, we approached the front fence and gate and £he police were pulling police

out of the crowd i.e. that corpse      .e. one every five seconds or so with a great deal
   we reasoned in this crush fatal about 15.2Qhrs when after the crush had eased

   slightly we pushed our way backwards away frai the fence towards the tunnel.



   1 notice as the crush eased off that people v^re doping to the floor ls*ny of ttan
   were dead and certainly unconscious.



  Ul eSCapln9 ^   ™     «     *ood in a state of shock gasping for air an. watching the
  suporters carry out tSe dead and injured.    The police v^re standing and watchingf

  and a^^eared to he quite befcilde^d. At one point I saw a supporter who was sta^ung

  over a body which appeared to be either his father or olcter bother with a police-

  woamn looking on. The supporter grabbefi hold of this polioewcrpan by the collar
  and said • Are you a qualified polciewonan1, her reply 'Yes of Cousse1.
  tie then pullea her down and said give him the kiss of life.



  I personally think that if the police had given the kiss of life to core people

 instead of standing around, the injuries would have been far less.



 After feeling really disgusted and also questioning the head police officer who

 also appeared bewildered I was so ^ t h a t I left the ground at 15.50 hrs.



 We eventually left Sheffield and retunung to the car and arrived hare just before
 7.00 O'clock that evening.



(to the Tuesday coming ieth         ^     I went to ny G.P. who is Dr. |
                                                                       ---- I** told

him that I cculdnftt sle^ and * was acing froa head to foot and I also found that I

was breaking do™ unoontroably in tears and v*xUd sob for 20 ndnutes at a time and
about 10 or 20 timas aday.



He immediately, told roe that I couldn't work for 2 weeks which caused *   great
financial difficulty.



I find this so because I work an a ccmuisian basis for the
Although X aiu employed by them I have to sell three menerships per week in order to

continue my eiiplyeaent- I have been told that I should obtain this figure as a

numirnuru standard.



Because I have been in a state of shock I have been not able to gain the enthusiam

necessary for a sale job such as this and 1 txibaiae the above incidents described for

this.



I have been to my Dr. twice since these incidents to ask for a tcnic or something

because of lack of sleep and a geaeral feeling of tiredess on beinf run down.



I now wish to see a Specilist and I am prepared to do so as itry back is still painful

which I believe that it is due to the crushing effects on that day.



I also wish to add that I now have to go back to ray Dr* tonmorrow for more nedicatio
