  STATEMENT OF

  HOME ADDRESS:

 D.O.B.

 P.O.S.     03.05.89

 STATEMENT FOR FILE:




 On Saturday morning 15th April 1989, I travelled down to Sheffield with

 my friend to watch the Semi-final of the F.A. Challenge Cup between

 Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.



 fee travelled by Easeways Coaches of Ashton leaving the city at 11.30 ara

 and arriving in Sheffield at 14.45 pm.   The late arrival was due to the

 police checking all the ^coaches for alcohol and if any was found the

 coaches were being turned around and sent away.



 On arrival at the ground there were lots of people milling around and

 I wish to state the organisation outside the ground was disgusting.



There were no queues outside the ground just losts of people pushing and

shoving and we walked straight in through the tura-stile.



Once inside the ground we walked through the tunnel and on hearing a loud

cheer behind looked around to see about 1000 people pushing towards rae, I

couldn't get out of the way and was knocked to the ground and trarQpled an.



I was very frightend and started punching out at people who were walking

past.   There was no were for me to go I was just forced on through and into

the ground where I eventually escaped by being pulled up and into the stands

by some of the supporters.



There were people strewn all over the floor dying, screaming and crying for

help and nobody appeared to be doing this.   The police looked lost and appeared

callous.
By the time we eventually got out of the ground it was 4.30 pia and I

was glad to be alive.    Once I had arrived home Iwent straight to bed

but couldn't sleep for nightmares and I was very upset and crying.



All day Sunday I was vomiting blood and edecided     at 5o*clock that

evening that I could take the pain no longer andwent to Wigan

Ini ermary.



The doctors x—rayed me and found X had a cracked rib and that was the

reason for the blood.    My foot also had a cracked bone in it and I am

on crutches.



I am self-employed and am not paid when I am offwork    which iscausing

me great distress as I ara about to move.



I also wish to add that last Saturday evening I went with my wife to

a local night club.     Whilst in there a group of people gcame in through

the doors, I started sweating profusely and it took me right back       to

when I was in the ground and I grabbed the nearest person and     started

punching him.



The door man dragged me off and my wife explained    the situation.   I apologised

for my behaviour and had to go straight home.



I now realise 'that I have to get some medical advice in order that I may

continue to live my life as normal.



My solicitor has informed me that he will give me the name of a Counsellor

that I can consult in relation to this matter.
