STATEMENT OF

HOME ADDRESS:
              U


D.O.B. |
       __________

P.O. G.   20.04.89( 1

STATEMENT FOR FILE;      |

                                                                               \
                                                                               I




I was present at the Liverpool     -v-   Nottingham Forest match at Hillsborough

Staaiura, Sheffield on 15th April 1989,




I went down with some friends in a mini bus, we arrived near the ground

at about 2.35 pm.       I walked with my mates towards the ground.   I had a

full ticket which I still retain possession of in my pocket..




We joined the crowd milling; about outside the gate and eventually managed

to push our way through towards the turn-stiles,       As we got near toe

turn-atiles we queued to get in and eventually I passed through the turn-stiles

but there was such a crush I couldn’t even get my arms into my pocket to

produce .iiy ticket nevertheless I managed to pass through the turn-stile into

the,ground.




By this stage I had become separated from my friends.




As I got close to the mouth of the tunnel leading into the Leppin^s Lane

Stand, I heard a cheer from behind me and when I looked I saw a gate had

been opened and that there was a crowd of fans running into the ground,



I decided that I had better get into the stand it I was to see the match

and made my way into the tunnel.




The tunnel was already tightly packed with people making their way into

the stand.




I eventually got through the tunnel to the back of the stand but as I

arrived there the pressure of the people coming in behind me pushed me down
the stand towards the front



I was pushed within a few feet of    the wiremesh fence but could not be

pushed any further because of thebodies infront of me.



pp amis were pinned at my side by the pressure of people around me.      I

felt the pressure growing on my chest and then I passed out.



When I came to, it was to find myself still lying in the stand on the

ground with a young nan whom I assume to be a fan pumping on my chest

saying "FIGHT IT, FIGHT IT".



I could :f£el a weight across my le&s and when I looked I could see it

was a body   lying across my legs.    Next tome, there was a bodyof a

young man and I could see that people were trying to revive him but

apparently without any success.



This lad whom I would not re.cognise again pulled me from under the

body across my legs then I began to crawl towards ti.c back of the stand.



Eventually I managed to pull myself upright and left the ground unassisted

and went back to the van.



I waited at the van for my mates to come back eventually we all got together

again and we drove back to Liverpool.   Luckily none of them appeared to be

injured but we did stop on the way to telephone my parents and their

parents to say we were alright.



As a result of what took place, I did suffer bruising on my chest, back

and arms.    I drew the attention at the hospital to this when I attended.



I have also lost the feeling of the three outer fingers of my right hand
s



along the outer edge of my right hand as well.
I have been told by the doctor that I could be suffering from a nerve

in my thigh which could be affecting the feeling in my hand,



I attended Walton hospital under unit number 095 on ISth April

where I was seen by Mr



I have to go back on 16th May for x-rays to the fracture clinic.



I would like to say that I have been very upset at what happened and

have still not recovered fully.
