 STATEMENT OF

HOME ADDRESS;

D.O.B.

D.O.S.   24.04.89

STATEMENT FOR FILE




I travelled down to Hillsborough on the morning of Saturday 15th April

1989, with ray three friends by Barnes Travel on a coach.      My three

friends were                                   and another lad who goes

the match with us          itrhose second name I don't know.



We arrived at the ground at approximately 2.55 pm.       The queue had

diminished at that time so we walked straight through the turn-stilea

and into the Leppings Lane end.     The inaide of the ground I walked

through the tunnel, but as I got in there was a lad being dragged out

unconscious, people were crying and then I realised that there was

something dreadfully wrong there was also people being carried out

who appeared to be dead.



I couldn’t believe this so I approached a police man and asked him if

these people were dead and what was gaing on.



The police man said that these people were dead and to try and avoid

blocking up the entrance.



I went back to ray friends and told them we should wait for the crowd

to disburse which we did then made our way out to the nearest phone.



I rang my daughter to tell her I wa3 o.k. and wouldn't be back until

later on that   evening.    We then went back to the coach and travelled

back to Liverpool after waiting for a short period.for people to arrive



There were a lot of young lads on our coach and we urged the driver to

pull into the nearest service station to use the telephone.
 The police were waiting with road blocks at the front of the service

 station to prevent us from entering and using the telephones.   We

 carried on a bit further along the motorway until we came to another

 service station where we again tried to gain access but were barred

 from entry by the police.



Eventually we pulled into Huddersfield and used the nearest public house

 telephone which was grately appreciated.



We eventually continued our journey and arrived back in Liverpool at

about 8.30 pm were I had to go for a couple of pints to calni me down

but this proved too much and I had to go home after one pint.



I was crying all night and couldn't get to 6 i ^ p just thinking about

all that I had seen that day but I realised that I couldn't forget

all 1 had seen.



One week I have been thinking about it and this hat? been causing me

great stress.



l*Sy family had to put up with me and my wife and daughter have had numerous

arguments with me over stupid little things that don't matter very much.



I am still very tence and tired because of the might mares and lack of

sleep.



I am in the T.A and thoughmyself well enough to cope with this but the

si^ht- of too many people dying has proved too gross for me to bear.     I

never want to go to a football match again if this iB going to be the

outcome.
