Statement of
                                                                             i



D.O.B.

P.O.S. 5/5/89



On Saturday morning the 15th April 1989 I travelled in a friends car

bo Sheffield to watch the semi final of the F.A. Challenge cup between

Liverpool and Nottingham Forrest at Hillsborough Football Ground.


                                                                         i



We left Liverpool about 10.00 a.m. and arrive at Sheffield at

approximately 13.15 hrs.



On arriving at Sheffield we went to the Bass Charringtons Social
                                                            for
Club where we went last year for a couple of pints and left/the

ground about 14.10 hrs.



1 was in the main stands but my son who was with his friends had

(ravelled down with us were in the Leppings Lane enclosure B.



At about 15.05 a commotion started in the enclosure B.     At this

point i started to panick when I saw people being carried out.



I told my friends that I was going to look for my son and left the

stands to do so.



I went down the stairs to the rear of the ground where there were

bodies laid out and I looked through them all to see if my son was

there but luckily he was not.



Junt by where I had been looking at these bodies a lad was standing

crying and wetting himself and the Policeman said he had cracked

ribs and was distressed.   At this point my friends came up to me

 a n d said that they had spotted my son outside the ground with his

 Fi j.cnds and we had arranged to meet him there.   I wish to say that

 two of the friends who travelled with us are now deceased and I have been

 most distressed and attended both of their funerals and have tried to
2



confort the families but have found myself in a constant state of distress

ami in fact I had to go and see My Doctor who is Doctor            of

                       jto obtain tranquilisers to help me sleep



I am self employed and have found that alot of my time has been

taken up
