Statement of

D.O.B.

D.O.S. 9/5/89

Address:



I travelled to Hillsborough with my friends on a mini bus to watch the

semi final of     the F.A. Challenge cup between Liverpool and Forrest.



We left Liverpool about 10.00 a.m. and arrived in Sheffield at 12.30 — 1.00 p



My four friends and I stayed together whilst the other six older men went

to the pub.    We talked around for a while and then walked straight into the

ground.



On arrival at the ground about 13.40 hrs the queues were quite large but

after waiting for a while we went through the turn styles about 14.20 p.m



Once inside we took alleft turn into the left hand side into the enclosure

and stood waiting for jour friends to come in and the match to starts



The game started and as soon as Beardsley hit the bar i watched the commotion

as people piled over the fence and into our enclosure and thought that it

was another pitch invasion.    I saw a friend of ours who was with us climb

out of the stands and over the fence onto the pitch where he proceeded to

help people over the fence.



he was white and crying and held up four fingers to us to tell us that

four were dead.    About 5 minutes later he came up to us and said that

he had just seen 12 people dead,    he was still crying and vomiting

at this point and we did not realise the seriousness of what was going

on.   My friend said lets go and I turned around quickly    to see what was

going on around.iand turned back but he had already gone.    I waited for
to see if he would return but as he did not I walked back to the mini bus

on my own.   On my way I called in behind the pub to use the telephone

to let my parents know that I was safe.



I then went back to the mini-bus and sat listening to the radio a local

Nottinggham Station that was blaming the fans for the incident that had

just occurred.   After about half an hour we left Sheffield this was

about 6.30 p.m. and got back to Liverpool about 8.00 p.m. that

evening.



My fattier met me at the pub and took me straight home.



I was upset all that evening crying and had to sleep on the setee.      Although

Id didnot realise I had been told that on Sunday morning but I knew that

I did not want to be on my own.



On the Sunday evening I went to the Catholic Cathederal to the service

in memory of those who!: had died it was not until I got home that night

it all hit me.   I was crying and I couldinot speak about this to anyone

not even my young family which caused then a great amount of distress.



On the Monday morning I went into school for the first lesson but

so imany people were talking about this and asking me questions i had

to go to the Secretary and sign out to go home.



I attend                                          and the Headmaster is




On the Tuesday morning my mother telephoned the Doctor that is Doctor

of               who suggested that I went to Walton Hospital.



My mother decided that she did not think that this would be a very good idea
because of the waiting inside the hospital and also the fact that this was

a Psychiatrist.



My mother eventually telephoned the Helpline for the victims of the

Hillsborough Disaster and a Social Worker came out that evening to see

me at home.



I spoke to the Social Worker               from 4.30 that evening until about

10.15 that night and also |                one of the teachers from the school

came and sat talking to me as well and he left the house about 12.15 a.m.



After they had gone I ate some tea and toast the first that that I had

eaten since the Saturday mornirg before travelling to the match.



The Social Worker has been seeing me two or three times aweek since

the incident and                  has taken me to Melwood ie. Liverpools

Playing ground to speak to the team



The other evening Kenny Dalgliesh ran the house and spoke to me and

tried to console me but i did not find this of any help.



My   g .C.E.   Examinations are due between May the 18th and June 16th but

i am not in a position to sit these exams.



The Head of                       the Teacher that is says that he will try

and gather the Medical and Social Workers evidence in order to try and

get the Education Board to assess my work over the year for submission

 instead of sitting these examinations.



 I also wish to add that I have been accepted by                  College

 to study a                                        pending the examination

 results mentioned about.      The problem is I may not be accepted if I

 fail to sit these exams.
The Social Workers name is   of
