i
                                                      ORECROFT DAWSON & GARNETTS
                                                                                         SOLICITORS


                                                                                   QUEEN BU ILD IN G                                                                             TE LE P H O N E
 j B ) N G K A M .LLB                          M . G.DAW SON
                                                                                    8 DALE STREET                                                                             051-236 8871/9318
 G C OAVIDSON, LLB               R. BARK-JONES, M.A.(CANTAB)
                                                                                                                                                                                051-227 3344
 r H OAWSON, LLB                          B .T . LAWLOR, LLB.                         LIVERPOOL                                                                                       TELEX
                    BARBARA M . RIMMER, LLB.
                                                                                            L2 4TQ                                                                            628052 SHARET G
                         ASSOCIATES                                                                                                                                            FAX   051-236 8109
 M AR Y I. MEALY, LLB.                  C F. MORLEY, LL B
 C 0 , BILUNG, BA.                CAROLE A . BRENNAN, LLB.                                                                                                                           DX 14142



                                                                                                                                        PLEASE A S K F O R      ^     R   J^^S O n

                                                                                                                                                  O U R R £F.   RHD/SMS
                         Miss E N Steel                                                                                                       Y O U R REF.

                         Chairman
                         Hillsborough Steering Committee
                         C/O Castle Chambers
                         Cook Street
                         Liverpool 2                                                                                                                            5 June 1989




                         Dear Miss Steel

                         RE: GARY JONES DECEASED

                         We have been instructed to act on behalf of the parents and family of
                         Gary Jones who was one of the victims of the Hillsborough Tragedy.

                         We have recently taken statements from Mr and Mrs Jones and also from their
                         daughter |               ^nd we take this opportunity of enclosing copies of
                         those statements herewith for your file.

                         We would wish to emphasize a number of points on behalf of Mr and Mrs Jones

                         1         They are very unhappy about the way in which matters were handled by the
                                   Police when they went over to Sheffield on the Saturday evening after the
                                   disaster. They of course recognise that there was a major disaster, but
                                   they feel that the Police could and should have shown much more
                                   sensitivity and understanding than was the case.

                         2         Our clients never received any formal notification from the Police of the
                                   death of their son.

                         3         It was not until 30 May that our clients were able to find out from the
                                   hospital when their son had died.

                         In cornnon with many other people our clients consider that sane responsibility
                         for this tragedy must rest with the Football Association and with the method
                         of allocation of tickets. We appreciate the difficulties which were referred
                         to by Mr Hytner QC with regard to causation, but given the complaints that
                         some fans have made about the crushing at the 1988 game and the
                         representations that were made to the Football Association to increase the
                         allocation of tickets to Liverpool fans prior to 15 April 1989, we do not with




                                      CONSULTANTS: R BARK JO N E S , M.A(CANTAB)   F. J. C AM EN ISC H , B.A.(OXON)   R. J. M ACKEN ZIE, U .B .    P. A . ASCROFT



                              W O O LTO N                                                CROSBY                                                           UPTO N
A L S O AT                    031-426 6356                                            051-924 9234                                                     051-677 2279

                                            THIS FIRM IS REGULATED BY THE L A N SOCIETY IN THE CONDUCT OF INVESTMENT BUSINESS
                            CO NTINUATIO N




respect think it is necessarily too remote to suggest that the Football
Association could and should have recognised that there might be problems with
regard to crowd control; in particular it would surely have been an easy
matter to have allocated spectators to particular marked pens in the Leppings
Lane area so that there would not have been over crowding in any particular
pen.

We have in fact written a letter before action to the Football Association and
we would urge the Steering Committee to regard the Football Association as one
of the potential Defendants to a claim for damages.

Finally we would like to have facilities to be able to inspect the 2 hour
video that was shown to the Inquiry and we would be interested to hear from
you in due course as to what arrangements can be made for a viewing.

Yours sincerely
STATEMENT OF PHILIP AND MAUREEN JOSES

OF I                 II          | MAGHULL, MERSEYSIDE



WILL SAY as follows

We are the Parents of Gary Philip Jones and make this statement in connection

with his death.     At the Hillsborough Stadium on 15th April, 1989.



Gary was born on the 18th December, 1970.     He attended Cardinal Heenan School

until 1987.     He took 0 Levels during that year, but, did not pass sufficient

0 Levels to enable him to go on to Further Education and he then went to the

Hugh Baird College in Bootle and he was due to take 5 0 Levels in the Summer

of 1989.   He was uncertain about a future career.



Gary held a season ticket for the Kop section of Liverpool Football Club and
                       i


went to all Hone Gaines.   He did not normally go to Away Gaines and the Away

Game at Hillsborough on the 15th £pril, 1989 was the first Away Game that he

had attended.



He travelled over to the Game in a Minibus together with sane friends,

including his Cousin |



We first heard about any trouble at Hillsborough when we turned on the Car

Radio at about 3.05 p.m. when we were shopping in town.    We did not think

anymore of the problem at the time as we did not think that Gary would be

involved because we knew that he had a ticket and we thought that he would

have been in the ground in good time.



We carried on shopping.    At about 4 pm when we were in Waring and Gillows, we

heard from the shop assistant that there had been a number of deaths at
Hillsborough.    Maureen said that she would be worried until Gary had come hone

safely and we therefore decided to go home.



We went to the car park and then proceeded to travel hone.       There is a car

phone in the car and we tried the emergency phone number but couldn't get

through.    We also spoke to the mother of               who is our nephew and

she said that        had rung but said that he could not find Gary.



We arrived home at about 5 pm.     We did not watch the television but kept on

trying the emergency number but could not get through.     We listened on the

radio to reports of what was happening.      We had also telephoned our son

           who was in Bradford to tell him that at that stage we did not know

anything about Gary.



Philip Jones rung various hospitals such as the Hallamshire and the Northern

Hospital but they said that they did not have any information about Gary

Jones.



                s father came round to our house and       rang up and spoke to

his father.     He said that they were giving some descriptions of some clothing

that was found, particularly a pair of Yogy Bear boxer shorts which Gary had.

This was at about 7.30 pm.     At about 8.45 pm, we decided to go over to

Sheffield and we left at about 9 pm.     We also asked our son           to travel

over to Sheffield - this was after we had heard about the clothing that hadd

been found.



We travelled over to Sheffield by car and eventually found our way to the

Northern General Hospital and arrived there at about 10.45 pm.        We went to the

Northern General Hospital because that was where          had rung from and had

 had the report of the clothing.
Initially we were met by                   He took us down to the accident unit

and we went into a private room.     We there met a Minister             and also

a Social Vforker.



We were at the hospital for a few minutes.     We also met with my son

and his girlfriend



          told us that we would have to go to a Police Station, to give

details about Gary.     When we arrived at the Police Station it was chaotic.

There was only a small amount of space and there were many people around.



We gave details about Gary and we were then taken to an essembly area in a

local boys club.     We remained there for over an hour.   Nobody explained what

was happening.      We were able to make a couple of telephone calls from there.



Eventually at about 1.30 am we, together with a group of other relatives were

taken to a double-decker bus which then drove us to the Hillsborough Ground.



We were told to stay on the bus until we were called for and after about ten

minutes we were let off the bus and taken into a Sports Stadium within the

Hillsborough coirplex.     The Minister and Social Worker were still with us.



We were asked to go out of the sports complex after a considerable time and

stood with another two couples outside a door that was guarded by a Policeman.

It was very cold and about 2 am.      After a while we were offered the use of 2

blankets; after a wait of another 10 - 15 minutes, we were then requested by

 the Policeman to go into a room and in that room were a number of photographs

on the wall and we were told that if we saw anyone that we knew, we were to

 point.
We did of course see our son Gary and pointed to his photograph marked number

86.   A short time later we made a formal identification.



After that we were asked to make statements in the same area which although

partitioned off, was being used as a mortuary.



Vfe felt that many of the questions that were being asked were inappropriate

and irrelevant at that time and could have been dealt with at a later date,

considering our state of mind at the time and our sense of deep shock.

The type of questions which we were being asked were details of occupation, my

age and details of who Gary had travelled over with at the time etc.



In our opinion the Police handled the situation very badly, they could have

shown compassion and sensitivity and dignity but this was lacking.     From what

we saw of other bereaved people, they were treated in a similarly bad way.



We were asked whether we wanted to stay in Sheffield, but, we decided to drive

back to Liverpool and we arrived back at about 5.00 a.m.



Maureen Jones works for

work on 15 May 1989




 Philip Jones has been for |
                           _______________________________________________

                          He went back to work two weeks ago.   He is employed by
The interim Death Certificate that was issued in respect of Gary indicated

that the formal cause of death had yet to be established.   In fact we only

learnt of the details of when Gary had died on the 30 May 1989 when a Social

Worker from Sefton Borough Council found out the information from the hospital

in Sheffield.   We were told that Gary was alive at the time that he arrived at

the hospital and he had in fact been revived for 5 minutes but that he died at

4.20 pm from cardiac arrest.



SIGNED       ....                           SIGNED...........
      Philip Jones                                Maureen Jones
STATEMENT OF                         of                                Maghull,




I was born on                      I am             :>f Gary Jones who died in the

Hillsborough Disaster on 15 April 1989



On the afternoon of Saturday 15 April, I was in the Liverpool City Centre

shopping.    At about 3.30 pm I was in a shop and I heard one of the shop

assistants say that there had been trouble at Hillsborough, and that seme fans

had spilled onto the ground and that the game had been postponed.      I carried

on shopping but then in another shop I heard from a shop assistant that there

had been some deaths.    I inroediately became worried about Gary.   This was at

about 4.30 pm.                                                  I tried to ring

home, but there was no response, so I went heme and I arrived heme at about

5.15 pm.



I was with              and during the evening we were listening on the radio to

reports of what had happened and we were waiting for any news of Gary.



             left heme at about 9 pm to travel over to Sheffield.    I remained at

home and I watched Match Of The Day on BBC Television when they showed the

scenes of what had happened at Hillsborough.



I saw the crowd scenes and I at one stage saw Gary.    I saw him climbing over

seme barriers, take a few steps onto the pitch and then collapse.     Then

somebody appeared in front of him and then there were masses of people around,

but I could not see any further as to what happened.    I remember saying,

"There’s Gary,11 and being concerned over what had happened to him.
I continued to listen to the radio but it was not until       returned at

5 am the following morning that I learnt that Gary had died




                    1




                                                                    ;
