  Statement of

  Address;

  D.O.B

 Home Telephone No.

 D.O.S. 3/5/89




 I was present at the Hillsborough Stadium on Saturday 15th April

 1989.




 I   travelled down to Sheffield for the weekend in another friends friends

 car.




We arrived at SheffieH at about 1.20 p.m.      We parked up in the car and

 went to a nearby pub and remained there until about 2.10 p.m.       I had

two pints of bitter.      I had had noting to drink in the car on the

way down we just had a quick drink because we were a bit early for

the match.




We then continued from the public house in the car and parked up about

a 5 minute walk to the ground.      We walked to the ground arriving there

about 2.30 p.m.      As we approached we could see that there was a crowd

of people outside the turn styles.      We made our way slowley forward

until we passed two mounted Police Officers.        We then got caught up

in the crush outside the ground and gradually we were pushed in the

direction of the turn styles.




We had not got to the turn styles by 2.40 p.m. and we were getting

pushed to the right away from the turn styles due to the pressure

of the crowd.      I was abit worried about this.    I would say that it

was very uncomfortable outside and I thought that the people up

agninst the turn styles might be in some danger because they were

bc;iti£   pushed up against the wall by the pressure of the crowd.   I

was further back and had people all around me so although it was
uncomfortable I would not have said at this stage that it was directly

dangerous.




As I say about 2.40 p.m. I noticed that a door into the ground was being

opened.    I noticed the door and at the time I saw the door being opened

it was almost fully opened and I pointed this out to my friend and we could

see that people were running into the Stadium through the open door.        The

door was quite close to where we were in the ground I would say about 15

feet away.    We then managed to make our way towards the door and walked

quickley into the ground.    We did not run.   We found ourselves in the

courtyard behind the turn styles and then made our way through the

underground tunnel into the standing area.     We must have arrived in the stand

about 2.45 p.m.    I would say that conditions were already crowded when we arrive#

there.    We were pushed forward by the pressure of the crowd behind us and pushed

slightly to the right so we ended up to the right of the rear of the goal         We

managed to duck under a barrier and I would say that we ended up in a position

about 6 ft from the safety fence at the front of the standing area.        I do

not know how it was that we came to be pushed over to the right, but looking

back on it this was obviously what saved us from grave injury.



                                                         «k

I was already feeling apprehensive because I was aware* not only of the

pressure in the stands, whioch already existed, but also had in the back

of my mind the whole time the large number of people who were still

outside the ground waiting to get in.




By this time, the crush in the standing area was worse then anything

that I have ever experienced in any other match that I have been to.




However I put these feelings down to the fact that I was in a strange ground

that I had never been to before and away from home and tried to dismiss

im- -fears from my mind.



I remember the teams coming out onto the field
When the teams came out and started kicking the ball about, I remember having

a strange feeling.   Some of the lads around me were singing.         I think I was

singing   but it was a half hearted feeling.   It was       a strangefeelingand I

cannot describe it but I have not asked my friends about this.



At 3.00 p.m. the vlistle blew for the match to begin.



Almost immediately I felt a tremendous pressure      on my ribs, and I was

struggling to breath.    I am used to pressure in the       standing,area inother

matches but this pressure does not usually last very long.         This pressure

was different it did not seem to go away.



I remember thinking to myself that I was not enjoying the match as I should

be.



Something happened to my vision, I could see the players and then I could

only see a red blur moving across my eyes.     My vision must have cleared

because I remember seeing a uniformed Police Officer walk by on the other

side of the fence.   I heard people to myleft, shouting out to him that

there were people dying.    He glanced over towards them but did not
                                                              «k


stop but carried on walking.    Although at matches, usually in the crowd

there is a lot of movement backwards and forwards that did not happen here

everyone was standing rigid because they were all being crushed together.



When the pressure came on, I was with my two friends one of them is

6ft 4 ins tall but another of my friends is even smaller than I am.

Because of the pressure from the crowd my arm was around my friends back

and around the back of     his neck.   I could see      that his face gradually began

to turn red and that he was uncomfortable because of my arm around him.

I tried to move my arm     but I absolutely could       not.I could    not move any

      ff my body, I was absolutely locked in by the     pressure on me.




I turned to my tall friend and said to him             ^0R GODS SAKE; HELP ME".       He
 knew he could not move either but said that he would and tried to give me a little

 encouragement.




 I remember seeing two lads who had got over the fence and they had managed

 to get     out and had climbed up the inside of the fence that is on the pitch

side.     They were on the top of the fence and they were pleading with the crowd

to push back and they crowd were screaming at them to push back and I could

see hands clasped as though they were in prayer.     They were jointed by a

uniformed Officer but I did not really see him doing anything to help.




One of the lads on the fence managged to reach down into the crowd and took

hold of my friend |
                  ______|and tried with all his strength to pull him up

but could not do so.     I remember seeing the camera man taking photos

through the fence and wondering why they were taking photos when I

was thinking that I was about to die.




This feeling persisted for what seemed at least 10 minutes but I cannot

be sure every ting is very disjointed.    I am not sure if a barrier collapsed

or what it was but I remember seeing a pile of dead people at my feet,       the

pile seemed to me to be about 4ft - 5ft in height and I even to this day

I can clearly see the colour of the shirts and the colour'of the hair of

some of the people in this group.     I realised only too well that they were

all dead.      It seemed to me that I was pushed up or got up onto this pile

of people in order to get up to the fence. I think my friend i      must
              a
have given me/hand because I had to shin up the fence in some way to get

to the top.     I managed to get over the top, but then my shirt and jeans

caught in the fence and I was trapped.     Someone took hold of me I think

it was a Policeman and he kept trying to pull me off the fence and I kept

shouting "MY JEANS, MY JEANS".     He must have thought that I was worried about
  my jeans but all I meant was that I was caught up by my Jeans.       He said

  "HICK YOUR JEANS" and by pulling on me managed to get me off the fence as my

 clothing     ripped.    I was now down on the ground and stumbled forward onto

 the pitch.     I was in a daze.   I was stumbling around.    I remember trying

 to catch my breath someone said "LIE ON THE GROUND".        I lay on the ground

 a I could feel myself struggling to breath trying to take big gulps of air

 into my lungs.    I was conscious of the fact that my ribs hurt.      I took

 five or six breaths and got back onto my feel I was        acutely aware of my

 friends and started screaming "MY MATES ARE DEAD, MY MATES ARE DEAD" because

 I believed that they were still inside the fence.        It was then that I saw

 my smaller friend and rushed over to him and said'WHERE       isl        and he

 said "HE IS ALRIGHT HE IS OVER E H E H EL PIN G".   My friend and I decided that

 we would go to help.      We ran across the pitch we came to the Police line

 across the pitch and a Police Officer asked us where we were going and we

 said that we were going to help and he let us through.       We ran to the far

side of the pitch where we saw a uniformed Officer tearing down the

hordings to use as stretchers. He      gave us one and this must have been

when I cut my right arm just about the wrifet although i did not notice

this at the time.       We aran back across the pitch with the hording and

put this down and someone was placed on it and then someone else took

this away.    We sat down on the pitch then and I could not believe that

I was on the pitch I was very confused and I know that the pitch is

restricted and could not quite understand how I got there.




We then saw all the hordings being piled up and throught that there must

have been no more use for them.      We could not believe what had happened.




By this time we were walking around the ground, sitting down for a while

and then getting up and walking around again.        This went for about 30 mins

and wf: remembered the two men who had been with us in the car.       They had

nlnnd   tickets by this I mean they had tickets for seats we tried to find

them and eventually saw them and made our way up to them.        They did not

seem to understand what had happened, and explained to them we thought
  6




 someone had been killed and I remember them looking close into our faces




 Eventually we managed to make our way back to the car and set off for

 Liverpool and put the car radio on and tuned into the news station and

 firstly ,we heard that 5 or 10 people had been presumed killed and then

 20 and then 40 and by the time we got to liverpool they were saying 70 .




Everytime that we heard the next number given over the radio it was like

a physical blow to us.




As far as my own injuries are concerned I had some bruising to my right

side of the chest and also a small cut on the inside of my right arm which

did not need stitching.   Whenever I look down to my left, I can see very

clearly the pile of bodies that I saw there.   The whole incident and is

still very much on my mind.   I often lie awake in bed thinking about it.




I told my friend ______ the tall one a couple of days after and asked him

why he appeared much calmer than we had in the Stadium aftet* the incident

and why he still appeared to be much calmer and he said   that he had never

thought that he was going to die.   That is the difference between [       Iand

me but I truely believed that I was going to die.
