'/-'I :
 *-\A x
                            Burke Edwards                                                                                            V   -   -




John Burke LLB                                                                                                                 583 Prescot Road,
Gerald Edwards                                                                                                                          Old Swan,
David Woods LLB                                                                                                                          Liverpool
Paul Bibby LLB
                                                                                                                                         L135UX.
Peter Murphy                                                                                                                    Tel: 051 2592595
Edgar Morris LLB Consultant                                                                                               VAT Reg No. 414 6735 54


T h e person dealing with
this matter is
                MR WOODS



                                                                                                                        27th April 1989
                 Our Ref:




                 Ms. N.C. Harrison,
                 Hillsborough Steering Committee,
                 Castle Chambers,
                 Cook Street,
                 Liverpool L2 9SH.




                 Dear Ms. Harrison,

                  I write    further to our               conversation                    of      25th April            1989    and confirm      that




                                    on the terraces, either                                                        or               from
                                   and                                                                             would be pleased
                 with you and assist.
                  I enclose!--- (statement, together with 3 copies of it and I would be obliged
                  if you would ensure that a copy is sent off both to the Police enquiry and
                  to the Judicial enquiry.     If necessary, ______________________________________
                  to the Judicial enquiry.

                  I would be obliged if you would also note my interest as acting on behalf
                                     and Mr.          both of whom suffered personal injuries
                  of Mr.
                  and suffered from shock as a result of the incident.

                  Yours sincerely,

                    ^ s U J ^    <Sre.V                         V,




34AllertonRoad, Liverpool L 1 8 1LN. Tel: 051 7342200
9 BroadgreenRoad, Old Swan, Liverpool 13. L135SDTel:051 2541666
302 Stanley Road, Bootle, Liverpool L20 3ET. Tel: 051933 6060
                                   Our lirm Is regulated by the La w Society in th e conduct o f investm enl business
                 3f                                         LiverDOol

Will say s-



I am a        year old                             as a

                                             Liverpool

I hold    a Season Ticket with Liverpool Football Club which entitles me to

watch each home match from the Spion _ Kop which is a standing terrace behind

one of the goals.         I have been following Liverpool Football Club on a regular

basis    since    I was   about   15 years old.    During that time     I have attended

most of the country's first division football grounds.

On the 15th April 1989 I travelled to Sheffield with some friends including

two other                   and we all intended to attend the F.A. Cup Semi-Final

taking place at Hillsborough that day.

We left Liverpool at 10.30 a.m. approximately and expected to be in Sheffield

in good time to meet some friends who were travelling from Nottingham.

Unfortunately due to builds up of traffic from Stockport near to the start

of the "Snake Pass" we did not arrive in Sheffield until about 2 p.m.

We only had time to meet our friends, have one drink a bite to eat and then

leave for the ground.

We left for the ground by car and after finding somewhere to park arrived

at the ground 10 minutes prior to kick-off.               I had in my possession both

a   stand ticket and a terrace ticket.            I decided to give the stand ticket

to a friend and watch the match from the terraces with 3 friends.

I expected that there would be a queue outside the ground and I expected

at that time that I would not get into the ground until after kick-off.

There were certainly a lot of people pushing and josstling to get into the

ground.     I did not feel the amount of pushing remarkable as I have on many

occasions seen such scenes outside big matches and outside Anfield and

Goodison.        A number of people were anxious to get into the ground and it

was obvious that it would be necessary for the Police to control the crowd.

There was in my view rather less Police than one would normally find outside

a big     game and    in comparrison to what      I am used to,   with the Merseyside
    Police at home games, they seemed to lack organisation.

    Police Officers on horseback were attempting to control the crowd by shouting

    to them to keep back but at no stage did I ever hear an address by megaphone

    or other amplifier.

    The   crowd did not appear to be particularly aggressive,             and they did not

    give the impression of being predominantly intoxicated.

    After a short wait I was surprised when the Police horses blocking our way
\
    parted    to allow us     nearer the ground and        I was   even more surprised when

    I was ushered towards an entrance which did not appear to have many people

    going through it.

    I and my friends went through the gate and we were                surprised to discover

    that we were at the wrong side of the turnstiles and that it was not

    therefore necessary for us to present our tickets (a photocopy of my complete

    ticket is attached).

After        visiting   the   gentlemen's   toilets   we   entered   the ground by what we

perceived to be the only entrance              from that vantage point.        This was     by

way of a tunnel which went under the stand into the centre part of the terraces.

The       crowd in the tunnel was quite dense and I was actually at that point

quite anxious about it but at that stage I dismissed my thoughts as being

    irrational.

On reaching the terrace the force of the crowd behind us became more intense

    and we were alsmost immediatey pushed to the front of the crowd within yards

    of the perimeter fence.

The crush from behind us was at this time quite severe but it was perhaps

    equal to that which I had experienced in the past and it was possible to

    lift one's arms from one side and to move              slightly both forward and back

    to the side.    Within minutes the crush had become so severe that one couldn't

move onels arms and there was extreme pressure on one's ribs.

    It was necessary to make an effort to breathe and I was becoming hot.                  The

    crowd was     still being pushed    slightly      forward with    nowhere for   it   to go

    so the crush became more intense.         The man next to me was complaining about

    the crush at first but quickly became desparate and started to ask for help.

    I indicated that I could not assist him because I could not move.
I initially thought that I would eventually be able to get out at the small

gate in the perimeter fencing onto the pitch but my view soon changed when

I saw the Policemen were having          difficulty in   pulling     the people   out of

that gate because of the weight of       the people behind.

I saw that those who did not reach the gate itself but the area either side

were   being crushed against       the wall.   The Police were shouting to people

to get back but by that time the crush had reached such intensity that nobody

was able to move in any direction and we were all totally helpless and our

fate was totally in the hands of outside parties.

I remained crushed for what seemed to be an incredibly long period and the

man next to me went red and then blue in the face and his cries became

steadily fainter.       I did not look at him again as I was at that stage trying

to use all my resolve to stay calm as I knew that to panic would lead me

to hyper ventilating and it was difficult enough to breathe as it was.

To my right there was a crush barrier.            There were people     crushed against

that barrier crying out in pain.          There   was a girl level     with me but her

leg was clearly behind the barrier and was breaking as a result of the

pressure of the crowd.

I was quite close to the front but it was obvious to me that if any room

did appear I ought to attempt to         get back as people were being crushed        to

the    front   and   I could easily be   crushed as get out.    At this      stage only

my toes were on the ground and my body was leaning forward about 45 degrees

to the    ground.     Suddenly there was a movement      in front of me and I felt

myself falling and       I managed to get my legs in front of me to prevent me

going under the       crowd to what would have been almost certain suffocation.

At that time when I was falling foward I saw that there were bodies on the

floor.

I prevented myself       falling   forward and pushed myself back using my legs,

placing    them on    another person who was on      the ground.      This   sickened me

but I had no choice.

Suddenly and almost       immediately after,   the pressure behind me        stopped for

a second and I was able to get myself some 5 yards back to safety.
    After a while I was able to push my way back to the entrance tunnel which

    was virtually empty apart from a couple of Police Officers.

    I then went back into the courtyard area by the turnstiles.

    In the courtyard area I sat on a wall talking to other people who were also

    shocked and dazed.
v
    There was a general feeling, and my feeling at the time that the disaster

was caused by the Police control of the crowd and           the    opening    of   the   gate

which allowed a lot of people into a small area.

At that time many people were upset and were shouting at individual Police

Officers     to    the effect   that   they were   responsible    for the    disaster which

occurred.

This, at that time and in those circumstances in my view was a justifiable

and reasonable response.         I only saw one person attempt to physically grapple

with a Police Officer,          and even then his actions could be put down to the

shock of the situation which he had found himself in.

There were no full scale attacks on Police Officers from what I could see.

At this stage the injured were beginning to trickle out brought out by Police

Officers and those who felt able to help.

I could not at that stage assist and in a shocked state I left the ground

to wait for my friends who were, as far as I knew still in the ground.

I would     like to      say that I was   not impressed by the Police operation of

controlling the crowd outside the ground or their initial corporate response

when the disaster struck.

The efforts of some individual officers were heroic but the action lacked

coherence or leadership.

Police incompetence        is in my view     not unusual   at such events and        I have

always taken the view that apart from the Merseyside and Greater Manchester

Forces who        in my view appear to understand how to deal with large crowds

(presumably from experience), few Police Forces have any proper idea.
I would also like   to comment on the paucity of the public address system.

At no stage were any coherent orders given over the public address system

to either the emergency services or the crowd.      If those orders were given

they would have been at the height of the panic and the public address system

was not in my view loud enough to be audible in such situations.

It is quite clear in my view that the accident was caused by the decision

of the Police to open the doors to all and sundry waiting at the Leppings

Lane end so as to enable everybody to enter only one portion of the ground.

Quite clearly, the vast majority of people went through the open gate rather

than through the    turnstiles and they were left in the situation where      the

only obvious way to go into the ground was through the tunnel into the

central area.

If the Officer who     took the decision to open that gate was aware of the

layout of the ground and still took that decision knowing that there were

be a crush, then those actions would be criminal in my view.

If he did not know the layout of the ground and was not therefore able to

make provisions to prevent people going into the centre part only and

provisions   to ensure that the people also went into the side areas,      it is

in my view negligent policing and the person who was in the position to make

such a decision     should have had the experience and the information to make

an informed decision knowing all the factors involved.
                          Burke Edwards                             GITORS
John Burke LLB                                                                                                               583 Prescot Road,
Gerald Edwards                                                                                                                        Old Swan,
David Woods LLB                                                                                                                        Liverpool
Paul Bibby LLB                                                                                                                         L135UX.
Peter Murphy                                                                                                                  Tel: 051 2592595
Edgar Morris LLB Consultant                                                                                               VAT Reg No. 414 6735 54


The person dealing with
this matter Is

                                                                                                               10th May 1989




               Hillsborough Steering Committee,
               c/o Castle Chambers
               Cook Street,
               Liverpool
               L2 9SH




               Dear Sirs,

               I write further to my letter of the 27th April 1989 which enclosed
                   tatement together with copies.  I enclose photocopy of    :icket
               which should have been annexed to that statement.

               I am now in receipt of bulletin number one, and can confirm that I
               shall advise you of the complete list of clients this firm are acting
               for shortly.


                          ithfully,




34 Allerton Road, Liverpool L181LN. Tel: 051 734 2200
9 Broadgreen Road, Old Swan, Liverpool 13. L135SD Tel: 0512541666
302 Stanley Road, Bootle, Liverpool L203E T.Tel:0519336060

                                   O ur firm i s regulated by the Law Society in th e conduct o f investm ent business.
                                                                                                      TOnrrr




                                                                                   _              -



                                                                                            •**«: •
                                                                       ' J */*»*■* . ^ ' •■», '



                         - v "   ' l




                    S'




                             »         i W       i i ^



                                                     .«** j?




                                                 M   K




                                             »   »




MSVvP\[:
         J *1.1 JI
        .:

        y ***:
             ?v"; •’
   a?
        ia g a
             kw?5                                              •■*s.
