                                                                                                 M ackrell & Thom as
                                                                                                                       Solicitors

                                                                                                   144 Liverpool Road
J o se p h M a c k r e ll L L . B .
                                                                                                  Page Moss
                                                                                                  Liverpool L36 3R G
                                                                                                  Telephone: 0 5 1 -4 8 0 3 6 6 6
                                                                                                  V . A . T . N o . 3 2 0 2341 23

                                                                    W h e n T e le p h o n in g o r C a llin g Please ask f o r :   jy jp   T id in g *



Your Ref:
                 : FAO ELIZABETH STEELE               Our Ref:   ST/LC/HARRISON/CIM.                                  Date      1 5 . 5 .1 9 8 9




             Dear Ms. Steele,

             RE:          The Hillsborough Eisaster

             We enclose herewith statement of Mr. John Harrison of 1-------------1 |
                                                                                   ---
             Liverpool in respect of the deceased son Peter Andrew Harrison and we await
             hearing from you.

             Yours faithfully,




              Mackrell & Thomas

              Ehc.




               FAO ELIZABETH STEELE,
               Hillsborough Steering Committee,
               c/o Castle Chambers,
               Cook Street,
               LIVERPOOL.
               L2 9SH
 STATEMENT OF JOHN HARRISON


                                     LIVERPOOL



 I first heard of the Hillsborough disaster by watching television and

my first reaction was of course for my son Peter Andrew Harrison

d.o.b. 4 . 5 . 1 9 7 3 .   I never actually saw Peter on the television

although my wife says that she did see him on           the floor wrappedup

in a blanket.          I immediately went to Hillsborough myself on the

Saturday, April 15 th to check up to see if myson was there and

alright.       When I got there I was shown into abig hall with Police

Officers and was questioned by the Police and some CID people who

asked questions concerning my son's name, age and his appearance.

I then identified my son from a picture, I think it was Number 22 and

then I identified the body itself.          I confirmed that my son was a

season ticket holder and he had bought the ticket from Anfield and

I was asked by the Police to make a statement there and then which,

although I was very upset, I did and subsequently signed it.          I was

then given a number of the Coroner to ring which I did on the following

Monday and he told me to make arrangements with funeral directors

to arrange the funeral.          The funeral took place on the 24th April.

We received subsequently a preliminary death certificate which

confirmed the cause of death as traumatic asphyxia.          I have never

seen or spoken to anybody who was a witness to ray son's death nor

heard of anybody who was and as far as I know he was never even taken

to hospital as I never received any notification that this was the

case.    I was later given all my son's clothes back.
