STATEMENT OF______

HOME ADDRESS:_____

D.Q.B. I

P.O.S.     02-05.89

STATEMENT FOR FILE:




On Saturday morning 15th April 1989, I travelled with some friends to

Hillsborough to watch the semi-final of the F.A. Challenge Cup between

Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.



We arrived at Sheffield a couple of hundred yards from the ground at

about 12.15 pm.       My friends decided that they would like to go and have

a couple of pints but as I do not drink I chose to go up to the ground

and obtain the match programs.



On arrival at the ground I found that I co-old not purchase any proerams

so I walked further around the edge of the ground to see if there were

any sellers there.       Unfortunately I could not find any so I approached

 a group of supporters and asked them if they knew where I could obtain

 some of these programs.      One of   the   lads   told me that he had been up

 to the football ground and been allowed in through the tum-stiles to

 purchase a program, and he had them retunned out* he couldn't believe

 how lax the security of the ground was.



 I walked around the ground for a while and eventually went into the

 ground through the turnstiles this was about 14.10 hours.



 Once inside the ground I made ny way throught the tunnel into enclosure

 >B» Leppings Lane where I had arranged prior to the match to meet my

 friends. I walked down into the ground up to about 5 foot from the

 front fence and stood waiting for my friends to arrive and the match

 to start.
At about 14.58 hours there was a teemendous surge forward and I

was pinned against the front by the ensuing crush.   Everybody seemed

to be pleading with the police to help but the police were telling

us to push back*



The crush was tremendous and the girl who was infront of me was

pinned to the fence I heard the policeman who was observing this

say "ITS NO GOOD DON'T BOTHER SHES GONE".



I eventually clambered over the bodies st ewn around until I reached

up and scaled the spiked xence.whereupon I colic,-sed onto the pitch.



Once I got onto the pitch I was crying and walking around not believing

the sites I had just seen or the crush I had just been in.



A group of Stewards walked over to me and asked me "WHAT HAS HAPPENED".

I couldn't believe this and just walked away*



The stewards appeared not to realise the seriousness of the disaster

and appeared totally bewildered*



As I walked around the ground I prayed that it was thanks to got that
                                           for
I had been released from the crush and also the people who I had

realised were already dead.



Eventually I sat down and watched a supporter telling the police what

to do.   The supporter was tearing down the advertising boards and using

them as stretchers to ferry the fans over to the medical services.      At

this point I was in shock when my other friend came over after spotting

me on the pitch and sat talking to me for a vhile*



We eventually left the ground at about half past four and made our way

to the car.   This took me about 40 minutes as the car was a good distance

from the ground.
On arrival at the car we tried to telephone by the public telephones

that where situated by the car park but unfortunately the queues

were too large and this couldn't be done.



Eventually we decided to climb into the cars and go home hoping that

we could telephone our families and friends on the way home.



tfe arrived back at about 9 o'clock that evening and I was in a

terrible state and infact had to keep the car window home all the

way home as I was sick.   By the time I arri ed home my mother was

watching the television and I observed myself climbing over the fence

and onto the pitch.



Since the incident I find that I cannot sleep and I have since buffered

intense headaches I thought I would o.k. but had to attend at my doctor's

Dr«                                Ion Thursday 27th April 1989.
