            Extract from Bulletin I t o Hillsborough Solicitors' Group

                                  3rd M ay 1989




Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry

The substantive Inquiry is to start at Sheffield Town Hall at 10.30am on the 15th
May 1989 and Lord Justice Taylor hopes to complete all evidence by the end of
June.   Through Counsel we made representations th a t part at least of the
hearing should be in Liverpool because of the problems of travel fo r witnesses.
He replied to say that he was conscious of the problem but that initially at least
the hearing would be at Sheffield.

At th e initial hearing representation was allowed fo r the following interested
parties only

Counsel to the Inquiry:                Andrew Collins QC

                                       Bernard Phillips

                                       Alan Goldsack

(The injured and bereaved)             Tim King (Instructed by Hillsborough S G)

Football Supporters Association        John Jackson (Counsel)

Sheffield Wednesday Football Club      Edwin Glasgow QC (Counsel)

Football Association                   John Dyson (Counsel)

South Yorkshire Police                 M r Woodward (Counsel)

Fire Service                           Andrew Robertson (Counsel)

Sheffield City Counsel                 Represented on Friday by Solicitors

Transcripts of the evidence will be made available and a copy kept at the Law
Library fo r reference.
Witness Statements

The Evidence to be presented w ill be determined by Counsel and Solicitors to
the Inquiry (the Treasury Team) who will consider all witness statements
submitted (either taken by the W est Midlands Police or submitted direct).
They will give advance notice of witnesses to be called but there is no
disclosure of all evidence submitted.    No witness w ill be called who has not
submitted a w ritten statement.

We have received at the Law Library a number of witness statements which we
have forwarded to the Home Office. They have made it clear th a t they would
rather have duplication of statements - i.e. submitted direct and given to the
Police - rather than to lose a witness on the basis that no statem ent was
received.

As we will not have prior disclosure of statements which the Counsel to the
Inquiry do not intend to call if you have already received statements from
witnesses, could you please let me have a copy and, if those statements have
not already been sent to the Home Office, please send the original and we will
ensure th a t it is immediately forwarded to the appropriate Department.




NOTE.     This document is subject o f jo in t privilege and the remainder o f the
document will not be disclosed. We have released this extract to explain how
the statements came into the possession o f the Steering Committee and were
subsequently disclosed to the Taylor Inquiry and thus lost their privileged
status.
