STATEMENT OP


D*0*B>
D.O.S. 25,4,89.
TAKEN m GT/U/EJVJb




On S&turday noming 15th J^uril 1989, I travelled with a couple of friends down
to Hillsbrough watching Liverpool - v - Nottingham Forest. Vfe cueaed t*> abcwt
2 -3 minutes everyone just seemed to be farced forward through the gates.


Havigg been forced through the tum-stiles I couldn't move side-ways or backwards
I was just passed foward until the mcvenent stopped and it was than that my face
ended tp being pjapmpd against the railings and 1 wound that 1 oculda#t breath

and I was feeling .dizzy I must have been there for about 5 — 6 minutes when a
couple of si^parters were nearby pulled me upwards and out of the crush and into
the stands for safety.


I had to stay in the stands Carid w : ® ^ 33 they were carrying out dead bodies
and trying to resuscitate people. I eventually got out of the ground at abcut
4.30p.m. and headed for a house were I cculd use a telephone. There ware people
ccroing out of the houses and offering us to use the telephones to ring our

families*


After telephoning ay family and letting them know that 1 was still alive 1 walked
back to the main bus and met vp with my friends. Ihe travelled home and arrived
at Liverpool at about 8.00 O'clock:.


1 was very badly shocked and didn't realise just hew badly that 1 had been injured
figpause i was trying not to think about it and putting it cut of my mind.


On Wednesday morning I was in such pain that 1 had to go dewn to the Royal
Liverpool Teaching Hospital I arrived there about 2.00p.m. and I was examined ^
ex-rayed by the Doctor and they had said that I have dislocated ray neck and Hm-i       tt,
side of my right leg.



I e^)lained to him that I hadn't been eating or sleeping and at the back of ray head
was in constant pain. The Ur. told me that the pain in the back of ray head was
ccnmon with usuries of this type and had probably only been felt on Wednesday after
over-caning the initial shock.


I now wearing a surgical support collar on ray neck and I am taking tablets for the
pain I am in need of sleeping tablets and I have been given these by ray Dr.


I am having nightmares and keep waking whenever my neck hurts.


I will never go to a football match again and I am very frightened of crowded places.


I blame this cn the police and the football organisation.
