SBftXESvJENT OF



D.O.B.
D.O.S. S>.5.89.

TAKEN BY GT/LJ/
FILE NO            Hillsborough



On Saturday morning 15th APril 1989, I travelled with friends with Barnes Travel
to Sheffield to watch the sfsni-final of the F.A. Challenge Cup finalbetween
Liverpool - v - Nottingham Forest at   Hillsborough Football Ground.


We left Liverpool at approximately 11.15a.m. and arrived in Sheffield at about

13.45.


On arriyal we went for seme chips and walked up to the ground inmediately.


On arrival at the ground at approximately 14.25 we entered to the main fence and

the ground outside was quite heavy. By the time we got to the tum-stiled the
ground was unbelieveable and at one point they even at to pull a girl out of the
way of a police horse to step her being tranpled on.



When we eventually $ot to the tum-stiles at about 14.45 after being ehuffed and
crushed we went intthrough the tunnel and notice that there was no movement whatsoe

in the ground. All 1 could hear was    screams shouts, so we forced ourway backwarck

and into the left enclosure just adjacent to the tunnel.


At this time all we had do was watch the mayhem in enclosure B form our position
in enclosure A.


We vould hear the screams and bodies being carried out it was an absolute carnage

We had to stay and watch what was happening feeling total ill and very shocked.


Eventually, we left the ground at about 16.30 hrs after the abbulanoes had cleared

and by the time.
we got to a telephone at 17.00hrs ray wife was absolutely hysterical* She had been
running around to friends houses to see if I had telephoned and was in fear for my

life.


After telephoning, we walked back to the coach to wait half an hour so for a couple

of people who had not turned up.


On the way back everyone was in tears and we were all very distressed. BE was a

terrible journey hare.


We arrived back in Liverpool at approximately 20.45hrs and 1 went straight hone.
I wished to add that 1 have been in a distressed and shocked state since this match
and even watching the television upsets me. 1 did not go to the Doctors as 1 thcugh
of all the people who had died that day and 1 didn't want to bother the Doctors

feeling that my own case was trival.


1 wab badly bruised and 1 am still in shock.
