SEftXEMEKP OF



D.O.B

D.O.S. 26.4.89.
        BY GT/LJ/

FILE NO




Ch Saturday 15th April 1989, I travelled with icy three friends             and

                and           down to Hillshrough to watch the match between

Liverpool and Nottingham Forest in the semi final of the F.A. Cup.



Wa left Liverpool at 10.00a.m. and arrived in Sheffield at about 1.00 06clock



We riptratod cn arrival that we would go and get same chips ana then walked down to

the ground.



Wa arrived at the ground at 14.15p.m. and walked straight through as they were not

that many people and walked into Section A we had realised what we had docsr so we

then noved cut and went into Section B   ( B already packed).



It was paHcpd but not cxxipletely so we walked straight through the middle tunnel

and just behind the goal.



At this point hhe pushing and shoving stafcted and we ended up being forced to the

left hand side of the goal about 15 foot fran the rails.   The time was about

14.40 to 14.45.



Things started getting packed just before 3.00 O'clock there wos a serge forward

were we ended up against the left hand enclosure fench.    I could not breathe

and leaned over against the fench to try and pull myself out.



I eventually got into the next section and I was trying to re-gain ray breath

there weee dead bodies everywheere I couldn't believe it and I just sat watching
 I dedided that I could take no more and may my way over the fench and onto the pitc
 ware I had spotted ray friends.



 Wa decided to leave at Bbout 4.00 JSclock and walked back to the car.



 Cta arriving at the car we decided that we should telephone from one of the Service
 stations in order to let iqy family knew that vmere      alive and cfe.



 On arriving hone we debated that would have a pint- Wiich we did and I wasnot
effected very much until Tuesday morning 18th April 1989.



I awake on that day ray back was M&jgg badly.       I decided that I should go and see
my G.P. I vent to see Or.             who gave me pain tablets in the form of

Paracetamol and told me that I should see a Social Worker. On speaking to a

warker she   spent   most of the time telling me the experiences of her two son's who

had been there at the match.      Suffice to saythat I did not appreciate this advice
and left.



The Social Marker has since been to see me each week on 26th April 1989, and I did
not wish to speak to her.



My Solicitors told me to consult a Social Warker it is in ray best interest.
