snaBiatr of
H0>3 ACtHISS;

P.O.B. ■

P.O.S.     33.04.09

S’l/au.'ii'i'r I«CH FILE:




We left Liverpool at 7.30 am on the trftin to Sheffield to watch the

Semi-final of the F.A. Challenge Cup Final between Liverpool and

Nottingham Forest ®t Hillsborough.



My friends who were with me were




Ue arrived in Sheffield at 10*15 ain and hailed a taxi to a public house

       the ground.          We had a few pints at this public house The Mason Arms

and left at approximately 14.40 hours.



I walked up to the ground with my friends and arrived outside the gates

at approximately 7 minutes to three.            I know this for a fact because a

follow supporter asked me the time and I looked at my watch.



As I was about to walk in through the turn-stiles             W   police opened the

corrigated iron gates and the crowd rushed in and             we proceeded towalk

through these gates into the ground and nobody checked our tickets.



Once inside the ground we were pushed by the ensuing crowd all the way

through to about 5 foot jp,rora the £ence -ip?the front of the Leppings Lane

»B‘ enclosure, infact I appeared on the News at Ten that evening in full

view of the cameras and videos of the match.



Because of the crush I could not breath and thought I was going to collaps

or even die         peopel were holding me up to prevent me falling and I began

to lose consciousness.           The peop e in fronttof me were dying and I realised
I coulw't help because I was trapped.      I eventually freed    ray arms

and helped my friend                t>ver the fence.     As soon as I had

done this I looked down and saw a man lying against the wall who was.

beai’ly conscious I picked him up and passed over to my friend and in

the process ripped ray jacket, t-shirt and jeans on the fence.



After climbing over the f^nc.?. myself I just lay on the pitch in pain:a

St. Johns ambulance man came over and gave me a glass of water.



I just lay there watching people being carried around and other people

being rescusitated.



At about 4.30 pin when I had regained composure I ireft the ground and

went back to the pub to find m y .mates.



Once we had arrived we walked up the road to a near by house were we

knocked on the door and asked someone to let us use the telephone to

ring home and let our family know we were o.k.



The ownere of the house offered us a lift up to the station and I just

wanted to get home.



We caught the train and arrived back at Lime Street Station at approximately

0.30 pm that evening.



We want to the Crown to wait for another friend who we could not find in

Sheffield as his girlfriend was waiting on the platform for his arrival.



I went home that evening and could not sleep.



I was in shock all day Sunday and still feel ill.



On the Monday I went to my doctor, Hr.              of

                  who gave me sleeping tablets and painkillers for my ribs

and muscles.   I had to go back to him on 24.04.89 and he has now told me

to stay off work and gave ine a doctors note, a copy of which I have given to
solicitor.



X will never go to a match again.   I stil. Teel very tired and ill and

despite being a fanatical Liverpool fan X cannot bring rayself to

continue•
