                              HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

                         SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF MR. AND
                                  MRS. ASHCROFT.


1. We do not propose to make any submissions in relation to the matters directly
   appertaining to the circumstances at the Ground. These are well covered by
   submissions made by others*

2. The submissions which we wish to make relate to the facilities available to
   the families of the dead and injured following the Disaster..

3. The information facilities available for the families were totally inadequate
   to cope with a Disaster of the magnitude which occurred at Hillsborough.
   Emergency telephone numbers were provided but it is quite clear that the
   emergency numbers provided were totally inadequate to cope with the numbers
   of enquiries being made. It was only as a result of approaches made through
   Warrington Police that any information at all was given to Mr. and Mrs. Ashcroft.

   It became plain on the Sunday morning that something serious had befallen
   Mr. and Mrs. Ashcroft's son as he had not returned from Hillsborough. A full
   description of their son was provided on a number of occasions and Mr. and
   Mrs. Ashcroft were told on more than one occasion that there was nobody
   fitting that description amongst the victims of the Disaster.

5. Whilst we appreciate the sensible desire of the Authorities to try to prevent
   their emergency centres being swamped by distraught relatives, an invitation
   to Mr» and Mrs. Ashcroft to visit Sheffield was not made. It was a suggestion
   made by Mr. and Mrs. Ashcroft at approximately lunchtime on the Sunday which
   resulted in their travelling to Sheffield. We accept that we are judging this
   matter with the benefit of hindsight but we feel that it was not unreasonable
   to come to the conclusion that if somebody who had attended the Match had
   not returned home by early Sunday morning that something serious had occurred
   to that person. At that point there was still a number of unidentified bodies.
   Consideration should have been given at that point to the question of inviting
   the families to go to Sheffield to assist in identification procedures.
