                   THE EVIDENCE OF DR. MORGAN O'CONNELL
                               19th June 1990
                           Examination in Chief)


            Mr.   Hytner: Could you indicate your relevant experience.

             Mr. O'Connell: In 1982 I was a member of the task force
which was deployed for psychiatric cases during the Falklands conflict.
Following this experience I developed an interest in the recognition and
management of post traumatic stress disorder.   The team of which I have
been a part has been involved in disasters both civilian and military.
I was specifically concerned with the treatment   of those who were
considered to be in need of treatment.

            Mr. Hytner: Is there a distinction between psychiatric
illness and emotional upset?

            Mr. O'Connell: The distinction is one of degree, the
psychiatric illness requires treatment.  Emotional upset may well
antedote a psychiatric illness.

            Mr. Hytner: Is it accurate to say that the psychiatric
illness is something that can be treated by doctors?

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes.

            Mr. Hytner:    Is the term depression used in two quite
different senses.

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes.  If depression is used by professionals
then it is used in relation to an illness.

            Mr. Hytner:   Is depression an illness with known specific
symptoms?

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes.

            Mr. Hytner: Is grief following bereavement necessarily an
illness?

            Mr. O'Connell: No.

            Mr. Hytner:  Is there a condition known as pathological
grief, which is a recognised conditon?

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes

            Mr. Hytner: Would pathological grief be disabling in
relation to the person's conduct of their ordinary affairs?

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes

            Mr. Hytner:   Is there a condition known as nervous or
physical shock?




                                                 cont/
            Mr. O'Connell:  There is a condition known as physical
shock.  When we talk of nervous shock I understand it to mean to
person's temporary inability to respond to their environment.  I do not
myself use the phrase nervous shock, although I think it means that a
person has been overwhelmed by his or her experience over a period of
time.

            Mr. Hytner: Is post traumatic stress disorder a recognised
psychiatric illness?

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes.

            Mr. Hytner: What are the symptoms of post traumtic stress
disorder.

            Mr. O'Connell:  The individual must have been subjected to
an event which is outside the normal human experience.  As a result that
person becomes preoccupied by the experience and this might include
nightmares, or a sudden preoccupation with the event during the day.
This leads to an avoidance of stimuli related to the event in order to
prevent the person from becoming upset.  You will also find a change in
themselves and an often apparent change in their personality, for
example, a wife may say that the man she married is no longer the man
she is living with today.  An individual may find that certain sights,
sounds, taste, smells and touch remind him of the horrific experience
and lead to mood swings, agression, anxiety of a pathological nature and
alcohol abuse.  In the concept of PTSD it is important to deal with the
individual as a whole, and not as part of the make up.

            Mr. Hytner: Would a car accident produce PTSD?

            Mr. O'Connell: A car accident may not produce PTSD, but it
might.

             Mr. Hytner:  Is fear for one's own safety or the safety   of
others   anecessary or normal pre-requisite for producing PTSD?

             Mr. O'Connell:   It is a necesary pre-requisite.

            Mr. Hytner: Is it necessary for the development of PTSD for
that other person to be injured or killed?

             Mr. O'Connell: No.

            Mr. Hytner: Is a build up of tension which is unrelieved by
the knowledge that that person is safe a normal incident of PTSD?

            Mr. O'Connell: That knowledge is significant in the
development of PTSD.  It is not necessary but if it exists, PTSD   is more
likely to happen.

            Mr. Hytner: In psychiatric terms is there any material
difference to the diagnosis whether someone in fear for another's safety
searches physically or orally by means of a telephone.




                                                  cont/
             Mr. O'Connell:  The opportunity of being active is means of
 reducing the pain and agony depending on how substantial the information
 is which is obtained as a result of that activity.  I would hate to be
 faced with the decision as to whether to wait at home or to go out and
 search.

            Mr Hytner: What steps taken by people in fear     are likely to
cause PTSD? Are you saying that someone who fears for the safety of a
loved one is likely to    seek in one way or another what has happened, but
until they do so there    will be a build up of tension?

             Mr. O'Connel: Yes         "
                                   *




             Mr. Hytner:      That build up of fear is a cause of PTSD?

             Judge:   It is more likely to happen as a result.

            Mr. Hytner:  Communications of death.       Is that oral
communication of death a cause of PTSD?

             Mr. O'Connell: No.

            Mr. Hytner:  In your own experience once someone knows of
the bereavement, would seeing a recorded TV broadcast or hearing a
graphic oral description of means of death be a cause of PTSD?

             Mr. O'Connell:     It is something which would aggravate the
situation.

            Mr. Hytner: Within the development of PTSD would you draw a
distinction between pre-knowledge of death and post knowledge of death?

            Mr. O'Connell:      It is the uncertainty which is important in
the development of PTSD.

            Mr Hytner:  If a person is in fear and then views something
horrifying which is related the cause of the fear, and the person knows
of the event and then sees a body in grim circumstances, is that a
likely cause of PTSD?

             Mr. O'Connell: Yes

             Judge: That is'before the knowledge that the loved one is
dead?

             Mr. O'Connell: Yes

            Mr. Hytner: What is the significant period relevant for
causing PTSD? Psychiatrically speaking what is the significant period
of the aftermath?

             Mr. O'Connell:     Up to the cessation of ligitation.

            Mr. Hytner: You have not understood my question. Assuming
that nobody has yet got PTSD, what is the last event in this saga which
is likely to cause it?

                                                    cont/
            Mr. O'Connell:  I don't know and I don't think that question
can be answered.  PTSD can be present some years after the event.

            Mr. Hytner: Someone may watch a programme in six years time
and get PTSD?

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes, although there is some debate as to
whether you get PTSD or whether it merely comes to light and is
asymptomatic over that period.  The individual must in some way have
been sensitised by the experience, and you can think of it as a cupboard
in the mind in which all memories are pushed, the door is then latched.
At a later stage something happens which opens that cupboard.

            Mr. Hytner: Have y<Ai any doubt as to whether the tension
build up after watching the t.v. and the fear for others is part of the
aftermath?

            Mr. O'Connell: I have no doubt.

            Mr. Hytner: Is identifying bodies in a temporary mortuary
part of the aftermath?

            Mr. O'Connell: For some people.

            Mr. Hytner: The circumstances where someone knows that a
person is dead but identifies a battered body.  Is that part of the
aftermath?

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes
                     CROSS EXAMINATION BY MR WOODWARD


            Mr. Woodward;  The questions of aftermath which have now
been raised are not dealt with in your generic report?

             Mr. O'Connell: I did not report on them specifically.

            Mr. Woodward;    This is the first time that you have
expressed these opinions.

             Mr. O'Connell: Other than in dicussions, yes.

             Mr. Woodward; psychiatric illness is a complex and difficult
matter.

             Mr. O'Connell: Yes

             Mr. Woodward: Even for you a complex and 'difficult matter?

             Mr. O'Connell: Yes,   I am learning all the time.

            Mr. Woodward: You appear to be saying that an individual
exposed to an experience can continue to be exposed to that experience,
for example through war films and documentaries.

             Mr O'Connell: Yes

            Mr. Woodward:  Does   it follow that if the events portrayed
in that film or documentary are   horrific then the person may succumb on
seeing that film.  It is the film which makes the difference?

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes but the film does not have to be related
to that experience.  For example I have treated a naval man who was
reminded of his experiences on HMS Coventry by seeing pictures of the
Herald of Free Enterprise on its side during the Zeebruge disaster.

            Mr. Woodward: Is it inconceivable that that person was not
ill until he saw the film?

             Mr. O'Connell: Oh indeed, yes.

            Mr. Woodward: You seem to be saying thatthere is    a
potential in events depending on how and when they are portrayed which
may set off PTSD.

            Mr. O'Connell: It depends on how that individual sees the
event having been sensitised.

             Mr. Woodward: Sensitised?

               Mr. O'Connell: If we treat the brain as a computer and the
brain is   so overwhelmed by the messages that   are fedintoit that it
fails to   operate properly (not a full note).

            Mr. Woodward: In the example given, prior to seeing the
news, the person didn't have PTSD or psychiatric illness?

             Mr. O'Connell: Yes.
                                                  cont/....
            Mr. Woodward:  In the incidents which you give, you state
that watching the news could produce psychiatric illness.  Might not an
illness be produced by hearing an account by words alone?

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes.

            Mr. Woodward: If words are graphic, emotional or
thoughtlessly expressed will they have an effect?

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes.

            Mr. Woodward: There is no means of protecting an individual
from this in a practical way?

            Mr. O'Connell: No.

            Mr. Woodward: There is no means in limiting it in time as to
when this might occur?

            Mr. O'Connell: No

            Mr. Woodward:  There is no means of limiting it in space or
place to where it might occur?

            Mr. O'Connell: No.

            Mr. Woodward: In order to produce psychiatric illness in
consquence of an accident, it is not necessary that that accident be
frightening for the individual.

            Mr. O'Connell: I would say that it is in the sense that the
individual must be traumatised or effected by it.

            Mr. Woodward: Is there any means of predicting how an
individual can be expected to react?

            Mr. O'Connell: No not completely.  There are normal
responses but I can't say completely how a person will react to a given
situation.
            Mr. Woodward: Is there any recognised criterion of
normality?

            Mr. O'Connell: What is abnormal is one community will not be
abnormal in another.  If a group of psychiatrists who went to the same
medical school, were from the same background, and were treating the
same patient, then you may get a consensus of opinion.  There is a broad
spectrum with abnormality at each end, and what is considered normal is
somewhere between the two extremes, (last sentence paraphrased).

            Mr. Woodward:   Are these matters on which opinions differ?

            Mr. O ’Connell: Yes.

            Mr. Woodward: May psychiatric illness follow in a normal
person upon a bereavement.

            Mr. O'Connell: It may.

                                                 cont/
              Mr. Woodward: When you talk of grief and psychiatric illness
  following bereavement, what psychiatric illness are you thinking of?

              Mr. O'Connell: The commonest psychological illness
  associated with grief is depression.

             Mr. Woodward: May a feature of that depression be a dwelling
 on circumstances in which the individual died?

             Mr. O ’Connell: I don’t understand.

             Mr. Woodward: May a feature of the suffering be an obsession
 with the manner in which the deceased died?

             Mr. O'Connell: Yes.

             The Judge:   Does that answer depend on the death involving
 trauma?

             Mr. O'Connell: Yes, and if there is a period of uncertainty
 surrounding what happened to that person.

             Mr. Woodward: May a psychological illness develop after
 looking after someone who is disabled or an ill person, grinding down as
 a result of looking after them?

             Mr. O'Connell: Yes

             Mr Woodward: Could you remind us of the symptoms of post -
 traumtic stress disorder?

            Mr. O'Connell: nightmares, concentration difficulties,
irritability, aggression, mood swings, sleepnessness, and an obsession
with the events concerned.

            Mr. Woodward: Not necessarily all of these symptoms would be
present?

            Mr. O'Connell: No.

            Mr. Woodward: Is anxiety capable of producing these
symptoms?

            Mr O'Connell: Some of them, it is not my experience that
anxiety would produce nightmares or a pre-occupation with an event
during day to day living.

            Mr. Woodward: In psychiatric illness would you agree that
psychiatric illness may be a product of a single cause or a number of
causes?                                          r
                                              r


            Mr. O'Connell: Yes.

            Mr. Woodward: Where there are apparently a number of causes
is it the case that.you may not be able to say with any degree of
certainty which was the significant cause?

                                                   cont/
            Mr. O'Connell: You may be able to identify the critical
cause leading to the onset of the illness.

            Mr. Woodward:    Is that necessarily the cause?

            Mr. O'Connell: No, but we can look for one during treatment.
The people I have seen in relation to this incident suffer from
illnesses other than post traumatic stress disorder.

            Mr. Woodward:  Does that include psychiatric illnesses which
have common symptoms to PTSD?

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes.

            Mr. Woodward: How is it possible to determine that
particular symptoms relate to a particular illness?

            Mr. O'Connell:  For example you may make a diagnosis of
anxiety and treat it, but the underlying cause of the anxiety is
depression of which anxiety is a symptom.

            Mr. Woodward: You make an assessement, judgement?

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes.

            Mr. Woodward: Is sleepnesses a feature of      many psychiatric
illnesses? Are you able to say whether sleeplessness       is a consequence
of one of two possible causes?

            Mr. O'Connell; It could be both.

            Mr. Woodward: You haven't seen the T.V. programmes?

             Mr. O'Connell: I saw the broadcast on the day in question,
and I have subsequently seen a video tape of the evidence submitted at
the enquiry.   It was one side of a video, over 2 hr video tape.

            Mr. Woodward:  Was some of this video taken at the time of
Hillsborough, but not necessarily broadcast?

            Mr. O'Connell:   Yes, some of the tape was from security
tapes.  Ican't say I have    looked at all the material, but I have looked
at an awful lot.

            Mr. Woodward:  May I ask you about                  (refer to
pages 98-100).  May the commentary be a material factor?

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes.                    *
                                               /


            Mr. Woodward:  May the camera work be a material matter, the
close ups, the panning shots?

            Mr. O'Connell1
                         . Yes.




                                                   cont/
            Mr. Woodward:  May the presentation and editing of the
broadcast be a material matter? It would appear that people were
viewing Hillsborough, then there would be a return to the studio and the
person concerned would therefore have their concern disturbed by the
intermittent quality of the broadcast.  Is that a material fact?

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes, in my opinion it emphasises the
unreality, the awfulness of the situation, and the natural reaction of
the person viewing, is that no it's not happening.

            Mr. Woodward: The cutting back would emphasise the unreality
and make it worse for the viewer.

            Mr. O'Connell: I hesitate to say whether it makes it worse,
but it makes it more difficult to distinguish between fact and non fact.
 It is the not knowing which made it more difficult for people to handle
(it referred to page 101b of the bundle).

            Mr. Woodward:  She refers to an afternoon of desperation.
Is it your view that the psychiatric illness which)___________ (suffered
may already have been caused by the time that her husband went to
Sheffield.

            Mr. O'Connell: It may have been

            Mr. Woodward:  Those events at           s home where she
was endeavouring to get information were part of the cause for her?

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes I believe so.

             Mr. Woodward: So the broadcast in its particular context
and the receipt of that broadcast in its particular context.  Would it
be material?

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes.

            Mr. Woodward: In relation to |
                                         __________ | is it fair to assume
that hisreaction would be  the same by the time he went to Sheffield?

            Mr. O'Connell:Yes, but he   may be   different.

            Mr. Woodward:   Are there any means of telling?

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes by getting his history from him. I am
sure there is away of finding out how far he was affected at that time,
although at this time I am not able to say.
                                                  r

            Mr. Woodward:  By the time that you had examined him a whole
number of factors had come into play.  May publicity be a factor?

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes.

            Mr. Woodward:   Is it the case with psychiatric illness that
the individuals are affected by factors that they are not aware of as
affecting them at the time?

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes.

                                                  cont/
            Mr. Woodward: Prospective litigation?

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes (he was referred to page 191 and 91a).

            Mr. Woodward: Looking at this account was there sufficient
to have produced PDST at that point?

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes

            Mr. Woodward:   It is events up to that time which the
Plaintiff dwells on.

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes (referred to page 194)

            Mr. Woodward: You set out an emphasis on the commentator's
voice as he read out the number of deceased?

            Mr. O'Connell: yes.

            Mr. Woodward:   You then deal with the identification of the
son at the mortuary.

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes.

            Mr. Woodward:  It doesn't appear that identifying a body was
something that he emphasised in his account.  Would that be fair?

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes

            Mr. Woodward: He only gives a factual account of what he
did?

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes




                                                        cont/
             Mr. Woodward: Would you say that the identification and the
 events at Sheffield made any difference to the outcome?

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes the identification may have had a
positive or negative effect on the outcome.

            Mr. Woodward: So you cannot say that the experiences at
Hillsborough made a material difference.

             Mr. O'Connell: Equally I cannot say that it didn't.

            Judge: Is it a parallel with a situation where death follows
illness and whether to see the body is a decision for the individual?

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes, although that decision is made over a
period of time.
    i




            Judge: The sight of the body may be a release or it may make
things worse?

             Mr. O'Connell: Yes (referred to                   svidence,
page 209).

             Mr. Woodward:  It would seem that as a result of the news
__________ suffered stabbing pains in her heart and became panicky.
Would knowing that someone was there and not being able to get through
be capable of causing a psychiatric illness?

             Mr. O'Connell: Yes

            Mr. Woodward: Could that of its own produced the illness
which she suffered.

             Mr. O'Connell: Yes.

            Mr. Woodward:  That experience, the news and the shock,
panic, trying to telephone and then seeing her parents upset is likely
to have caused psychiatric illness?

             Mr. O'Connell: Yes

             Mr. Woodward:   And as far as you can say it may well have
done?

             Mr. O'Connell: Yes.

            Mr. Woodward:    There were then further phone calls which
added to the trauma?

             Mr. O'Connell: They add to the tension.

            Mr. Woodward: By the time this lady sees the t.v. her
parents have gone off to Sheffield and she is at home with her aunties
and believes her brother may be at the hospital.  Did what she saw on
the tv make any material difference to her psychological condition?

             Mr. O'Connell: It exacerbated her condition.


                                                 cont/
            Mr. Woodward:     A condition in your view which was likely to
happen anyway?

               Mr O'Connell: Yes

            Mr. Woodward;  Did you know when you wrote you report that
she had studied videos of the event in order to help the Police?

            Mr. O'Connell: I don't know, I can't say with any certainty
that I knew this when I wrote the report, (referred to              Page
198).

            Mr. Woodward: At 2.30.p.m. she had already heard something
on the car radio. At that time she was not affected by what she heard.

              Mr. O'Connell: Yes

            Mr. Woodward:  Her trauma appears to have been produced by
the news in the context of what she had already heard.

              Mr. O'Connell: Yes

            Mr. Woodward:  The event capable of producting pyschiatric
illness was that sudden revelation that her brother was at the ground.

              Mr. O'Connell: Yes

               Mr. Woodward: She says that she felt the panic rising in
her.     Is that a classic description?

              Mr. O'Connell: Yes indeed.

            Mr. Woodward: I would like to refer to                Are you
aware that there is a medical report on this matter by              (refer
to page 179 of the bundle).       ____________|was witnessing the events,
                             When |
he believed that his brother-in-law was safe?

              Mr. O'Connell: Yes.

              Mr. Woodward;  There is a reference to his experience at
Hysel.    Would this be a material matter?

              Mr. O'Connell; Yes

            Mr. Woodward: Would seeing what was happening on the
terracing be sufficient to produce psychiatric illness?

              Mr. O ’Connell; Having seen what he saw at Hysel, yes.

            Mr. Woodward:  Was the responsibility of looking after his
newphew a material matter?                   «•

              Mr. O'Connell: Yes.

            Mr. Woodward: The feeling of responsibility for his brother
in law, although quite wrongly?

              Mr. O'Connell; yes.

                                                  cont/.....
            Mr. Woodward:  In looking at "these cases it is difficult to
point out a single matter whereas in others you can indicate a stage
where a prognosis is set.

            Mr. O'Connell: I have got to say yes (he referred to |       ~
      page 128).

            Mr. Woodward:   Is the raising of hopes and the dashing of
them a very material matter.

            Mr. O ’Connell: Yes (refer to page 131a.

            Mr. Woodward: Was breaking the news to the children in such
a situation likely to cause her to suffer psychiatric illness?

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes

            Mr. Woodward: Are you able to say whether the identification
of the body made any material difference.  Read to yourself the
condition of body at the time of the identification.

            Mr. O ’Connell: Yes I would say that what she saw would have
aggravated her condition, and made what was already a serious condition
somewhat worse.
                          MR HYTNER - RE-EXAMINATION


            Mr. Hytner:  If someone saw a wife, child, and best friend
killed in an accident and suffered a depressive illness afterwards,
would it be daft to ask a doctor how much depression was caused by
seeing each individual killed?

            Mr. O'Connell: I think I could answer that as a person is
most clearly affected by the death of a close relative than a friend.
Similarly the death of a child affects people more than an adult.  I
would therefore put them in the order of child, wife, and then friend.

            Mr. Hytner:    Are some consequences of tragedies common to
all and some vary?

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes.

            Mr. Hytner:  As tragedy unfolds, will a person be subjected
to a whole series of events?

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes.

            Mr. Hytner: Will some of those experiences in the
experience of a psychiatrist be likely to cause psychiatric illness?

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes

            Mr. Hytner:    With others it might cause psychiatric illness
but not likely to?

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes

            Mr. Hytner:  If you get a person who goes through the whole
range of experiences from being involved to identifying bodies, to
breaking news to close relatives, the whole range of experience, would
it be sensible to ask which event caused the PDST.

            Mr. O'Connell: I wouldn't attempt to identify one cause of
another.

            Mr. Hytner: It ’s impossible.

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes.

            Mr. Hytner: If asked what would you say caused the PDST?

            Mr. O'Connell: the major trauma, the individual's perception
of an event which is outside their normal human experience.

            Mr. Hytner:  If someone watches the event unfold on tv and
is then told that someone she knows has been killed in that event.  Is
that sequence of events a possible cause of PDST?

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes.

            Mr. Hytner; If you were told first and then see the sequence
on tv is that a likely cause of PTSD?

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes.


                                                   cont/...
            Mr Hytner: Does it matter to a doctor which way around the
events occur?

            Mr. O'Connell: No.

            Mr. Hytner: You have been asked about a lady who heard about
the events on the radio and then saw the tv.  The lady suffers from
PTSD, a symptom of which is the nightmares of the event.  Is it likely
that she would have nightmares of the event if she had not visual
perception of the event?

            Mr. O'Connell;   It is less likely.

            Mr. Hytner;  You have been asked if mere oral communication
can cause psychiatric illness.  Is it a possibility that someone told of
the death of a relative or close friend in a disaster and then being
given a graphic account of how they had died. Is it possible that that
could cause PTSD.

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes

            Mr. Hytner:   Have you ever come across such a case?

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes

            Mr. Hytner: How many?

            Mr. O'Connell: In the naval situation I have come across
sailors who have heard of the manner of death of others.  They
themselves have been members of the Task Force or have been waiting to
join and have suffered psychiatric illness as a result of hearing how
the others died.

            Mr. Hytner:  In a sample of 1000 people if you tell them or
they know that a wife or husband or brother has died, what level would
you expect to suffer from a psychiatric illness?

            Mr. O'Connell:  I don't know but I would expect it to be in
single figures.  Studies indicate that only a small percentage of people
go on to develop psychiatric illness following a simple bereavement.

            Mr. Hytner:   It would not be normal.

            Mr. O'Connell: No

            Mr. Hytern:  To draw parallels with another condition.   If
somebody suffers from constitutional degenerative changes in their back
and then suffers trauma to the back and experiences symptoms thereafter,
some doctors say that the cause of the symptoms is the trauma whilst
others state that the cause is the degenerative changes in the back.
You can accept that they are concurrent causes.

            Mr. O'Connell: To be semantic I consider a cause has a
beginning and an end and degenerative changes I therefore do not
consider to be a cause.


                                                    cont/...
            Mr. Hytner: To draw another parallel, skin has a protection
against certain irritants, if you remove that protection then a person
will suffer irritation when the skin comes into contact with another
irritant.  Both are causes of the condition,  do you agree.

            Mr. O'Connell: yes.

            Mr. Hytner:    Is it a common occurrence that a person
develops post traumatic stress disorder or symptoms of PTSD years after
the event?

            Mr. O'Connell: It is becoming more common as the medical
profession recognises the syndrome.

            Mr. Hytner: Have you ever known a person to develop PTSD or
symptoms of PTSD years after the event when the person has never
originally been involved in the original event?

            Mr. O ’Connell: No

            Mr. Hytner:    somebody who has not been sensitised by the
particular event will not be caused to suffer PTSD by watching tv three
years after the event? Is that likely to happen?

            Mr. O'Connell: No.

            Mr. Hytner: Is it correct to say that in order for PTSD to
develop in the long term there must be initially the underlying
condition caused by the participation in the event in the broadest
sense.

             Mr. O'Connell: Participation must be there but not
necessarily as an underlying condition.  When PTSD was first diagnosed
in 1980 it was categorised as chronic, acute, and late onset.   There was
then some discussion as to whether PTSD was present throughout or
whether it developed at a later stage (last sentence paraphrased).
However, a recent study involving a group who had been subjected to
trauma and who were returned to at a later stage found that there were
people then showing symptoms of PTSD who had not shown them initially.
I now believe that we are back where we started and that there is a late
onset category in relation to PTSD.

            Mr. Hytner: Is it more likely that those whoparticipate      in
an event will develop PTSD within a year or later.

            Mr. O'Connell: It    is more likely that it will be sooner than
later.

            Mr. Hytner: Of millions who saw the match on tv and
thousands at the match only 150 claims have developed.  Is it likely
that more or less will come forward in the next six years (no note was
taken of the answer).

            Mr. Hytner: Do you see any distinction between naval
personnel and civilians in delaying coming forward for treatment? This
may be because of a macho belief that they do not need treatment?


                                                   cont/
            Mr. O ’Connell: They may perceive this themselves as there is
always a macho element in men who are regimented together.

            Mr. Hytner: Does this element occur more in naval personnel
than in Hillsborough victims?

            Mr. O'Connell: Yes
