STATEMENT OF

HOIffi ADDRESS

D.O.B

D.O.S.   26.04.89

STATEMENT FOR FILES




I travelled down to Hillsborough to watch -the football association

challenge cup semi-final between Liverpool and Hottingham Forest.

I di this by means of Hardings Coaches a subsiduary of Amberline

with a firend called



We arrived at the ground at approximately 1.30 pin and walked straight

thrwt^h the tura-stiies andinto enclosure ‘B'.



At 2;45 pa the ground was becoming more 'and more packed and that

was when the pushing started.



People at that point were starting to climb over the fence to get

away froiri the 'crush.



The ground was too tightly packed fome to     able to do this and at

3 o'clock panic broke out. ‘



The police were standing around but looked completely lost.    They

appeared to be shouting at us to stay in the enclosure.    At one poiot

a lad who was trying to escape from the crush had his hands knocked

forcing him away from the f nee and back into the crowd.



I was then forced up against the fence and realised I couldn't breath

properly.



Eventually X climbed up the perimeter fence once the crush had subsided

slight and realised there were dead bodies everywhere.     I could see

this distinctly from the 'C* section were X regained my breath.
Eventually I walked down to the fVont and climbed through the gate

in *C* Section which was open and onto the pitch*



I started looking round for my friend and when I eventually found him

we helped the St* Johns Ambulance and supporters ferry fane across

the pitch to the medical services.



At 4*50 pm we made our way out of the ground to a house where I telephoned

home to let icy parents know I was still alive.           We eventually made our way

back to the coach and arrived back in Wallasey at 8.10 pm.            I went

striaght home to my parents.



I stayed off school on Monday 17th April and my parents had informed

the school of iqy predicament.       „,c     ...... ; ,



I couldn't sleep until the Thursday evening when my brother moved back

into my room to confort me.



My House {tester               of          School in Wallasey has suggested

to ^y father that I obtain a counsellor regarding this



I intend to do this as I am still, very upset about the matter and feel

as though I do reed some help.
