Statement of |
             ____________

P.O.S. 26/4/89

D.O.B.



On Saturday morning the 15th April 1989 I travelled with my friend to

Hillsborough to watch the semi-final of the F.A. Challenge cup match.



We left Liverpool at 12.00 p.m. on that day and travelled down arriving

at 2.30 p.m.



On arriving the area was packed and the turn styles were still shut

and we waited outside the ground entrance just inside the large metal gates

that had been left closed by the Police.



At this time people were being crushed and screaming and this was prior

to 3.00 p.m.


                                     and
The Police them opened the main gate/the rush carried us in through the

gates and into the tunnel inside the Leppings Lane end enclosure B.




Once inside enclosure B we were forced about 20 — 30ft against the fence

and we could not believe how tightly packed we were.             The   crush was

terrible and I realised that I could not breath.            Because of this my

legs felt weak and I could not hold myself up any longer and fell to

the ground.




I started to try and scramble up through a small gap that appeared and

as I did I helped a young lad up and passed him to an older gentleman

to hold up.



Before I could actually get up and the          crowd pushed forward again and

I again fell to the ground.        This time I did not think that I w o u l d ever get

up I thought that I was going to d i e a n d 1 whs v----vy IV i i?h l.miCi).   Ml   "i-   nfl
 people were crying and screaming in panick




          seemed to lean down from no where and picked me up and held me

thjere because my legs were very weak and he tells me my face was

purple.




The next thing that I could see was that               had climbed over and

was on the pitch he started shouting to a Policeman that I could not

breath and could he .help and and all he said was hang on.




Eventually after 5-10 mins a lad pushed his back towards the fence and

helped me upwards using his hands as a footstep whereupon a Policeman

grabbed my hand and pulled me over the fence.



1 lay down on the pitch to get my breath and on doing so started to

help           grab people out of the crush.



Eventually St. John's Ambulance man came over and told us to sit down

and that he would get us a drink.



I was trembling badly and every shocked.        I stayed there for-   a while

and left the ground at about 4.00 p.m.




We went to the car and on the way home called into a Granada Service

Station on the Ml to phone home and say that we were O.K.        We eventually

arrived back home in Prescot about 6.30 p.m. that evening feeling

pretty bad.    On the Monday Morning the 17th April 1989 I went to see

the Doctor who told me that I was suffering from shock.        My knee

cap was also badly swollen and he gave me an elastic bandage to support

: -    I t o l d my Doootor that I could not sleep and he gave me sleeping

  v 'ets find also paj'i killers for my neck.    I have also been told that

1 need to see a Councellor.
