A d u n J. Pem berton, LL.B
Jonathan R. Brayshaw, LL.B
Richard H . Grimes, LL.B M .A
                                        Watson Esam & Co                                                                                                        16 P aradise Square,
                                                                                                                                                                  Sheffield SI 1TY
                                                                                                                                                              Telephone (0742) 753350
        Consultant
                                                                                   Solicitors
                                                                                                                                                                       MDX 10551
David R . Brayshaw, LL.B                                                                                                                                           FAX No. (0742) 768277



r                                                                                                1
        The Secretary,
                                                                                                                           O u r R ef.                    AJP/BJ
        Liverpool Law Society,
        Castle Chajnbers,                                                                                                  Y o u r Ref.
                                                                                                                                                          8th May, 1989.
        Cook Street,                                                                                                        D ate.
        Liverpool,
        L2 9SH

L                                                                                                J


       Dear Sir,

       re: Hillsborough Disaster

       I understand through our Local Society Secretary that you are co-ordinatin-
       claims m the above matter.

       I enclose a copy of the letter I w r o t e to the Enquiry. I have nou: been
       interviewed by Police Officers conducting the Enquiry and h a v e made a
       further statement to them.

      Yours faithfully,




                                A lso at: 1 Bridge Street, Killam arsh. Telephone Sheffield (0742) 487172
                                  T h is F i r m is re g u la ie d by t h e L a w S o c ie ty in i h e c o n d u c t o f in v e s tm e n t b u sin e ss
                                                                                       16 Paradise Square,
Adam J. Ponboton, LLB
Jonathan R. Brmyihcw, LL.B
Rkhtrd H. O rion, LLB M A
                               Watson Esam & Co                                          Sheffield SI 1TY
                                                                                     Telephone (0742) 753350
                                                  Solicitors                                MDX 10551
      Consultant
Dsvk)R. B nyihiw , LLB                                                                 FAX No. (0742) 768277



r                                                       n
                                                                   Our Ref.
      Geoffrey Dear, Esq.,                                                     AJP/BJ
                                                                   Your Ref.
      Chief Constable,
      West Midlands Constabulary,                                  Date.       18th April, 1989
      c/o Sheffield Police Headquarters
                                                                               PERSONAL
      Snig Hill,
      Sheffield, S3.                                    J
L

       D ear Mr. D e a r,
                                          WTT.T fmCBOUnH    DISASTER

                                     POLICING OUTSIDE LEFPINGS LANE
                                       AT APPROXIMATELY 2.45 P.M.


       I arn aged I years, Senior Partner of this firm and went to the Football
       Match w ith my two f r i e n d s fro m L iv e rp o o l, one o f whan i s r e t i r e d a n d one o i
       whom i s a

       We planned to arrive at Gate "A" of Leppings Lane entrance at 2.30 p.m. to
       meet a friend there.   We had a ticket for him. We had £14.00 ickets for the
       North Stand.    We approached the Ground from Penistone Road having parked a
       long distance away.     When we got to the Penistone Road side of the Ground
       just before 2.30p.m. we were told that we'would have to walk right round the
       Ground to gain entrance at the Leppings Xane end.   However we were not able
       to go along any of the small roads from Penistone Road to Leppings Lane i.e.
       Vere Road, Fielding Road or Bickerton Road but were told we had to go right
       to the roundabout at Herries Road where we should turn left.   This we did.
       This delayed us. I did not expect to have to make such a detour.

       I would estimate we arrived outside the Leppings Lane entrance at about 2.40
       p.m.   We would have been there earlier had we not had to make such a long
       detour.

       When we got there, there were many people in a great mass outside the Gates.
       There seemed to be no queues for the entrances.

       We were unable to see out friend in the crowd.    Because we were already in
       the crush moving towards the three Gates "A" we were unable to stop and wait
       for him but were pushed forward towards the Gates.

       So far as I can recall there were a number of Policemen outside the big blue
       Gates, some of whom were on horseback.    They seemed to be doing nothing at
       all to control the crowds.

        I saw ttc> ill tumour or jSrurikeness of any sort outside the Ground.  There
             no anger until I was pushed right up against the brick cabin holding
        the turnstiles.       Because we were all being crushed from behind we were
        getting frightened and angry. People were shouting back over their shoulders
        asking those behind not to push.
People were shouting at the Police Officers by the side of the turnstiles
demanding that they ask their superiors to take action.

I would estimate that I was in the crush1 outside the three Gates marked
"A" for the North Stand between about 2.40 p.m. and 2.55 p.m.

I was eventually crushed up against the brickwall of the turnstile.     By
this time I was separated from my companions, both of whom are about 6ft
tall.    Immediately in front of me at one time was a woman in a white
annorak.    She was being crushed against the wall and became hysterical.
She could not move towards the turnstile because of the weight of numbers.
Somehow or other those of us around her managed to push back from the wall
sufficient for her to get through the turnstile.

At this time there was a young male Police Officer and and young woman
Police Officer immediately in front of me.   I had been pushed over towards
the right, away from the three Gates marked "A”. I think that the woman
Police Officer was manning the Gate at the right.      As I got near to them
the crowd around me demanded that the male Police Officer do something and
he tried to climb the brickwall of the Cabin housing the turnstile.   He was
not able to do this but I believe eventually got through the turnstile to
the inside of the ground.     The woman Police Officer remained in front of
me.    She became more and more alarmed as she was being crushed against the
brickwall.    She did not seem to say anything at all but looked completely
terrified. I think she got into the ground just before me.

I eventually got tothe righthand of the, turnstiles marked "A" when the
crowd swayed again tothe left.       The person immediately in front of me
seemed to have only half a ticket and the person on the turnstilesaid
something to him, to which he replied that he had lost the other half in the
crowd approaching the turnstile and could not bend down to pick it up.   -He
was allowed entrance to the ground.         I followed him in through the
turnstile and would estimate that I was on the inside of Gate "A" at
approximately 2.55 p.m. because I just got to my seat on row "H” of the of
the North Stand just as the game started.

Having got through the turnstile, along with many other people I immediately
turned to my left where there were a number of Police Officers - I would
estimate between 10 and 20 standing about.     People were screaming at them
and shouting with great anger to take control of the situation outside the
gates.    A black Police Officer shouted something back to me, I am not sure
what he said.

Many people walking from the turnstile to their seats were angry and
incredulous at the scenes that we had just been through outside the gate.
When I arrived at my seat my I year old male friend was white faced.   He
said he had been supporting Liverpool for a very long time and had never
seen such ineffective crowd control outside a ground.

I was very shaken
                      AFTER THE INCIDENT INSIDE THE GROUND

Very soon after the incident a man in the row behind showed me the whole of
his" ticket.   He had not had to part with any part of this in gaining
entrance to the ground.     I remember other people nearby saying that they
had not been asked for their ticket.
From my seat I had a clear view of the Leppings Lane enclosure behind the
goal. ‘ Along with many other people it took me a long time to realise that
something serious had occurred when the game was stopped.     I think that
there       very sad failures to deal with the situation.               the
failures that occurred after the game was stopped, I would list tne
following:-
1.       For a very long time no medical help was given to people who               were
        obviously injured and lying on the pitch.

2        For a very long time, most of the Police on the pitch stood about
        doing nothing, even when spectators were carrying their injured and
        dead friends on advertising hoardings towards the far end ol the
        ground. Sometimes the Police and the spectators helped to carry those
        that were injured or dead.
3.       It seemed a very very long time before any Ambulances                arrived
        anywhere near the Leppings lane end of the ground.

4.      The tannoy loudspeaker system was hardly used at all either to direct
        the crowd or to inform the crowd. • I heard no demand for a Doctor or
        other medical services up until the time I left at about 3.55 p.m. I
        heard only one request early on for the spectators to clear the
        pitch.
       I heard one request that spectators clear the Leppings Lane enclosure
       which also was a long time after the incident.

 5.      No use was   made of anyone in authority including the two Managers to
       give either     encouragement, information or direction.       This was
       particularly    unfortunate as for a long time much of the crowd were
       unaware of     the seriousness of what had occurred and there were


       occasional dangers of confrontation, particularly when one Liverpool
       fan ran towards the Nottingham Forrest end of the ground.

 6.     No use was made of the Electronic Notice Board up until the time I
       left the ground.       People around me were particularly angered when
       it became clear that people who were dead were being carried past us
       and the Electronic Notice Board continued to give out advertisements.

 On walking away from the ground with m y friends_I saw m a n y ^ p e o p l e who   were
 very distressed and extremely
                        extreme  angry with the Police.         I saw many          many
 people shouting at the Police.
Whilst I have no knowledge of the immediate cause of the crush in the
Leppings Lane enclosure that caused people to die, I am in no doubt that the
lack of effective crovA control outside the Leppings Lane entrance between
approximately 2.30 p.m. and 3.p.m. caused a very serious hazard and risk to
life.

I hope you can acknowledge receipt of this letter.

Yours in very great sorrow,




    Solicitor.


P.S.   This Statement was dictated by me at my Office at about 6 a.m. Sunday
morning, 16.4.1989.
