STATEMENT OF

HOME ADHRESS:

D. 0 . B.

D.O.S.      02.05.89

STATEMENT FOR FILE




On the morning of Saturday 15th April 1989, my friend and I travelled

by hire car to Hillsborough to watch the semi-final of the F.A. Challenge

Cup between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.



We left Liverpool at 9.45 am and arrived in Sheffield at approximately

12 o'clock.     On arriving we had a couple of pints and left the public

house at 2 o'clock.



On arriving at the ground we walked up to turn-stile »B' where there

were quite a lot of people queuing to gain access.    A Mounted policeman

was tiging his horse to force people into the rails and through the

tum-stiles.      As 1 watched he knocked two people over and did not appear

to be apologetic at all



As 1 entered through the turn—stile 1 noticed £hat the police had opened

the concertina gates to the left of <me and there was only one policeman

on that gate who was not checking tickets at all.



I walked through the tunnel on the; inside and into the ground.    The

crush from the people who had gained access through the gate forced

us down through the ground and up to about 10-15 foot from the fence

at the front of enclosure       . This was about 2.55 pm.



Just after kick-off everybody appeared to crush forward causing me to

be forced towards the fence at the front.     The screams and shouting

and crying were overwhelming, all I wanted to do was to escape the crush
Because of the downward movement of the crowd and my proximately

to the gate I was eventually catapulted out and onto the pitch.

1 tried to regain some composure but my back was hurting so much

1 doubled over in pain.



Eventually, to make room for other people to be rescued from the

crowd^I climbed over still in pain to section *C* where I was

helped by the police.     1 Just stood watching what was happening

and disbelieving my own eyes.     I stayed in the stand for approximately

10 minutes when 1 could take no more, 1 climbed out of this section

and into the side of the stand where there was a gap and walked out of

the ground.



My three friends were with me,                               and \

            We walked together back to the car and used some nearby

telephones to ring home and let them know we were o.k.



Later on, about an hour later, the lads from the other car came and

we realised that         was missing.   Ve went to the nearest Police

Station where they told us which hospital people were being taken to

from the ground.   On finding that the Royal General Hospital was being

used we all decided to go there to see if          lad been admitted.



On arrival, we were told to go into a waiting room rvhere we were

give descriptions of the dead and injured but         was not described

as one oi these.



Two of the lads stayed whilst we went back to the Police Station were

they had opened up a hall for people looking for friends and relatives

involved.   This was -to no avail so we walked back to the cars to see if

he had made his way there •                                 v



At about 6 o'clock the other lads arrived with no news whatsoever of

      whereabouts so we decided to go back to the Boys Club Hall that

the police had opened.
 We were told at the police station two hospitals had a number of

 people who had not been identified.    We decided to drive to these

 hospitals to see ifI      was there.



 On arrival at the hospital at HQltisham we were told to described

      but he was no there and that the dead were being kept for

 identification at Hillsborough.



We travelled back to the ground and two of my friends went in and

looked at some photographs but realised that)      |was not amongst them



We then went back to the Boys Clubsbut by this time it had closed

and policemen directed us to a ch irch hall that had been opened

to cater for friends and family of the injured and dead.



We sat there for a while and kept on ringing his home as we had been

told that a number of people who had been slightly injured had been

taken back to the station am) put on a train home.



At about 1.00 am we travelled back to Halisham hospital to see if he

was there but this was also to no avail.



After about half an hour we went back to the church hall and stayed

there.



Four of the lads who were with us went back to the ground to see if he

had been placed there and after looking at some photographs went in and

identified his body and came back and told us that they had identified

him by a cheque that fts had on him with his wife*s name on it.



We eventually decided that there was no point in staying and decided

to go home to Liverpool.



                              s mother-in-law to tell her that         had

died and pass the message on to her daughter who was       s wife
We eventually arrived back at Liverpool at 6 o'clock in the morning



I went to hospital on 17th April with bruising to my ribs whereupon

I was x-rayed and went to see a Social Worker.



I was told by the doctor who examined me tha there was nothing broken

but 1 had internal bruising so he gave me tablets for the pain.



Since then I cannot sleep at all and when I do eventaully fall aslesp

I wake up screaming in the night waking my wife up and waking up in

the morning with splitting headaches and find that they are now

continuing on into the day.



I went back to work on Wednesday 26th April 1989 and started trembling

twice.   Although X feel a bit better whilst in work because my mincf

is active 1 still cannot get these occurances out of my mind.



I have had to take 11 days off work and may even need more time.



I still have my ticket as proof and have given this to my solicitor.
