Dooley Si C o                                                                                                                    Solicitors                       Commissioners fo r Oaths



P. O. BOX No. 5                                                                                                                                                              K. A. □ □ □ L E V
                                                                                                                                                                             0 . J . T A Y L O R , B. A.
12 2 CHERRYFIELD DRIVE,                                                                                                                                                      T. M . M U R P H Y . LL.B . H O N S .
KIRKBY, MERSEYSIDE L32 BAA                                                                                                                                                   J . P . B R O W N , LL.B . H O N S .
                                                                                                                                                                             1. A. S . F O R O , LL.B. H O N S .
Telephone: 0 5 1 -54B 991 1
Fax:           0 5 1 -2 7 0 2 0 9 5

VOURRER                                OUR PEF.


                                                                       W S C / 4809                                                                         7th August 1989

  Hillsborough Steering Ccmnittee,
  C/0 Gastle Chambers,
  Code Street,
  Liverpool,
  12 9SH.


  Dear Sirs,

  RE:
  HniSBCROUGH - MXJIRY PART 2

  Vfe enclose herewith a copy of a letter which we have received fran our client in respect of the
  above.

  Yours faithfully,
  DOOLEY & 03.,



                                                                                                                         c?




                                                            A L S O A T 1 4 6 Q U E E N S O R IV E , L IV E R P O O L L 1 3 0 A L
                                                                          TELEPHONE: 0 5 1 - 2 5 6 7 7 2 2
           th is   f ir m j$ r e g u l a t e d   by t h e    law   so c iety   in t h e c o n d u c t   o f   in v estm en t   b u s in e s s u n d e r   t h e financial s e r v ic e s   act   ite6
                                                                    Ormskirk



                                                                    4th August 1989



Dooley and Co.
P 0 Box No. 5
122 Cherryfield Drive
Kirkby
Merseyside


Dear Sirs                                                      ::

HILLSBOROUGH - "INQUIRY PART 2"

I refer to your letter dated 31st July 1989, on the above.

I would be very much obliged if you could submit the following to be considered at
the Inquiry for dealing with recommendations for the future:-

1.   In no way should the Authorities feel complacent that the events at
      Hillsborough were merely a ’one-off’. For example, I attended a Semi-Final
      Match at that ground ten years earlier in 1979. Then, fortunately, I was in
      the seated area above the terracing on Leppings Lane and how a similar
      tragedy was averted I will never know.

2.   As was asserted before the match, the F.A. should have given greater
     consideration to the numbers of people who follow particular teams. Ticket
     allocations on a pro-rata basis to a Club’s average home league games is the
     simplest and fairest method of ticket allocation.

3.   Generally speaking, all Authorities connected with football should become
      fully conversant of the particular ’cultures’ of football supporters. For
      example teams such as Liverpool and Manchester United have massive support
      and it follows that when not enough tickets are supplied for certain matches
      e.g. Semi-Finals and Finals there is a likelihood of numbers of supporters
      travelling away without tickets and any number of ways of entering grounds
      without tickets are attempted.  Conversely, supporters of teams who have
      occasional success and therefore have smaller followings, such as Nottingham
      Forest and Norwich City (as in last year’s Semi-Fina3S) are not nearly as .
     concerned if they do not happen to receive tickets.

4.   Given 3« above, Police should therefore more carefully consider the control
     of particular sets of supporters and at particular matches.   Perhaps
     different concentrations of controls and strategies that accord with a given
     situation.   For example, consigning Police into certain sectors of the ground
     is far too inflexible and is shown to be a very short-sighted arrangement.

5.   It is very obvious that there has to be greater inter-communications between
     Police and Stewards, both inside and outside football grounds.
6.   Clearly, greater provision and attention should be given to the direction of
     such crowds by Stewards and Police. Notices headed ’'Standing'* at only one
     entrance to terraces simply is not good enough.

7.   I am firmly of the opinion that it was not the perimeter fencing that
     prevented people escaping, although ultimately this proved to be a formidable
     barrier against the safety of beyond. Notwithstanding the opening of gates
     and turnstiles outside the ground which precipitated the problem, the
     major cause was due to the lateral fencing controlling the numbers into
     individual pens. Had these fences not have been there, the crowd would have
     at least had a chance to disperse to either the left or right of the
     terrace. This had been my intention.   The use of these lateral fences should
     be abandoned forthwith.

8.   Finally, this is the only time I can remember somebody asking for my views on
     something which I consider I know a great deal.  I would recommend the
     Authorities, in particular the F.A., to work in unison with supporters
     associations instead of creating inertia and a *them and us1 situation.  If
     any one group of people know what problems there are at football and how to
     address them, they do.

Yours faithfully_________
