I I
  ______________\>f

say as follows:

My ‘phone number if              I was born on



I recall on the occasion of the Hillsborough disaster I went with several

friends to the match.     It was an organised party and we went on Barnes Coach Travel

Agency.



We arrived at 2.30 p.m. and went straight to the football ground.

It took approximately 15 minutes walking.



The police were stopping every coach on the way to the ground and searching

the coaches and taking off any quantities of beer.        Our coach was simultaneously

stopped and only found one can of beer.        This I believe was the reason

for such large amounts of people being at the ground late as the stopping

of our coaches caused long delays.     We left Liverpool at 11 a.m. and did

not arrive until 2.30 p.m.     It was extremely crowded.



There were police in attendance who were stopping people singing

and confiscating drinks.



I had a ground ticket and I swopped it for a stand ticket.

I got into the stands at about     2.55 p.m.

When we got to our seats we looked into the crowd and it seemed very congested

in the middle section.     They did not allow the two outer sections to fill up.

I recall the previous year I went to Hillsborough and they seemed to filter

sections.   This year it did not seem to be happening.

There was a great deal of confusion.     After the kickoff I did not really watch
                  r




the match as those of us in the stand were all aware that something was not quite

right in the ground.     The match proceeded for approximately 6 minutes.

We noticed a policeman running to the referee to stop the game.

A friend of mine still had his full ticket and managed to get into the ground.
2   ...
I togehter with four other lads whom I don't know pulled a policeman

into the stand who was also suffering from the effects of the crush.

People were trying to get onto the pitch, however, the police on the

perimeter of the ground were stopping them climbing over.

I don't think they realised what was going on in the centre of the enclosure.

We shouted to them to go back to the 15 yards line as we could see what

was going on.



People were running on to the ground and collapsing, we tried toassistdragging     peof

out of the ground onto the stands as much as we could.

There was lots of screaming and we saw lots of dead people.

It went on for a good half hour.    The first ambulance came onto thegrounds   some 25

minutes after it had all started.



I am a                and as a result of what I witnessed have been very

badly upset and as a result of the same have had many sleepless nights.

It has also had a bad affect on my health in that I have lost my appetite and

have not been able to eat or sleep.
