STATEMENT OF




D.O.S. 22.5.89

FILE



Will say:

1 am       rears of age, my date of birth being



On 15th april 89 I travelled by coach to see the semi-final cup game between

Liverpool and Nottingham Forest at the Sheffield Wednesday ground.      I was

with two friends,               ana
                                and m
                                    his
                                      s brother
                                        orccner               age
                                                              ageda             srrs

respectively.     My ticket was for the Leppings Lane end of the ground.



The coach arrived at Sheffield at about 2.40 p.m. the roatfah was due to

kick off at 3 p.m.     The coach had been delayed by traffic and roadworks, we

had left Liverpool at about 11 a.m.    When the coach stopped a police constable

got cm and told us we were not to take any cans etc. into the ground but

we were not escorted to the ground.    It took a few minutes to get to the grounds

I was searched by a P.C. before going into the ground, my ticket was dealt

with and I went in.    Anoither P.C. was making random searches and I was

searched again.    I bought a programme and followed everyone who were going

into a tunnel, there was no one there to direct us and the policeman was

merely carrying out random searches.     When we emerged from the tunnel   we

were on the back of the terrace, there was still no steward or anyone else about

to help us as to where to go.    Ve couldn't see from the back of the terrace so we

pushed our way down towards the front.    WE got down to the first barrier back

frcBi the pitch, we decided we could see from there and stayed there.

Kien we first got there we were fairly comfortable but after a couple

of minutes the crowds started to build up around us.

We could still see and at first weren't bothered because we were used

to watching matches from the Kop at j£Anfield where we often were in crowds.

At this time the players were on the field but the match had not actually

started.    A short time after the kickoff, only a few minutes after, things
2...

in the crowd around me started to go wrong and I began to feel worried

for my own safety.

I panicked and started to cry,    I lost contact with my friends and a large

man who was trying to push his way to the front fell on roe* He was shouting ’Keep me

lads*.   I was able to keep my feet but was being crushed against the side fence.

I was terrified of falling because I thought that if Idid I would die.

A man could see I was crying and in trouble and he got hold of meand

helped to keep me upright.   A path was eventually made for people

to get through with stretchers and scone of the crowd had got from the front

and things got a bit easier.     I had not bothered with the game   since I

panicked, but I think by now the game had finished.



The man who had helped me took me through the tunnel and outside.
Before moving I had seen some bodies lying in the front of the terrace.

When X got outside the ground there were a lot of ambulance men and St.Johns men

attending to injured people and there-were bodies with their faces

covered up and 1 realised those people were dead.



The man who had helped me met some friends.    Ke made sure I was alright,

I thankid him and he went off with his frienc’s.    My two friends had got

out safely and were waiting for me so we made our way back to the coach.

There was no one in the coach but the driver was sitting on the back seat

reading his paper.   First the driver wouldn’t let us on as he knew nothing

about the trouble, he eventually let us back on the coach and put the radio

on and he then heard about the trouble that was happening.

Other people started to come back to the coach in ones and twos, it then

said on the radio that they migfrt try to restart the game but we said we weren't

going back on that ground even if they did restart it,

I think it was Radio Nottingham we were listening to at the time who said

this.



Our coach filled up but we didn»t leave for some time, all the coaches seemed to leave
at once as though on police instructions.

It would be about 6 p.m. when we left.

Our coach stopped at a service station to give us the opportunity of

using the telephone to ring hocae to say we were safe.   I wasn't able to get through

to my home but was able to get through to someone else who took a message to my

mother and father.



I arrived home at around , 9 p.m.

I keep getting a recall about the incident, particularly when I am on my

newsround, I keep feeling claustrophobic» and in frustration one day

I kicked out at a door at home.     I don't like my mum giving me a goodnight

kiss or hug as I used to, I don't like it and throw her off because it

makes me remember when all the people were crushing round me at the football

match.



It sometimes comes back to me at school, my teachers have noticed that my

experience has altered me.



A boy from               3ied, his name was Philip Howard.

I had seen the dead bodies and it has made me think about death.

Philip and I         blayed together in a Sunday League and         should have

played the team that Philip was in the following day.
