 -.-aH’istfr o f



D.O.B.

P.O.S. 13.5.89.

TAKEfl BY GT/LJ/

FILE NO 88/16226/



On Saturday morning 15th April 1989, I v^nt by coach with my friends   to Hillsborough

to watch the semi-final of the F.A. Cup Final between Liverpool and Nottingham

Forest.



We left Stoke at 11.30a.m. in the morning and arrived at Sheffield at 14.30hours,



The crcwd was tremdous when w    got there but W3 got through the entrance into

the tunnel and w    were carried by the crowd into the ground.



Because of this crush I think that I must have been farce against the barrier as

I vain great pain    and I felt my jeans ripping when It was caught on the edge of

sanething I felt a terrible pain in icy ankles and I couldn't breath I must have

been about 3-4 foot off the ground.



At this point I passed out and came around as I was being passed over the heads of

other fans who was slapping rny face and saying don't die, stay awake the fans pushed

me over their heads and I headed towards the back of the ground where X was lifted

into the stands above the enclosure.



At this point I was semi conscious and I only ransitoer being carried through exit

X and being laid on the floor by the tall entrance against the wall.



Another fan approached me and said that he was a trainee Nurse and placed me into

the rec'overy position he. asked me where I was hurting and I told him By ribs

testicles and ankle.    In talking to this man he explained that he was frcm

Woolton and that he would stay with me and keep me awake until   the nedical services
  Alter a w h ile a            can** over and a:,K:.I l2u s       jihb   was X       Uso iuan said

  he has broken ribs and suffering frcm shock I still' semi conscious at this tin**

  and kept on wanting to go to sleep.



  Although things were vauge a nixriber of other people came over including an ambulance

 man who said that he would get a stretcherto me         as soon as possible.



 After about 40 minutes an Antmlance man came         to me with a blanket and proceeded to

* put me onto the blanket with the aid of two policeman and this man fran Woolton.



 They carried me to the Antoulance using this blanket where I was taken with a nunber

 of other fans to the Northern General Hospital in Sheffield at about 4.45p.m.



 On arrival at the hospital there was absolute chaos and 1 was left in a corridor

 until aDr. came to see me.      The Doctor examined me and went away.
                           *          '




 After a couple of minutes a weman cane over to hold my hand and take me away and

 to generally comfort me.      She explained that she had been off today cane in to

 help to attend to the dead and injured.



 Eventually, they took me into the instant ward were there was complete chaos whilst \

 I was lying therewas     pecple who were close to death and pecple who were being

 resuscitated and I just didn't want to watch, everytime I closed ny eyes so to                      '
                                                                                                     »i


 not to look at this the nurses and Dotors came and shook ire to make sure that I
                                                              /                                      i


 kept my eyes open.



 I really didn't know what was happening, I just couldn't believe that I had just                    )

 prior been to a match and all this was actually happening to ire.               They were times

 when I actually felt that X wanted to dip with them and I didn't have to observe

 this any longer.     Also I was in great pain and I just felt like giving in canpletely.
    After a while the Doctors came over to me and stripped me and again mejleft me there

    for a while.



    Another Doctor came over and said 'Your (Sc new you can go', at this point I couldn't

    even lift my head.   Just after this Doctor walked away another Doctor came over and         •;

    said 'Your going nowhere sen', and wrote on my leg    testurine for blood and send for '

    full ex-rays.
I




    This they did.



    They ex-rayed my ribs and pelvis and I was then taken to Ward 66 were I was placed on

    a bed.
                                                                                                 *




    At about 7.00 O'clock   the nurse came and I was given injections in my rear and I

    eventually went to sleep.



    I woke up at about 8.00'Clock that evening and somebody had brought in a portable

    television so we watached the news.   When I heard that at least 70 was dead I

    couldn't believe what was going on it really hit me then and I just broke dcmn

    in tears.



    At about 11.00 O'clock that evening my mother , father andgirlfriend cane over to

    me to see me and eventually left at about 12.45p.m.



    I stayed in hospital until the next day I was discharged at 13.30hrs.



    On Manday morning I went to see my G.P. and he signed meoff    for two \reeks andgive,

    me pain tablets and advised me to see a social worker.
                                                                                             i




    On the Friday before I was due to go back for work he signed me off for another week

    and insisted that I relax.



    1 wet-; to.ld that I had suffere^fa^nbad_^ush injuries that is seVere_^us|n3jr^i^ B^_M-
       'pipe was crashed and   testicles were badly cut and bruised.    Also my ankle was
    bruised and sprained and I had severe shock.



    In the crush I lost my trainers and my jeans were ccnpletely ripped into two at scne

'
    point or other X wet myself in pain my underpants were ccnpletely lost as they were

■
    ccwerrd in blood and urine and had to be cut off.



    I also wish to add that my shirt was ripped and this cost ne £40.00.    My training

    shoes ware also lost as mentioned above and these cost me £50.00.
