 blftjB&ittNT Uf



 D .Q .B .

 P.O.S.      4.5.89.
 TAKEN BYGT/LJ/

 FILE NO



 C*i Saturday 15th April 1989, I travelled with ray friends                 yy car

 down to Sheffield to watch the match between Liverpoall- v - Nottingham Forest.



 We left Liverpool at 10.I0a.iu. and arrived in Sheffied at 13.30.



 Oi arriving at Sheffield we decided to goofor apint and get sane chips, and
 doing this W 2 then walked up to the ground.



Vfe arrived at the ground about 14.15 and walked through the turn stiles returning my
stub and walked through the tunnel.



We ma^te cur way towards the front of the ground in front of the harrier which collaspe
later on.



At about 14.30p.m. we stood waiting for the natch to start and the crush was increasin



At about 14.55 the players cane out and onto the pitch . There was a teBienaus push

forward       were forced to about 5 foot to the railings at the front of the ground.



Hie crush forced the air out of me and this neant that I couldn't hreath and I was

on the verge of passing out and I felt dizzy and nauseated.



At this time I had been sjlybit up fran my friends and I was crashed against other
people for about 15 minutes.



A space appeared behind me and I eventually found roan to hreath.     I look around

and thar vrere pepole all around the floor aone of these people were obviously
  and soem people vere fighting for their li££



  X helped   15 ) a   number of thesp people were their feet and staggered over a nurber of

  these bodies to escape frcm the crush and onto the pitch and I did by clinking over
  the fench.



  When I got onto the pitch I looked everywhere for my friend. We found him at about
  20 to 5.00.



 IWo policeman told us to clear off as we were getting in the way.



 We made out way out of the ground fabd back to the car wera we intencted to telephone

 home to let our parents know that we were ok. ttiis was iirpossible because the quepi
 was far to large.



 Vfe climed into the car and drove off after deciding that we would use one of the

 telephones in the service stations on the way tone.        We rang hcne to our parents
 at about 17.40 hours.



 When I returned hone at about 9.00 #'clock I was deeply shocked and I belive that

my eyes were glazed and I was trenbling badly. My parents telephoned the Hospital

who give than advice that they should give me a warm drink and make sure that I

got to bed immediately, this I did and I went to sleep alnost immediately.



Oi the Sinday morning the 16th April I awoke feeling aery stiff and sore.        I was

informed by my mother that I should go to the Hospital at Qnnskirk to check that
I had no broken bones.



Oi arrival at the Hospital at 10.00a,m. the Dr. Exfe^ay my ribs and said that they
vere not broken but I had severe internal brusing and tom nicies in my back%



Bie Dr. told me to go home rest and relax and he gave me sane pain Ifibllers and
advised me to go and see my Dr. the following day.
I went to see my G.P. who advised me to speak to a Counsellor.



We              and made arrangements for                        to rail at the heme in

which he did.


cn the first occasion I found that I could not speak to her because I was finding it

stressfull after being in such a situation.


She left and said that she would return in a vreek or sen


On the second azcasion I briefly said •Hallo1, she gave me a ticket for the memorial

service in the Catheeil in Liverpool and then I fcund I couldn't speak to her any

longer so she left.


I was to add that I had to go back to Hospital if I have any problems in my breathing



I also wish to add that whilst I was in the ground looking for my friend I had to

search threw a nutter of bodies to check    t o see   if my friend was there,   I   can remember

being very distressed at this and I never want to go through that again.
