                                                                      B R IG H O U S E , J O N E S & CO
                                                                                                     SO L IC IT O R S
                                                                                       COM M ISSIONERS F O R OATHS

                                                                                                                                                                                                    TELEPHONE:
S. A. BRJG H O U SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                    O R M S K I R K (0695)
J. G. A IN SW O R T H                                                                                                                                                                               7 3 2 0 2 / 3 / 4 & 7 6 3 4 8 & 7 3466
P. A. J. G A R S ID E , LL.B.
                                                                                        28 DERBY STREET,                                                                                            MDX21253
J. K EM P. B«A.
S. A. L L O Y D . LL.B.
                                                                                        ORMSKIRK, LANCS.
S. M OSSM A N . LL.B.
                                                                                             L39 2BY                                                                                                F A X N o . 0 6 9 5 7 89 22




OUR REF: .SM/C                                                                                          Y O U R REF:     EMS/PW                                                       p le a s e a s k fo r   Mr...Mossrcian



                                                                                                                         26th June,1989



           The Hillsborough Steering Committee
           c/o Castle Chambers/
           Cook Street/
           LIVERPOOL/
           L2 9SH

           For the attention of Miss E.M Steel


           Dear Miss Steel/

           re: Hillsborough Disaster

           We enclose a copy of a statement that we have taken from our client/Mr.G.P.Bridson
           of               Skelmersdale/Lancashire.

           We would draw your attention to the following points made in that statement;

         1. A mounted Policeman attempted to create a break in the crowd/outside the ground
         in order to relieve pressure from the turnstile area/and that initially he appeared
         to be successful in creating a gap in the crowd. However no sooner had that gap
         been created when another mounted Policeman arrived and instead of patrolling the
         gap they then both proceeded to head towards the turnstiles.

         2. In the previous year's fixture at Hillsborough between Liverpool F.C. and
         Nottingham Forest F.C./supporters were being pulled out from the back of the
         terrace at the Leppings Lane end up in to the stands because of the "crush"

         In all probability these two points have already been covered in evidence that has
         been given to the Enquiry/ but if not you might find the statement of some use.


         Yours faithfully




         Enc                             T H I S F I R M IS R E G U L A T E D BY T H E L A W S O C I E T Y I N T H E C O N D U C T O F I N V E S T M E N T B U S I N E S S



                                                                            C L O S E D S A T U R D A Y E X C E P T BY A P P O I N T M E N T
                          A L S O A T : P .O . B O X 135, 152 B I R K R I G , D I G M O O R S H O P P I N G P A R A D E , S K E L M E R S D A L E , L A N C S , T E L E P H O N E ( 06 9 5) 23601

                                      A N D A T . h t F L O O R , 1 1 4 / 1 1 6 F I R B E C K , B I R C H G R E E N , S K E L M E R S D A L E , L A N C S . T E L E P H O N E (0695) 25255
    GEOFFREY      PHILLIP     BRIDSON      born                        of
     Skelmersdale, Lancashire will say as follows


I accompanied David George Rimmer of                    Skelmersdale/Lancashire to the
F.A.Cup Semi-Final football fixture between Liverpool F.C. and Nottingham Forest
F.C. at Hillsborough,Sheffield on Saturday 15th April, 1989.


I had gone to the same fixture‘at Hillsborough with David and other friends the
year before.


Both David and I were Kop Season ticket holders and as such we were entitled to
tickets for this fixture.   A friend of ours.                  who lives at
          Skelmersdale collected the tickets from Anfield


The tickets were for the Leppings Lane end of Hillsborough, terracing' turnstile B.


David and I travelled in my car.         We had arranged to meet some friends at Birch
Services on the M62 motorway.        However they were not there, we waited an hour then
left the service station at 11.55am.


The year before we had used         the car park   at BassBrewery near Hillsborough and
accordingly we decided to use      that car park   on thisoccasion. It was about a 10/15
minute walk from the Hillsborough ground.

We arrived at that car park at about 1.15.pm.


After arriving at the car park we ate our sandwiches in the car park and we each had
1 can of lager.


This was the only alcohol that we drank that day.


Wewere aware that our friends (whom we should have met at Birch Services) would
also be using the Bass car park.          We were still in the car when they arrived at
about 1.45pm.


 We started walking to the ground at about 2.15pm.         There was myself,David
                            s nephew J       and an older man who was a friend of




 There were 6 of us in all


 4of us had tickets for the Leppings Lane terrace and 2 had stand tickets for that
 end.
ift VV o f u s.    UM +V     3 r o o n c l ' h c k ' e + JS
Wo a H had the same turnstile frieliot letter B.
,/

We arrived at the ground at about 2.25pm./ it was certainly before 2.30pm.


When we arrived we observed a seething mass of people in front of the turnstiles,
it was chaos.
                                                                                      a p f re x ',
There were literally thousands of people trying to get throughy'6 turnstiles.
Because of the limited number of turnstiles and the position of the approach to
those turnstiles, there was a funnelling effect of those people approaching the
turnstiles.
                                                  ce.
There was unfortunately very little -police preser^f outside the ground.                         I observe
only one policeman on a horse and two policemen on foot (the latter wea^standing
by     the    turnstiles),who     were     attempting         to    supervise   the   fans outside      the
turnstiles.


The police presence was completely inadequate.


Normally at such fixtures the Police would check that everyone approaching the
turnstiles had tickets,but the 3 policemen had no chance of doing this.


I recall the policeman on the horse was asking the fans to move back in order to
reduce       the   crush   that   was    occuring      near        to the turnstiles because of the
funnelling effect mentioned above.


However we could not move back because of the pressure from the back.


Accordingly the mounted policeman then moved into the crowd in order to create a
space, i.e. a break in the crowd in order to relieve the pressure from the crowd
as it approached the turnstiles.


 The mounted policeman was in fact successful in creating a break in the crowd. The
 gap was about 3 feet wide and went right across and the mounted policeman was able
 to control this gap by moving his horse forwards the backwards.                       The gap was about
 3 feet wide.


 Despite the crush the fans were certainly co-operating in this and that was why
     one     policeman was able to create this gap despite the pressure from the back.


 When the gap was created I was on the turnstile side of this break.
David Rimmer, I       land his nephew|              ^ere on the other side of the horse


By this time our other two friends had gone to the stands.


Then another mounted Policeman arrived but instead of patrolling this gap both
mounted Policemen then went into the crowd heading towards the turnstiles.


As a result within a few seconds the gap had disappeared.


The crush became worse as we approached the turnstiles and was particularly                        bad
within say 6 to 8 feet of the turnstiles.
                                                           <N




However I would point out that although the crush outside the ground was bad, it
was no worse than at last year's match at Hillsborough.


Of the four of us I got through the turnstiles first.                         There was plenty of space
on the other side of the tumstiles^jand I waited for the other three.

                  «            c£        'l o s 'i i - *              g round
Inside there were aumeirras Policemen,programme sellers and possibly stewards as
well as supporters.


Within a minute or two the others came in and we decided to find a place to stand.


        s nephewl       (attends Sheffield University and he attended Hillsborough
regularly. He informed us that we could go to either side of the terracing or in
the middle.       There were no signs to show the way to the side sections of the
ground, we could only see the main tunnel that led to the middle section of the
ground.
However we decided to go into the middle part so that we could obtain the best
view.


We accordingly then proceeded to walk through the tunnel.                       There were no Policemen
and no stewards at any part of that tunnel.


As we got to the end of the tunnel we observed that there was a set of railings
that divided the middle section of the ground down the middle.                         We decided to go
into the left hand section.


We just went in a few yards took up a position near the back.                             it was about
2.40pm.and even at this time this part of the ground was quite full.


During the course of the next few minutes as more people came in it became even
more rrr>vr?<ar? *nr? up,.uprp rnnsfanHv                        mshpfl *nr?
 As a result within 10 minutes we were all separated and had lost contact with each
 other.


 David had been standing immediately in front of me.            I recall seeing David
 being taken forward by the crush.     That was the last time that I saw him.


 I thought that once the game started the crush would settle down.


 I have been attending football matches for some 24 years.      David had in fact been
attending matches for some 28 years.         I am nearly 6 foot tall, David was 6 foot
tall and weighed 13/14 stones.         We were both well used to coping with crowded
situations in matches.


At this point although the crush was bad,I consider that it was very like the
crush that occurred at Hillsborough the previous year.
                      r




I would wish to specifically point out that at            last year's fixture people
were being pulled out from the back of the terrace into the stands because of the
crush that was occuring then.


I recall seeing the teams come out onto the pitch at about 2.55.pm.      At this stage
the crush was getting even worse.


I have a stop watch which I always take with me.            I always   set it atabout
2.55.pm. with a view to starting it when the match kicks off.


By 3.00pm.when the match started, the crush was so bad I could not get my arms up
in order to start my stop watch.         I was only able to start the stop watch some
seconds
             a Pier       -Hv-e.   kicKoFP

The crush then became even worse and it was then that I started to get frightened.


We were all so restricted that I could not breathe because of the crush, it was
very frightening indeed.


I then recall seeing some supporters climbing over the barriers ontothe pitch         and
I saw a supporter go on to the field and approach Bruce Grobbelar.


By this time I had been moved forward and across to the left, and accordingly I was
a very long way from where I had started off.


The crush continued to get worse and worse and it was inpossible to breathe.
There were people screaming and shouting for help


I recall that I could feel that someone was on the floor but I could not see them,
we tried to make space to get that person up but it was impossible to do so and I
and many others were pushed over them by the sheer weight of the crush.


I nearly blacked out.         I recall realising that if I did not calm myself down and
concentrate on trying to breathe I was going to die.


In 24 years of attending football matches I have never experienced anything like
it.


Suddenly   there    was   a   reduction in the pressure and I noticed people were
clambering   over    the railings that separated the middle section and the left
section of the ground.        They did this by climbing onto the second barrier from the
front then climbing over the side railings.


I helped to get a girl who passed out over the railings.


I then proceeded to climb on to the barrier and then over the railingsinto a
corridor which was created by two sets of railings separating middle and left
sections of the ground.


I was then able to walk on to the pitch.


I had been pushed right across the left hand part of the middle section a distance
of about 20/30 yards.


I vaguely recall that there was one major crush that was more severe than the
others, but I do not know when this occurred.


I got on to the pitch at about 3.20pm.         I saw a few people having heart massage.
I realised that two or three people had died.


I then went about trying to find my three friends.


I quickly found two of the others, there was no trace of David.          We were looking
for him in the ground until about 4.30pm.


It was then that I feared something very serious had happened to him.


I got back to the car at about 5.00pm.       I rang my wife at 6.00pm.
Throughout the rest of the afternoon and the evening we were trying to establish
what had happened to David.      As time went on we realised that it was all the more
likely that David had died.


Just after 1.00am. we went to the mortuary and at about 1.30am. we were told that
David's body had been identified.,


I consider that the major cause of this tragedy was the lack of adequate policing
outside the ground.   At Anfield as soon as supporters arrive they are shepherded
into queues by the Police and these queues are patrolled by the Police continually
until the turnstiles are shut.


This did not happen at Hillsborough/ it did not happen the year before.          The
Police presence outside the ground was completely inadequate.




                                             Signed

                                             Geoffrey Phillip Bridson
