£L
'fb L -




   20th April 1989

   TO WHOM IT HAY CONCERN

   Dear Sir

   I as one of the victims of the terrible series of events which happened on
   Saturday afternoon on the 15th April 1989 at the Hillsborough Football
   Ground I feel ccmpeled to write down my account of the same, so that they
   can be brought to light at the ensuing,'/ enquiries.

   I arrived with my two workmates at the Leppings Lane end of the ground at
   about 2.30 pm.  There was a large crowd outside the closed turnstiles but
   no sort of queue had been formed by the mounted police.

   In my past experience of going to football grounds the police always make
   us form a queue.  I   was amazed atthe lack of order in any shape or form
   in this instance.

   As I got nearer the closed turnstile it became apparent that the crowd was
   not moving quickly enough thereby causing a terrible crush.  The metal
   railing gates through which I had already passed, were closed behind me by
   the police.  As far as I could see this was in order to clear the immediate
   area in front of the turnstiles.  This area was by now very crowded so my
   friends and I moved to one side along with a number of other people to try
   to allow the crowd to clear somewhat.

    A couple of minutes later at approx 2.50 pm the main double gates alongside
    the turnstiles were   opened by the police.

    My friend and I (bythis time were already seperated from our other friend)
    were allowed through these gates along with hundreds of other supporters
    without being asked to show our tickets.

    We asked police and stewards which way to go and, were directed down the
    tunnel.  When we got to the end of the tunnel we could see the immediate
    area behind the goal was already crowded.

    We had been informed by friends in work,both Liverpool and Everton fans who
    had viaited the ground before that this area was dangerous so try to get to
    the sides. We tried to move over to the sides but this was impossible as
    we were forced forward by the sheer number of people behind us.  I assume
    this must have been because the metal railing gates outside had been
    reopened.

    We were forced forward under extreme pressure until we reached a point of
    about 15 feet from the front fencing. Within seconds of reaching this point
    a lot of people were already shouting to the police on the touchline behind
    the goal to do something that people were being crushed.  This, in a matter
    of seconda, turned to them screaming and pleading with the police telling
    them that people were dying.
The answer from the police was to push back.   This answer surely proved they
could understand what was being said.

Some people at the front were by now starting to climb over the fence, only
to be confronted by the police telling them to get back.  I was by this time
terrified for my life.  The kick-off must have been only seconds away and
nothing was being done about getting us out.  It was then I noticed that the
lad next to me was limp and totally motionless I could only assume he had
paaaed out or waa dead.

Then the match kicked off this was evident as I could hear the crowd cheer.
That was my worst moment I thought I would die because I knew that nobody
had realised what was happening and it would be sometime before anything
would start to happen to relieve the unbearable pressure.  I then stopped
ahouting for help to conserve my energy ao as I could breath easier.

Even when the game was stopped and people were starting to get out unto
the pitch I waa still terrified.

It was about 3.20 pm before enough people were cleared allowing me to move
back slightly.  I then saw four people who were definately dead, one of whom
I helped to be passed out over the heads of the people in front of me.   I
then moved to.the aide of the terracing climbed over the side fence along
with several other people and went down the steps, out of the small gate
and on to the pitch.

As I came to the   gate a policewoman told me to sit down and asked me if I
was O.K., I said   yes, just help them and pointed to theterrace behind the
goal.

After a few minutes I stood up then looked around for my friends.   Sometime
later I did find them and was very relieved.

Even at this time actually seeing people dead we had no idea that the
eventual loss of life would be so great.

As you can appreciate I have suffered a terrible ordeal along with thousands
of other Liverpool supporters so I am naturally appauled to hear reports of
police saying large numbers of fans were drunk, and hundreds didn't have
tickets.

If this is so, why weren't any drunks arrested, arid where did they all
diaappear to afterwards. Also how can they possible estimate that hundreds
of fand did not have tickets when thousands of them didn't even have their
tickets checked.  Some of my friends who were in the North stand didn't have
their tickets checked.

 This brings me to my first point, would it not be possible for all the people
 who have unused tickets no matter what part of the ground they were for, to
 be able to present them at the inquiry to the Lord Justice Taylor.

 Also the Football Association in my opinion should be brought to justice
 for the unfair way they allocated tickets.  I would like the following three
 questions to be asked at the inquiry.

 Who gave the order to open the gates? Remembering if those gates had been
 forced open by fans, which was at first suggested, there would by now be a
 nationwide hunt for the persons responsible.

 Also how can police officers who must surely do regular football match duty
 ignore desperate appeals for help from the.crowd.  Surely they must have
 known they were genuine, and if theydidn't realise this why can't they be
 honest and say so.
Finally in these times where every fan is treated as a hooligan I would like
to know who was monitoring the close circuit T.V.

PLEASE DON'T LET THIS HAPPEN AGAIN.


Youra faithfully




               i




P.S, I would be willing to appear at the inquiry.
