Statement of

D.O.S. 26/4/89

D.O.B.




On Saturday morning the 15th April 1989 I travelled with my friend to

Sheffield to watch the semi final of the F.A. Challenge cup between

Liverpool and Nottingham Forrest.



We left Liverpool at 12.00 and arrived at the ground about 2.30 p.m.



Outside the ground there appeared to be a great deal of confusion, it

was packed and the turn styles were still closed.



We were inside the ground entrace inside the large metal gates.



The^e were kept closed by the Police and people at that point were being

crushed and were screaming for them to open those gates.



Instead of opening the exit agates to enable the crush to subside slightly

the Police opened the main gate into the ground and the run forced us through

the gates and in turn right into the ground through the tunnel.



Once inside the ground the crowd was like a solid mass of people and we

were in the middle of this.   The Police were on the barriers shouting

to people entering   the ground to push back but of course we could not and

everyone seemed to be screaming and shouting for them to stop the

match and help them out of the enclosure.    At this point I had to stand and

watch as my friend        ‘ell to the ground and after he had managed to

crawl back up again because he told me his legs had gone and I held him

up and looking at him his face was purple.



I then crawled towards the fence and over a mass of people and bodies and

the Policeman helped me over the fence and through the gate onto the pitch
A St. John's Ambulance man pulled me onto the pitch and told me to lie down

and to wait until I got my breath back.



This I did until I felt better and then I made my way over to the gate and

helped drag some people out of the crush.



One of the lads I pulled out was quite young about 17 appeared blue in the

face and because I could not feel him breathing I tried to   give him the kiss

of life and a Policeman came over and said to me “LEAVE      HIM ALONE      LAD, HE IS

DEAD" and a St. Johftis Ambulance man came over and told me to   sit down and

he would get me a drink.



I was trembling and shocked.   I stayed there for a while and met I

and left the ground about 4.00 p.m. and because we could not get to the

phone we made our way to the car with the idea that on the way home we

would call into a service station to do this.



We eventually arrived home in Prescot at 6.30 p.m. that evening.



i went to Whiston Hospital at 7.00 p.m. that evening and the Doctor X-rayed

me and told me I had bad bruising on my ribs and shoulder and may be a

hairline fracture and he sent me to have my arm put in a sling and I now

have to go to physio every few days.   I have not been able to eat and

cannot sleep since this incident and the Doctor has also suggested a

Councillor for me.
