     F r o m M a r t i n F la n n e r y , M.P.



                                H O U S E OF C O M M O N S
                                      LONDON      SW1A OAA
                                                               Phones 0742-332793
  FAX: 071-219-4885                  Phone: 071-219-3413       FAX: 0742-337243
       London                                                     Sheffield



David Blunkett M.P.
House of Commons,
London SW1A OAA                                   18th November 1990


Dear David,

     As you know, there is still a belief throughout
the general community, that the Hillsborough Football
Stadium is in the Hillsborough Constituency, and I still
receive many letters and documentation from people,
especially in Liverpool, who believe that I am the M.P. for
the area where the Stadium is.

     I enclose a recent batch of documents from a Mr Les
Steele, whose son,Philip died at Hillsborough, and he raises
a most important point,that the opening of those tragic
terraces where the deaths occurred would be a violation of
the Taylor Report.

     You will of course, make your own mind up on this,
but I personally agree with Mr Steele, and the Taylor
Report in all its recommendations, and have consistently
done so, throughout, from the very beginning.




                                                 Yours ever,
      F r o m M a r t i n Flanne ry , M.P.          Shef field, H i l l s b o r o u g h



                              H O U S E OF C O M M O N S
                                   LONDON     SW1A OAA
   FAX: 071-219-4885              Phone: 071-219-3413                       o W      ^ T ^ 793
        London                                                             Sheffield



Mr and Mrs Steele,

Ainsdale
Southport P R 8 .                              18th November 1990


Dear Mr and Mrs Steele,

     Thank you for the various copies of correspondence
regarding Hillsborough Football Stadium, but I must inform
you that the Stadium,since 1983 when the Parliamentary
Boundaries were re-organised, is no longer in the Hillsborough
Constituency, and therefore I am not the Member of Parliament
for the area.

     The Stadium is now in the Sheffield Brightside Constituency
the M.P. for which is Mr David Blunkett.

     Although I profoundly agree with you on this matter, I will
have to send all the documentation, according to Parliamentary
protocol, to the M.P. for the area where the Stadium is. I will
however, keep copies myself and do what I can to be helpful.

     I have felt very deeply throughout this dreadful affair, that
if 95 Sheffield people has lost their lives, there would be a
considerably different approach to the whole issue, and I have
said this publicly, on many occasions.



                                                      Kindest regards,
                                                   Yours sincerely,




                                                 Martin Flannery.M.P.
                                              Sheffield,Hillsborough.
S» 14 c       '   trw s   S to
                                                                               Of-. II £ <tO



                  3 1^
                                 /
                                           i\j   our                         C o » l\/b r U 4 o < )

ficvf             ^Alf _ I           {.^liok     Co^cto          c l.iC tA n /x e ii

^-op                                      to     do^c     u x ja jjr ^ j     -iU




          ^          <? U "1C        *                      aJ             xiiyi         ^
                                                        SOUTHPORT,
                                                          Merseyside


                                                    23rd July 1990




       I aa the father of Philip Steele who died at Hillsborough,
No doubt you will be aware of the report in the Liverpool Echo dated
14th July 1990, which I consider to be another discredit to the
memory of our loved ones. You will find enclosed a copy letter which
I have sent to Colin Moynihan, The Home Office, the Football Assosiation,
the football League and Mr Ronnie Pearn M.P, It is also my intention
to campaign with a National Newspaper towards the start of the football
season.

       All I ask of you is that you would send me a letter of support
if you agree with this action and hopefully this will help to show
Sheffield Wednesday F.C. they are causing insult to the precious lives
lost at their ground.




                         Yours sincerely,




                                 L.STEELE.
                                                                                                                          could again be STANDING on the Lep-                           out tor the Trad* and
                                                                                                                          pings Lane terraces next season.                              In d u stry S e cretary ,
                                                                                                                            Sheffield Wednesday Football Club has                       whose Hitler clanger hat
                                                                                imm                                                                                                     left his Westminster 4
                                                                                                                         revealed there are plans to re-open the p a rt                 colleagues convinced M ' I
                                                                                                                         o f th e g ro u n d w h e r6 ' 95. L iv e rp o o l             must quit- - • •     ’    1
                                                                                                                         supporters died — and it w ill not even be
                                                                                                                         converted in to an a li-s e a te r a rea , as
                                                                                                                         recom m ended in th e re p o rt in to , th e                                                   I
  swoop
                                                                                                                         tragedy.
                                                                                                                           But today Secretary of               By Val Woan
                                                                                                                         th e H i l l s b o r o u g h   the pens and fences on
                                                                                                                                                        the terraces.
                                                                                                                                                           M r Devonside, who lost
             By Paul Byrne                                                                                                      ie writing to all the   a son in the disaster,
                                                                                                                         a u th o ritie s concerned     added: “I am not alone In
   N IN E people were still being quizzed                                                                                urging them to refuse to       saying I am absolutely
‘  by police today after a dramatic                                                                                      allow this move.”              horrified and disgusted
s .drugs raid on a Liverpool pub.                                                                                                                       by these plans.
     Fifteen people were arrested at                                                                                            Re-opened                  “A ll o f the families are
    he Bow and Arrow pub in Princess'                                                                                       Sheffield FC Chairman,      realistic enough to know
   Drive. West Derby, following a big                                                                                    Dave Richards, has been        that the area will have to
   police undercover operation.                                                                                          reported as saying that        be reopened one day but
      Drugs suspected o f including                                                                          m           he b e l ie v e s m a n y      it was generally assumed               Grim-faced
   heroin, LSD, cocaine, cannabis and                                                                                    supporters still w ant to      that it would be trans­                Mr. Ridley
   amphetamines were recovered afte r                                                                                    stand at fo o tb a ll          formed into an all-seater.
   plain clothes police backed up by                                                                                     matches.                          " If any football ground
   uniformed officers raided the pub at                                                                                     And although it flies in    in the land should be
                                                                                                                                                                                          And Mrs Thatcher was
   8pm last night.                                                                                                       the face of the recom­         changed into a shining          today closetted In her
                                                                                                                         mendations of the Taylor       example of safety it is         Chequers country house
                Experts                                                                                                  I n q u i r y , he h a s a     Hillsborough."                  puzzling out a forced
       Detectives had been watching the                                         s                                        p erson al aim to see             Only the ticket office       reshuffle to fill the gap
* pub for a number of weeks before                                                                                       Leppings Lane re-opened        at the ground was open          when he does resign.
  : giving the go-ahead to raid the                                                          ■■■■» -A'"-'-               as a standing area, so he                                        But Ironically, opinion
                                                                                                                                                        today and no-one was
•,. premises.                                           My hero       Jean Baines and Mlnter                             has decided to demolish        available to comment.           polls showed his Ger-
       The nine people being questioned                                                                                                                                                 man-bashlng remarks In
    were being held at Eaton Road police                                                                                                                                                the Spectator magazine
    station.


                                             Wonderdog savesfamily
                                                                                                                                                                                        were popular In homes
       The substances seized are to be
    examined by forensic experts over                                                                                                                   ■fiT in ir fo m                 up and down Britain.
    the weekend.                                                                                                                                                                          Mr Ridley astonished
                                                                                                                                                                                        MPs when he said
       Two people were arrested fo r
    alleged public disorder offences at
    the pub. One man was charged and         MINTER, the wonder dog,                                               British middleweight cham­
                                                                                                                                                        EM Spi                          Germans wanted to take
                                                                                                                                                                                        over Europe and handing
    will appear at court at a later date.   was the undisputed cham­                    By Ray Kelly               pion, Alan Mlnter.                                                   sover ei gnt y to the
                                            pion of the Baines family                                                 The family had Just fin­          B fin r n iifr e                European Community
                                            today after saving them from           Her son, Billy, 25, asleep      ished decorating woifc                                               was tantamount to handi­

 BEACH WARNING
  TH E huge Mersey oil clean-up oper­
                                            their blazing house.
                                               The 14-year-old family pet
                                             raised the alarm at breakfast
                                                                                 In the next bedroom, was
                                                                                woken by his mum and
                                                                                helped fight a battle against
                                                                                                                      Mrs' Baines said the fire
                                                                                                                  has taught her a hard lesson.
                                                                                                                      She said: “It Is all my fault,
                                                                                                                                                         "THREE young children
                                                                                                                                                        and a man died In separ­
                                                                                                                                                        ate fires today.
                                                                                                                                                                                        ng power over to Hitler.
                                                                                                                                                                                                Hang on
                                                                                the first-floor blaze until the                                            In Bldeford, North               He was expected to
  ation continued today as thousands        time as the family slumbered                                           I had a quick puff on a ciga­        Devon a man and a girl,         quit last night but his
  of people headed fo r the W irral                                             fire brigade arrived.              rette when I woke with a bit
                                            while choking smoke spread             The upstairs of the house,                                           two, died when fire raged       plana back from
  Show.                                     through their Skelmersdale                                             of pain early on and I was           through their home as
     As more than 300 workmen toiled                                            In W o l v e r t o n , OI d                                                                             Budapest was six hours
                                            home.                                                                 Stupid enough to drop It              they slept                      late. He is highly unlikely
  in spectacular sunshine to clean the                                          Skelmersdale, was ruined by          “Smoking In bed Is asking
• oil-ravaged beaches, organisers of            Mlnter began whimpering         fire and smoke.                                                            One neighbour said: **1      to hang on past this
  the big summer event pledged “The          and barking but the family            Mrs Baines said: *‘l           for trouble.                          could hear a child crying       weekend
  Show will go on!”                          slept on.                          thought I could hear Mlnter.      • A woman from the Mid­               but could no! get to her.           The party would be
    The Wirral's Mersey coastline was                                           barking at me In my sleep. It     lands became trapped and              That will stay with me for      tom apart ft he tried to
 hit hardest by Thursday's disaster in         The fearless dog, a Lhasa        was all a dream until he          died after raising the alarm          a long time.                    Insist on staying for the
  which 30 tonnes of crude oil spilled      Apso, then ran up the stairs        started scratching aK my          and another was seriously                Two brothers, aged           thorny Issue o f Europe
 fropm a tanker moored at Tranmere.         Into the bedroom of Jean           face.*'                            Injured In a tower block blaze        two and three, died f t a       splits the Conservatives
    Today the public were warned to         Baines, S3, and started lick­          Mlnter, who looks like the     p r o b a b l y a t a r t e d by      fire which broke out as         down the mkJcBe and has
 stay away from the beaches south of        ing and pawing at her face         Magic Roundabout's Dougal,         arsonists.                            they slept In Milton            a l r e a d y coat Mrs.
 Fort Perch Rock a t New Brighton           ur}til |»f brought her round.    . Ja -namgg . after the, former ■.   • Full story Page Two.                Keynes, Bucks.
 down to Seacombe.                                                                                                                                                                      Thatcher three Cabinet
                                                                                                                                                                                        ministers.                  >
34,256     SATURDAY, JULY 14, 1990               20p




                                                                                Ridley
HILLSBORO                                                                        lovers
                                                                                on the

KEEPS TERRACES
15 IseSd
                                     GRIEVING families of victims of the
                                     Hillsborough tragedy were horrified
                                     today to discover that football fans
                                     could again be STANDING on the Lep-    .
                                                                                   By Lesley Hussefl,
                                                                                 Political Correspondent
                                                                                NICHOLAS Ridley today

                                                                                cifffhangor.
                                                                                  Time was fsat n m n its
                                                                                out for the Trad* and
                                                                                JIkt$ff8 %f ftW F^^^
                                                         SOUOHPORT,
                                                          Merseyside
                                                           PR8


                                                      23rd July 1990




       It was with disgust and upset that I read the enclosed copy
newspaper report on Saturday 14 th July 1990, as I lost my lovely fifteen
year old son and his two brothers were very lucky to escape with their
lives while my wife and myself were left to look on helplessly as the
whole disaster unfolded. We have been left with a loss we will never
recover from but we had hoped that the victims’ deaths would not be in
vain if all grounds were put to rights as per Lord Chief Justice Taylor's
report - from that we could salvage a ray of hope in knowing that other
families would not go through the same dreadful time that all the
families of the Hillsborough Disaster have and are going through.

       We have as yet seen nothing in reply to this outrageous and
totally insensitive action being taken by Sheffield Wednesday Football
Club who should surely be leading the way as far as improvements to their
ground are concerned especially Leppings Lane. Why are they being allowed
to ignore the suggestions of Lord Chief Justice Taylor? Or is it that
precious lives still do not matter as much as money? Sheffield Wednesday's
action or lack of action can only be taken as one more insult to the
people who died and their families. It is high time someone took the
responsibility for that fateful day, I wonder what use tha Taylor report
and the Government and Football legislation if Sheffield Wednesday can
ignore both. I feel they should either not be allowed to play any League
games or enter the F J i . Cup until they put their ground in order.

       Let the deaths of the 'ninety-five' not be a waste, let us see the
emphasis laid on ground safety and the Taylor recommendations carried out
quickly. We still see the big transfer fees going on so let us also see
a united effort from all parties concerned to carry out what needs to be
done without arguing and let the families left to mourn see something good
arising because of the Hillsborough tragedy.

       We have suffered enough, we have heard slurs on our loved ones'
names but if the football grounds are not made safe NOV/ surely this must
be the biggest insult of all. To do nothing about ground safety is to
say nin^-five people died and it does not matter - yes, that would be
the biggest insult of all. We want some positive action now.


                         Yours sincerely,


                                L.STEELE.
                        THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                                                   LIMITED
                                                    Founded 1863
                                    Patron: H e r M a j e s t y T h e Q u e e n
                                  President: H . R . H . T h e D u k e o f K e n t
                                        Chairman: F. A. MlLLICHlP

     Chief Executive:                                                                  Phone: 071-402 7151/071-262 4542
 R. H. G. K e l l y   fcis
                                                                                                Telex: 261110
                                                                                           Facsimile: 071-402 0486


                             16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W2 3LW
   Our Ref:                                     Your Ref:
                ART/AS/2866                                        30th July 1990




Mr L Steele


Southport
Merseyside PR8




Dear Mr Steele

HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM

I am in receipt of your letter of the 20th July regarding the suggestion that Sheffield
Wednesday FC are to re-open the terraces at the Leppings Lane End.

I am copying this correspondence to the club as I have no direct knowledge of the matter.
However, I would point out that Lord Justice Taylor’s recommendations do involve a phasing
period for all-seater stadia which, for clubs in the First and Second Divisions, is by the
commencement of the 1994-95 season.

I will write to you further when I have received the club’s reply or, indeed, they may take it
upon themselves to communicate with you direct.

Yours sincerely




For Chief Executive




                                 Registered Office: lb Lancaster Cate. London W2 SLW
                                 Incorporated in London Registration Number 77797
                                                              P^BAl>
                                                              °t/AfDED

                               T H E F O O TBALL L E A G U E LIMITED
Lytham St. Annes, Lancashire, FY8 l|G . Telephone 0253 729421. Telex 67675. Fax 0253 724786                                   Secretary |. D. Dent



5/8342                                                                                                      10th August, 1990.




L. Steele, Esq.,


SOUTHPORT,
Merseyside
PR8


Dear Mr. Steele,

     I write further to my letter of 30th July in reply to yours
of 20th July.

     I have taken the matter up with Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club who have confirmed to me that the story in the
Liverpool Echo was not a c cu r a te . They have never stated that
they are going to re-open the Lepping Lane terra c es .

     The club have undertaken to write to you personally and
they have said that they will keep, me advised as and when any
plans for the Leppings Lane end of the ground are finalised.

     I am sorry that you have suffered distress as a result of
this ill-informed newspaper report.


                                                    Yours sincerely




               All correspo n dence to b e a d d re ss e d to The Secretary. R egistered Office as above. Registered in England 80612
                                                               °OffDED    ^


___________________ T H E FO O T BA L L LE A G U E LIMITED                                                               _______________
Lytham St. Annes, Lancashire, FY8 l|G . Telephone 0253 729421. Telex 67675. Fax 0253 724786                                  Secretary |. D. Dent




5/8310                                                                                                           30th July, 1990.




L. Steele, Esq.,
                                    f

SOUTHPORT,
Me rs e y si d e,
PR8



Dear Mr. Steele,

                                SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB

         I acknowledge receipt of your letter of 20th July.

     I am making enquiries into this matter and I will let you
have a full reply shortly.


                                                     Yours sincerely,




                                                             Secretary.




                All correspondence to b e a d d re ss e d to The Secretary. Registered Office as ab o ve. Registered in England 80612
            The    football                 Li c e n s i n g A u t h o r i t y
                                      Chairman: Mr Norman Jacobs


Our Ref:                                                                                     c/o The Home Office
                                                                                             Room 957 A
Your Ref:
                                                                                             50 Queen Anne's Gate
                                                                                             London, SW1H 9AT
                                                                                             Direct Line:   071-273 2869
                                                                                             Enquiries:     071-273 3133


                                                                                             U* ftogosf IfjO.



              v^\KK     v^s    ^rvc\o5u^       ^ V c k         1    °i\U^                                           H n^


              I'W         O ffct

                                                   tACKi*                        of   *V\S      ( W K n ^              Irb

                              <rV^r    foo*Wl\              ^ o o ^ 5       0H                              .^UvS

               vsiAl      vvcT                                                    bvJ' V "         vsi^l    K icp^r*

                  (NaA 'X C^v\            *#0^              vjoo    JrWf         A*             JTv*\tS             AcVvcy
                  m\\     ^       "j ^ O^VWi   .




                                          ^ 00^             s'*ctK\vj
/
           HOME OFFICE
           Queen Anne's Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                         Direct line 01-273   071— 273 2582
                                        Swiichboard01-273 3000



                                                               Your reference
    Mr L Steele
                                                               Our reference


    SOUTHPORT                                                  Date^
    Merseyside                                                     -?• August 1990
    PR8




    Dear Mr Steele

    You wrote on 20 July to Mr Moynihan about the newspaper report on
    the re-opening of Leppings Lane Terrace.  Your letter has been
    passed to me for reply.

    The scenes of terrible tragedy at Hillsborough will live with us
    all, but I know that for many like you and your family, the events
    hold a deeper and greater sorrow.       I do not underestimate how long
    a task it will be for you to come to terms with the loss of someone
    so dear to you.  I understand therefore how you and others who lost
    loved ones at Hillsborough must feel about the reports of the re­
    opening of the Leppings Lane T e r r a c e .

    Lord Justice Taylor made firm recommendations for the safety and
    comfort of those who go to watch football matches.   He thought that
    the way forward for football was to provide better facilities
    including all seated accommodation.  He thought this should be
    achieved progressively and by fixed dates.   The Government accepted
    that recommendation and remains committed to its implementation.
    However, Lord Justice Taylor recognised that the work needed to
    improve the standard of accommodation for spectators cannot be done
    overnight.  Nevertheless, it is intended that improvements are made
    and that all seated accommodation is introduced at football grounds
    in line with the timescale recommended by him.   The Home Secretary
    will, if necessary, use the powers under the Football Spectators
    Act 1989 in order to ensure compliance.   In the meantime, local
    authorities, police and emergency services have been acting on
    other safety recommendations made by the Taylor Inquiry, for
    example reviewing the requirements of safety certificates reducing
    the number of people who are allowed to stand at matches and
    requiring improvements such as better first aid facilities.

    I can understand why people feel that it is an insensitive move by
    the football club to re-open this terrace which, I understand, has
    b e e n closed since the disaster occurred.  But Lord Justice Taylor
    d i d not say that standing accommodation should be banned
    immediately.     What he suggested was that until such time as the
    s tanding accommodation is phases out there should be a reduced
    limit on crowd density, particular safeguards to ensure that the
    n e w lower authorised capacities of terraces should not be exceeded
    a n d that there should be exit gates in perimeter fences.
    Hillsborough, in common with grounds of other football clubs in
        Divisions 1 and 2 of the Football League, will be expected to phase
        out all standing accommodation by August 1994.  We understand that
        the present proposals for Leppings Lane Terrace will restrict to
        between 500 and 1,000 the number of spectators who may occupy the
        terracing and that the perimeter fence has now been removed.  If
        the local authority is satisfied that these revised arrangements
        provide an acceptable degree of safety, then the club is not
        prohibited from using the terrace again.

                                                Yours sincerely




                                                MISS M SHARP
                                                G2 Division




CR.10
                      H O U S E OF C O M M O N S
                          L O N D O N SW1A OAA


                                                 54, West Street,
                                                 Southport. PR8 IQS.


                                                 September 13th 1990.



Mr. L. Steele,
12, Wilmcote Grove,
Ainsdale,
Southport.



Dear Mr Steele,


      As promised, I now enclose the letter from the Home Office
Dept responsible for the Safety of Sports Grounds for your
information.

      It would appear that action is being taken anda sad lesson has
been learned.

      I hope you find this letter reassuring in its pointer to
safety.

                                           2
                                                             IiL CiLi




                                                     H o m e O ffice
                                                    QUEEN ANNE'S GATE
                                                    LONDON SW1H <3AT




Our Ref: FEP/90 35/48/170   (S)
Your Ref: Rf/OMH




 .      .   T                                    1 1 SEP 1990


Your letter of 26 July to Robert Atkins enclosing this one
from Mr L Steele of                    Ainsdale, Southport,
Merseyside          has been forwarded
reply in view of our responsibilities for the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act.  I am replying in Lord Ferrers' absence from the
office.

I can understand your constituent's concern over reports about
the re-opening of the Leppings Lane terrace.  Perhaps I can
explain the present position.

Lord Justice Taylor made firm recommendations for the safety
and comfort of those who go to watch football matches.   He
thought that the way forward for football was to provide
better facilities including all seated accommodation and
that this should be achieved progressively and by fixed
dates.  The Government accepted that recommendation and
remains committed to its implementation.  But, like
Lord Justice Taylor, we recognise that the work needed to
improve the standard of accommodation for spectators cannot be
done overnight.  We nevertheless intend to see that
improvements are made and that all seated accommodation is
introduced at football league grounds in line with the
timescale recommended by him.  That is why we are providing up
to £100 million for football ground improvement over the next
five years.  The Home Secretary will, if necessary, use the
powers under the Football Spectators Act 1989 in order to
ensure compliance.

In the meantime, local authorities, police and emergency
services have been acting on other safety recommendations made
by the Inquiry, for example by reviewing the requirements of
safety certificates, reducing the number of people who are
allowed to stand at matches, and requiring improvements such
as better first aid facilities.



                                                 /Hillsborough,



Ronnie Fearn Esq OBE FCIB MP
Hillsborough, in common with grounds of other football clubs
in Divisions 1 and 2 of the Football League will be expected
to phase out all standing accommodation by August 1994.  We
understand that the present proposals for Leppings Lane
terrace will restrict to between 500 and 1,000 the number of
spectators who may occupy the terracing and that the perimeter
fence has now been removed.   If the local authority is
satisfied that these revised arrangements provide an
acceptable degree of safety, then the club is not prohibited
from using the terrace again.

I am sure that the local authority will look very carefully at
the revised arrangements before permitting Leppings Lane to be
re-opened.  That said, I do understand why you should feel
that it is an insensitive move by the football club to re-open
this terrace.




                                          B NICHOLSON
                                  Assistant Private Secretary
                      Ronnie Fearn, OBE, FCIB, MP.




-J


                        H O U S E OF C O M M O N S
                          L O N D O N SW1A0AA

                                               Please reply to:-

     Ref: RF/OMH
                                               Southport PR8

                                               7th August, lyyu,
     L Steele Esq.,
                                                                        •to

     Southport PR8


     Dear Mr Steele,                                               11-0 flf),

     I enclose copy of communication I have received
     from the Department of the Environment for your
     perusal - I will, of course, forward the Home
     Office report when same comes to hand.

     Kind regards,

     Your&^sincerely,



     (Dictated by Mr Fearn and
       signed in his absence)

                                                       /end
JH


                    D E P A R TM E N T O F TH E E N V IR O N M E N T
                    2 MARSHAM STREET LONDON SW1P 3EB
                                      01-276 3 0 0 0
                    M y ref:

                    Your ref:




                                           Sr 2 AUG 1990




You wrote to Mr Atkins on 26 July enclosing
correspondence from Mr L Steele about
football fans being allowed to stand on
the Leppings Lane terraces at Sheffield United
Football Club.

However, as the matter seems to be primarily
for the Home Office, I am passing your letter
to that Department asking them to reply
to you direct.

Yours sincerely




ALASTAIR MCINTYRE
Private Secretary




Ronnie Fearn Esq OBE FCIB MP
                   RONNIE FEARN, OBE, FCIB, MP.




                       H O U S E OF C O M M O N S
                          L O N D O N SW1A0AA


                                                    Please reply to:-
REF: RF/OMH

                                                    Southport PR8

                                                    26th July, 1990.

L Steele Esq.,


Southport PR8      I



Dear Mr Steele,

Thank you for your letter of the 23rd July 1990.

To too think it is heartrending that such a tragedy has not been
fully acted upon and that Government legislation has not laid down
firm rules.   Sheffield Wednesday are way out of line in their new
actions and I have spoken out already on their misguided policy.

I do agree with the sentiments and directions of your letter and I
know that the terrible experience your family, and others, suffered
should not be ignored in future actions on ground safety by all
Clubs.

I can assure you your communication will definitely find it's way
onto the Ministerial desk.

 iurs sincerely,
L IV ER PO O L FOOTBALL CLUB
                                     A N D A TH LETIC G R O U N D S P.L .C .
r —                         i       A N F 1 E L D R O A D , L I V E R P O O L L 4 O TH
                                                  0 5 1 -2 6 3 2 3 6 1 /2
  Official Sponsor                  Telex 627661 LFC G                         Fax 051-260 8813
                                                         Registered No. 3 5 6 6 8 . England
     ^ a n d if
                                     Metch Information Service Only      Match Ticket Office. Enquiries Only
                                            0 5 1 -2 8 0 SSSS                     0 5 1 -2 6 0 8 6 8 0




      PBR/MG

      Mr. L. Steele,


      Southport,
      Merseyside,
      PR8    \                                                           31st July 1990


      Dear Mr. Steele,

              Thank you for forwarding to me a copy of the letters
      which you have sent concerning a report in the newspapers that
      the Chairman of Sheffield Wednesday is considering re-opening the
      Leppings Lane End of the Hillsborough Ground as a standing area.

              We are very sympathetic to your feelings in this matter
      and agree that it would be totally insensitive toeveragain   use
      this area of the Ground for standing spectators.

              Unfortunately it is something over which we as a club
      have no control, but we sincerely hope that the Sheffield
      Wednesday Club will re-consider the matter and the Leppings Lane
      terraces will be converted to an all seater area if and when they
      are ever re-opened for public use.

                       With kind regards.

                                                  Yours sincerely,




                                      Chief Executive/General Secretary




                 1                K M. OALGUSH, M.B.E.                       P.B. ROBINSON
£.F.C-                            PLAYER/TEAM MANAGER                        CHIEF EXECUTIVE/GENERAL SECRETARY
 R egistered Trade M arks
Sheffield Wednesday
          Football Club PLC




 Our Ref:     GHM/JB/D19/4940

 22nd October 1990


 Mr. L. Steele,


 Southport,
 Merseyside.
 prs n n



 Dear Mr. Steele,

 Thank you for your letter dated 15th October 1990.

 The situation quite simply is that the Club have no definite plans for the
 Leppings Lane end.

Relegation fran the First Division last season has meant that additional
visiting capacity is not required at the present time and therefore the existing
3,840 seats within the West Stand are sufficient for visiting clubs. Should
promotion be achieved at the end of the current season we will be looking at the
prQbability of extending the visiting capacity, and as we will be required by
1994 to be all seater it is most likely that we would go down this path.

 I trust this clarifies the situation.

Yours sincerely,




G.H. MacfceeJJ
Secrotar-y—




          Hillsborough, Sheffield S6 1SW.
Tel: (0742) 343122 Grams: Wednesday Sheffield 6.
                Fax No. 0742 337145

                C h airm an : D. G Richards. Secretary: G. H. M ac krell, F .C .C .A .. M a n a g e r: R. F. Atkinson
         D irectors: C. W o o d w a r d . K. T. A d d y, E. Barron. G . K. Hulley. R. M . G rierson. F.C.A., J. Ashton, M .P .
                                                    R e g iste re d in England N o . 6 2 4 7 8
Sheffield Wednesday
          Football Club PLC




Oar Ref:      GHM/JB/D19/4852

13th September 1990


Mr. L. Steele
                                                                          .   -T
Southport,
Merseyside.
PR8


Dear Mr. Steele,

Further to correspondence you have had with the Football Association and the
Football League, I am writing to clarify the situation whereby at no stage have
Sheffield Wednesday F.C. indicated that they are seeking to re-open the Leppings
Lane terrace for standing spectators under its existing configuration.

My Chairman was quoted out of context and, of course, there are always members
of the media and Parliament who are quick to seek an opportunity for cheap
publicity.

I have been in conversation with Barry Devonside of the Hillsborough Support
Group and have assured him that prior to any alterations to that end of the
ground he will be advised in order to circulate the information to his members.

I welcome this opportunity of clarifying the situation.

Yours sincerely,




          Hillsborough, Sheffield S 61 S W .
 Tel: (0742)343122 Grams: Wednesday Sheffield 6.
  Telex No. 547709 WEDNES Fax No. 0742 337145

                    Chairman: D.G. Richards. Secretary: G.H. Mackrell. F.C.C.A.. Manager: R.F. Atkinson
           Directors'. C. Woodward, K.T. Addy. E. Barron. G.K. Hulley. R.M. Grierson. F.C A . J Ashton. M.P.
                                             Registered in England No. 62478
