                                                           Deponent Ann Adlington
                                                           First affidavit
                                                           1 exhibit
                                                           Sworn 9th March 1999



IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE                                       CO/856/99
QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION
CROWN OFFICE LIST




                                     EXHIBIT AMA/1




This exhibit marked AMA/1 referred to in the first Aifidavit of Ann Marie Adlington




SWORN by the above named Ann Marie Adlington)
this 9"'day of March 1999                   )                A /U /} J / '
at Liverpool in the County of Merseyside    )                                         '




Before me.........................
         Solicitor/Commissioner for Oaths

Name:

Address:           Quinn Melville Solicitors
                   15 Stanley Street
                   Liverpool, L16AA
                   0151 2 3 6 3 3 4 0
                  DX 14154       Liverpool
 VSB°A0&                                                                                 vSBOfiO^




                      Hillsborough Family Support Group

Your Ref: 24332/1/SBE/jet                                     2 March 1999

Winckworth Sherwood
Solicitors and Parliamentary Agents
35 Great Peter Street
Westminster
London SW1P 3LR

Dear Mr Eastwood

Adlmgton v Duckenfield; Adlington v. Murray

I was surprised to hear yesterday that you had applied for leave to move for judicial review
and for a stay of the committal proceedings. I do not know whether you told the Crown
Prosecution Service, but you did not inform us, contrary to my request in my letter to you of
18thDecember.

You will appreciate that the prosecution has an obvious interest in the application for a stay,
and that we have expressed a wish to be involved. I invite you to send me a copy of your
material without delay. We suggest that the onus is upon you, co-operating with Walker
Morris, to apply orally for leave and a stay before 22nd March, the next date at Leeds. I
assume that, in view of the date of the committal proceedings on 19th April, you have asked
for your application to be expedited. Our leading counsel has some days free before 22nd
March and we shall seek to assist by making representations ourselves to the Crown Office
about the importance of determining the matter before then.

Please confirm that you have informed the Crown Office that we wish to object to the grant of
a stay, and about our approach to the question of delay set out in our letter to you of 22nd
December. The prosecution will obviously object to leave, and to the grant of a stay, given
the serious delay.

Because your leading counsel told the court yesterday that you were to appear in the Chief
Constable’s judicial review proceedings, I am today sending you a copy of the affidavit and
supporting material that I have submitted. I do not understand why you had not told me
before that you intended to appear, in reply to my letter o f 23 rd February.

Yours sincerely




Ann Adlington
Solicitor


              Phone 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151.236 1936. E Matt info@ hfsg.org
            lit Floor Central B id d in g s 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR
 j,SBOi 00.




                                                                                           SUPF$*
                      Hillsborough Family Support Group


Your Ref: RBM/BQW/MURRAY

Walker Morris
Kings Court
12 King Street
Leeds LSI 2HL


2 March 1999


Dear Mr Manning

Adlington v Murray; Adlington v Duckenfield

Yesterday you announced in court that an application for leave to move for judicial review of
the decision o f the Crown Prosecution Service o f IS* December 1998 would be lodged in the
Crown Office within the next few days. I£ as in the case of Duckenfield, an application for a
stay is to be made, we suggest that the onus is upon you to apply orally for leave and a stay
before 22ndMarch, the next date at Leeds. Our leading counsel has some days free before
then, and we shall seek to assist by making representations ourselves to the Crown Office
about the importance o f determining the matter before that date.

Please serve copies o f your application on us when you serve them on the Crown Office. No
doubt you will co-ordinate matters with Winckworth Sherwood. The prosecution will object
to leave, and to the grant o f a stay, given the serious delay in making this application. On 22IK
                                                                                                 ]
December 1998 we indicated that we would object if you had not lodged your application by
8* January.

I have sworn a substantial affidavit in the Chief Constable’s Judicial Review proceedings. If
you confirm that you are to appear in those proceedings, please let me know, and I will serve
a copy o f our material upon you. If you propose to lodge evidence, I invite you to deal with
the question o f what the “many tens o f thousands of defence costs”, referred to in the Form
86A of the Chief Constable, have been spent on so for. This arises because you told the
magistrate yesterday you had not worked on the committal bundle I sent you last August
because of fears that you might not recover the sums on taxation. I am making a similar
request o f the Chief Constable and the South Yorkshire Police Authority.




            Phone 0151 23 6 1919. Fax 0 1 5 1 2 3 6 193d. £ M ail info@hfsg.orS
          1st Floor C entral Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR
I was glad to hear yesterday that the magistrate has been able to ease your problems in
applying for legal aid. It sometimes helps if the prosecution supports the defence in these
matters. If I can in any way assist you in emphasising the urgency and importance of your
application by writing a letter to the legal aid authorities, I shall be pleased to do so.

Yours sincerely




Ann Adlington
Solicitor
  W IN C K W O R T H SH ER W O O D                                                                  ^c:c;tP«s,„ :
                                                                                                    Lnnioi SW1?
 Our ref;            24332'l.'S3E.'jei                                                              Telcpfco^e. C l?’ 5 9 }
 Yoarrti:                MVO-POL                                                                    Fax: 01“ : 553 50S9
                                                                                                    DX: 2312 VICTORJA

 MissMVOadcs                                                                                        CirsctLme:          0171 593 510*
 Assistant Clerk and Solicitor
 South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat
 PO Box 3 7, Regent Street
 Bra»l«y, South Yorkshire S70 2PQ                                                                           D K e n te !99s

                                                                                                     BY FAX AND POST

 Dear Miss Oades

 Adlingtoo. *y- Duckeafield and Murray

 I refer to my letter of 10 December last in regard to judicial review proceedings, and
 confirm CruU we now have the advice from the Crown Prosecution Service regarding our
 request for intervention 2nd enclose herewith a copy of their letter of 1S December 1998.

 I have discussed this matter with Leading Counsel and am pleased to ezclose herewith a
 short memorandum of advice regarding the desirability of making an application for judicial
 review of this decision.

 On ;he bziis of that advice, which. I strongly echo, may I formally request that the Folic*
 Authority agree to underwrite Mr Duckea£eld‘s costa of sn application for jucicisi renew
 of the CPS/DPP decision not to intervene in this matter.

 Jt may assise you to know that we anticipate the framework for this will involve initially
 preparanon of an Application with a supporting Affidavit which Counsel hopes can be
 prepared within the first 2 weeks of January. The documentation would then be submitted
 to the Crown OfSce of the High Court here in London, and it is likely that an oral
 application will have to be made before a Judge, requiring the attendance of Counsel, for
 leave to move for judicial review. The prosecution may or may not be heard oa that
 application, depending upon the Court's approach, and we are confident that leave will be
 granted. It is lik e ly that the Court will order that the judicial review proceed ex p ed itio u sly ,
 and there is some possibility that the full substantive hearing, which will take several days,
 could be heard before the present committal date of 19 April 1999. A very rough and ready
 cost estimate for this exercise I would put in the region of ilO.QOO-Eli.CGO.




                                                       is:«iKK'-s*       ri.v                         TV *-V
  .■i
         :v. « •—
        . ... ..,1, ■:        •• ■ -
                                                       »»-.»»«           cro;..■*
                                                                                                       «•
                                                                                                       tu      j     s« tss
          y .v -.K ! .        ■        '" .■ .■ .n m                     c o n i« :.ta ^ - s _        i»;
                                             ^ i
                                         ■..sj'.wf
                                                       sin w if.s:
                                                       M-is*: nsrsr
                                                                         1         s .’.'."j:- J.      ^                          S3
                                                                      '<5£613£ZISIZ «■ S112aatB                      20 :ST       65/£0/£B
906 ’ON
              , 1 hope The above assists, and naturally r.y client wauia oe greatly tezsi^ta cy an early
       ►    , positive response from you in regard to the Police Authority decision. In the short term,
                however. I would be grateful if y o u could let me know the mechanics of consideration of
                this request so that we have some idea of the relevant timetable.
               Yours sincerely
                                                      /f'T.




  \




£0 0       906 0N                                             S£6T9£ZTSI0   S113&at0     £0=ST       66/£0/£0
 W IN C K W O R .T H SH E R W O O D                                                                       35 Great Peter Street
  S O L I CI TO RS AMS PARLIAMENTARY A CE N T S                                                           Westminster
                                                   \                                                      London SW1P SLR
Our ref:                 24332/1/SBE/jet
                                                                                                          Telephone: 0171 593 5000
Your ref:
                                                                                                          Fax: 0171 593 5099
                                                                                                          DX: 2312 VICTORIA

Ann Arlington, Solicitor                                                                                  Direct Line:                  0171593 5107
Hillsborough Family Support Group
1 st Floor, Central Buildings
41 North John Street
Liverpool L2 6RR
                                                                                                          23 D ecem ber 1998


                                                                                                          BY FAX

Dear Ms Adlington

Adlington -v- Ducksnfield and Murray

Further to the attendance before Mr Cadbury SM in Leeds on Monday we have been asked
by Counsel to raise the following matters:

Firstly, in regard to an application for leave to move for judicial review, we have noted the
request made in your letter of IS December, to be given notice in regard to an application,
which was echoed again by Mr Jones QC in Court. We are content to give an undertaking
to tell the Divisional Court upon making that application that you have asked to be heard on
the issue. We are bound to say, however, that we do not accept that you have any right to
be heard and are content to leave the matter for the Court. It is our understanding that it is
likely such an application will not be determined on the papers but will require an oral
application.

Secondly, we have noted that on several occasions Mr Jones has indicated the possibility
that should a committal hearing take place, it is possible that witnesses may be called
without written statements having been served in advance. Accordingly we give notice that
if any such witnesses are to be called, we be given the names and addresses of those
witnesses in advance, otherwise it may be necessary to seek an adjournment from the Court
in regard to the evidence so given, to allow for proper consideration of that evidence and
any appropriate cross-examination to take place.

Thirdly, in regard to voluntary disclosure either from the CPS or the DPP, we would be
grateful if you could make available copies of all correspondence in regard to this matter.
As you will appreciate we are not directly involved in resolving this question.




                                    STEPHEN WtCGS              RO C E R F1TTON     *tlM WATTS              The firta Is a member sf]_________
 PARTNERS
 NKTHOlAS OWSTON                    HUGH MACDOUG a LD          Paul IRVING         BEAD OF TAX             an iateflntiosal network o f lawyers.
 bfciAN1IOOD                        JO H N REES                B-QKALP F4 RRANTS   G pO R C .K B U M .*
                                                                                   CONSULTANTS
                                                                                                           The fino a rvpthted byTke Lwr Society
                                                                                                           ifi tfe      of Imwcwm temnca.
 PA U t. M O R .R 1S                P E T Eft. W IL L IA M S   R.Q1IEA.T UOTKAI
 M IC M At il T l I A l C l U s R   A N D ftlW MU&ftAV         SIMON EASTWOOD      PRANK H.C1BSON OftQ
 A|         firtH L O V             CHRISTOPHER. VINE          NAOM I GOODF.
 kX£6




                                                                     ©
We look Forward to hearing from you.

Yours faithfully




Winfckworth Sherwood

         Your fax o f22/12/98 has been received and will be considered at the earliest
         opportunity.




                                               2
 10026


                                                                                         TOTAL P . 03




                                          ©
 VSBO*0&
                                                                                          •    •



                                                                                          SUppO^
                      Hillsborough Family Support Group




Messrs. Winckworth Sherwood
35 Great Peter Street
Westminster
London
SW1P 3LR

22 December 1998


Ref: SBE/NAF0/24332-1


Dear Mr Eastwood,


I enclose as a matter of courtesy for your information, copy of a letter I have today sent to the
South Yorkshire Police Authority. It affects your position.

Yesterday, counsel instructed by you told the magistrate that you had decided to apply for judicial
review of the decision of the Crown Prosecution Service not to take over the prosecution of your
client and Mr Murray. It was apparent that you, and Mr Murray’s lawyers, had taken this decision
even though you had not received what Mr Harrison described as “reasons” in the counsel and
solicitor meeting, and “policy” before the magistrate.

 The effect of announcing this concluded decision was to cause a deferment of any question of
voluntary disclosure of documents by the Crown Prosecution Service and South Yorkshire Police.
Under Order 53 Rule 4 of the Rules of the Supreme Court, it is necessary that any application for
judicial review should be filed “promptly and in any event within three months”. The decision you
have made to apply for judicial review causes delay in the matter o f disclosure. Since all the
factors that have impelled you to announce a concluded decision have been known to you for
several months, there can, I suggest, be no reason why you should not be able to lodge your
application for leave and supporting evidence by Friday 8th January 1999, however long a
Christmas holiday you take. You will have all evidence you need, and the grounds for your
application are obviously capable of being expressed now.

We have suggested in court that you are using delay as a weapon in the case, rather than as a
genuine grievance. If you do not lodge your application for judicial review by 8th January 1999,
we give you notice that we shall object, in the absence of a compelling explanation, to the grant
of leave and/or substantive relief on the ground that you did not apply “promptly”.

             Phoue 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151236 1936. E Mail info@hfsg.org
           1st Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR
v-'We also confirm that we wish to be heard in opposition to the grant of leave even though the
   application be strictly ex parte, and that, if you ask for the question of leave to be determined on
   the papers, you bring this letter to the attention of the single judge. We ask you to provide us with
   a full copy of your application when you lodge it with the Crown Office.


  Yours Sincerely,


   fj. n d,l^ cjt/on
  Ann Adlington
                                                                                           ^SBORoy-




                        Hillsborough Family Support Group




Walker Morris
Solicitors
King’s Court
12 King Street
Leeds LSI 2H1

22 December 1998


Ref: RBM/BQW/MURRAY


Dear Mr Manning,


I enclose as a matter of courtesy for your information, copy of a letter I have today sent to the
South Yorkshire Police Authority. It affects your position.

Yesterday, counsel instructed by you told the magistrate that you had decided to apply for judicial
review of the decision of the Crown Prosecution Service not to take over the prosecution of your
client and Mr Duckenfield. It was apparent that you, and Mr Duckenfield’s lawyers, had taken
this decision even though you had not received what Mr Harrison described as “reasons” in the
counsel and solicitor meeting, and “policy” before the magistrate.

The effect of announcing this concluded decision was to cause a deferment of any question of
voluntary disclosure of documents by the Crown Prosecution Service and South Yorkshire Police.
Under Order 53 Rule 4 of the Rules of the Supreme Court, it is necessary that any application for
judicial review should be filed “promptly and in any event within three months”. The decision you
have made to apply for judicial review causes delay in the matter of disclosure. Since all the
factors that have impelled you to announce a concluded decision have been known to you for
several months, there can, I suggest, be no reason why you should not be able to lodge your
application for leave and supporting evidence by Friday 8th January 1999, however long a
Christmas holiday you take. You will have all evidence you need, and the grounds for your
application are obviously capable of being expressed now.

We have suggested in court that you are using delay as a weapon in the case, rather than as a
genuine grievance. If you do not lodge your application for judicial review by 8th January 1999,
we give you notice that we shall object, in the absence of a compelling explanation, to the grant
of leave and/or substantive relief on the ground that you did not apply “promptly”.

             Phone 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151 2361936. E Mail info@hfsg.org
           1st Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6KR
We also confirm that we wish to be heard in opposition to the grant of leave even though the
application be strictly ex parte', and that, if you ask for the question of leave to be determined on
the papers, you bring this letter to the attention of the single judge. We ask you to provide us with
a full copy of your application when you lodge it with the Crown Office.


Yours Sincerely,


 d-                 ■
Ann Adlington
vsa°*«&                                                                           a > ^ 0Ro%
                                                                                  ^ t     •




 Sl/ppO^                                                                              SUp?<ft
                    Hillsborough Family Support Group



  Messrs. Winckworth Sherwood
  35 Great Peter Street
  Westminster
  London
  SW1P3LR


  18 December 1098

  Your Ref: SBE/NAFO/24332-1



  Dear Mr Eastwood

  Adlington v Murray: Adlington v Duckenfield


  We propose at the hearing on Monday to raise the question of documents in the light of the
  CPS decision announced this morning. In order to avoid unnecessary expense to prosecution
  and defence, we should welcome any constaictive assistance you can offer as to the methods
  of disclosure of relevant documents in the South Yorkshire files. We enclose a copy of the
  letter we have today sent to Mr Metcalf of Hammond Suddards on the subject.

  The question of judicial review of the CPS decision has been raised by Mr Manning. We
  should be grateful if you would inform us on Monday if such an application is to be made. If
  it is, we invite you to make it promptly, in the light of your complaints about delay, and to put
  us on notice of when the application is to be heard, so that we can ask to be represented at the
  ex parte stage. If you ask for the application to be determined on the papers, please notify the
  Crown Office that we asked to be heard on the application for leave.

  On 20"' August it was indicated on behalf of both defendants that a decision had not been
  taken as to whether an abuse of process application would be mounted, and, if was to be
  made, at which court. It was indicated that counsel would advise on the matter.




             Phone 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151 236 1936. E Mail info@ hfsg.org
           1st Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR
We hope that, nearly four months later, you can tell the court on Monday, so that we can all
plan accordingly.

We look forward to seeing you on Monday.

Yours sincerely




Ann Adlington
Solicitor




                                              •2
vSBORoa.                                                                            vSBORoc




                   Hillsborough Family Support Group




Your Ret: RBM/BQW/MURRAY


18 December 1998


Walker Morris
Solicitors
Kiny's Court
12 King Street
Leeds LSI 2HL


Dear Mr Manning


Adlington v Murray: Adlington v Duckenfield


We propose at the hearing on Monday to raise the question of documents in the light of the
CPS decision announced this morning. In order to avoid unnecessary expense to prosecution
and defence, we should welcome any constructive assistance you can offer as to the methods
of disclosure of relevant documents in the South Yorkshire files. We enclose a copy of the
letter we have today sent to Mr Metcalf of Hammond Suddards on the subject.

The question of judicial review of the CPS decision has been raised by your firm. We should
be grateful if you would inform us on Monday if such an application is to be made. If it is, we
invit e you to make it promptly, in the light of your complaints about delay, and to put us on
notice of when the application is to be heard, so that we can ask to be represented at the ex
parte stage. If you ask for the application to be determined on the papers, please notify the
Crown Office that we asked to be heard on the application for leave.

On 20"’ August it was indicated on behalf of both defendants that a decision had not been
taken as to whether an abuse of process application would be mounted, and, if was to be
made, at which court. It was indicated that counsel would advise on the matter.


                                              -   1
                                                  -




         Phone 0151236 1919. Fax 0151 236 1936. E Mail info@hfsg.org
       1st Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR
We hope that, nearly four months later, you can tell the court on Monday, so that we can all
plan accordingly.

We look forward to seeing you on Monday.

Yours sincerely




Ann Adlington
v S o Iicitor
