g h 13 ju ly .7




Mrs Price
Legal Adviser's Branch



CORONERS INQUESTS: SUPPLY OF INFORMATION TO RELATIVES

 I would be grateful for advice on this correspondence from Mr
 Dorries, the Sheffield coroner, who asks whether he should accede
 to a request for the release of documents relating to the
^Hillsborough inquest.

2. "the background is set out in the note by Mr Dorries flagged
within.  Briefly, he has received a request from a Mrs Spearitt for
a copy of three statements made by members of the South Yorkshire
Ambulance Service.   These statements were not admitted at the
inquest as documentary evidence under rule 37 of the Coroners Rules
1984 and the makers of the statements did not give oral evidence at
the inquest.  These statements were made by members of the
ambulance service to a legal firm instructed by their employers.
They were then handed over with a consent form giving permission
for these to be used in connection with the Taylor inquiry only.
At the subsequent inquest, to save time, a police officer gave a
summary of evidence about each death based on hearsay evidence fxrom
various witnesses.   This appears to have included evidence from the
ambulance staff.   The ambulance service members hajve refused
consent for copies of their statements be given to7*Spearitt. A
letter from their legal representatives is flagged within.

 3.  It seems to me that these particular statements do not fall
 within rule 57 of the Coroners Rules as they were never admitted as
 documentary evidence.  In the case of R v Hammersmith Coroner ex
 parte Peach [1980] 2 WOR496, the view was taken that police
 statements which were passed to the coroner for his information but
 hot admitted as documentary evidence at the inquest, were police
 property and that the coroner could not hand them over to the
’relatives without a breach of confidence or trust. Other papers
 show that we have adopted a similar line in the case of hospital
 records and have advised for relatives to approach the health
 authority.

 4.  It seems to me that the present case is analogous to the 8lair
 #each case and that the ambulance staff statements are the property
 of the South Yorkshire Ambulance Service and that the coroner
 cannot copy them to Mrs Spearitt without the consent of the
 ambulance service without incurring breach of confidence or trust.
 Do you agree?




                                                    G HARRISON (MISS)
                                                           D Division
                                                            July 1992
