                                                              D eponent Ann Adlington               tZ z^p
                                                              First affidavit
                                                              1 exhibit
                                  If*
                                  U "
                                                              Sworn 9th M arch 1999




IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUS                                              CO/856/99
Q U EEN ’S BEN CH DIVISION
CROW N OFFICE LIST

IN THE M A TTER OF APPLICATIONS FO R JUDICIAL REVIEW BY DAVID
D UCKENFIELD AND BERNARD M U RR A Y OF A DECISION OF THE CROW N
PROSECUTION SERVICE ANNOUNCED ON 18th DECEM BER 1998




                             Affidavit o f Ann M arie Adlington




I, Ann Marie Adlington, Solicitor o f the Supreme Court, o f 1st Floor, Central Buildings, 41
North John Street, Liverpool L2 6RR, MAKE OATH and SAY;


1      I am a Solicitor o f the Supreme Court and the legal adviser to the Hillsborough Family
        Support Group (“HFSG”), a non-political organisation whose members are relatives of
       the ninety-six victims o f the Hillsborough football stadium disaster in Sheffield on 15th
        April 1989.

                                   The criminal proceedings

2      In July 1998 I laid information in writing before the Leeds District Magistrate Court
        alleging that Bernard Murray and David Duckenfield (“the Applicants”) were guilty of
        manslaughter o f two victims o f the disaster, representative o f the ninety-six, and of
        misfeasance in public office; and in the case o f Duckenfield alone, o f attempting to
       pervert the course o f justice. Summonses were issued in Leeds on 10th July 1998.
       Committal proceedings were fixed on 7th December 1998 to start in Leeds on 19th
       April.

3      I make this affidavit in reply to the applications by the defendants for leave to move for
       judicial review of the decision o f the Crown Prosecution Service o f 18th December
        1998. I wish this affidavit to be considered at the oral hearing o f the application for
       leave in order to present the following arguments;



                                                1
            (A) leave should be refused because no substantial argument is presented that
            the CPS acted unlawfully or irrationally;

            (B) the discretion given to the Crown Prosecution Service under the
            Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 is so wide that the Divisional Court should
            only intervene in the plainest case ;

            (C) the material presented by the prosecution shows that the decision of the
            Crown Prosecution Service was obviously reasonable;

            (D) the Applicants have other, more convenient, remedies;

            (E) the application has not been made promptly as required by O 53, r 4, and
            the delay prejudices the rights o f the prosecution and is prejudicial to good
            administration under section 31 (6) o f the Supreme Court Act 1981.

                                        Evidence

4   Exhibit SBE 1, Divider 4 of the Applicant David Duckenfield’s file, has no index, but
    appears to be a collection of some of the papers relevant to the CPS decision. Written
    submissions were made to the Crown Prosecution Service on behalf o f the prosecution
    as follows;

    20th July 1998 (SBE 1 p 119-125,
    31st July 1998 (SBE 1, p 96-113),
    4th August 1998 (SBE 1, p 89-90),
    17th August 1998 (SBE 1, p 81-4),
    24th August 1998 (letter and substantial file not copied)
    24th September 1998 (SBE 1, p 42) (substantial files of material not copied)
    2nd October 1998 (SBE 1, p 32)
    9th October 1998 (SBE 1, p 29)

5   These submissions were made piecemeal because the Secretary of State for the Home
    Department caused to be made available substantial material in 1997, and in the Spring
    and summer o f 1998, which the bereaved families had not seen before. The substance
    of the arguments presented to the CPS may most easily be seen in the representations
    of leading counsel of 24th September and 2nd October. I shall not produce the other,
    omitted, material for the leave hearing unless requested by other parties beforehand.

6   It is alleged by the prosecution that there is strong evidence of the crimes alleged
     against the Applicants, that previous enquiries into the Hillsborough disaster, including
    the CPS in 1990 and the Coroner’s jury in 1990-1, have been misled by polices officers
     from the West Midlands and South Yorkshire police; and that that fact is demonstrated
     by the material provided by the Home Secretary in 1998.




                                            2
7      The Grounds on which Relief is Sought submitted on behalf of Bernard Dean Murray
        suggest at paragraph 6.2 and 6.3 that

               “The respondent’s policy should lean towards intervention in a section 3 (2) (b)
               case where the prosecutor is unable to show a defensible justification for
               proceeding after a decision not to prosecute has been taken.”

8      The material analysed by and submitted to the CPS last year contains very powerful
       evidence to show that the previous inquiries were misled. All that material was
       submitted to Murray’s solicitors as well as Duckenfield’s in 1998. Both applications
       for judicial review ignore altogether the importance o f the evidence that has been made
       public through the good offices of the Home Secretary after the “Scrutiny” of Lord
       Justice Smith.

9      That material, together with the previous inquiries, was given the most careful
       consideration by the CPS between July and December 1998. The solicitors for the
       Applicant Duckenfield wrote to the CPS in October 1998 making the following
       assertion;

              “The Director is well placed to assess where the public interest lies having had
              involvement in the case over a period o f nine years and having seen the Taylor
              Report, the Stuart-Smith Scrutiny, the coroner’s verdict, the judgment of the
              Divisional Court and the review evidence and the advice o f leading counsel
              obtained when the Director made the decision not to prosecute.” (SBE 1, p 15-
              6>
10     The chronology is more complicated than appears at pages 3 ff in the Grounds o f the
       Applicant Duckenfield. The most serious omission is the failure to refer to the
       investigation of the Police Complaints Authority, and the formal charges o f neglect of
       duty and other matters laid against both defendants. The defendants escaped these
       charges because Duckenfield retired from the police force four months after the
       decision to prefer charges, claiming to be unwell, and the charge was then dropped
       against Murray, who then also retired, he too claiming to be unwell. (The Grounds of
       Murray do refer to the matter. However, no evidence is presented to justify the
       assertion that “continuation of the present prosecution would be injurious to his
       health” (Murray’s grounds, paragraph 7.3) and I believe that no medical evidence was
       presented to the CPS on this point.)

The delay in making this application

11     The Director of Public Prosecutions made his decision on 18th December 1998. In
       August the stipendiary magistrate had tentatively fixed two weeks from 7th December
       for committal proceedings. The 7th December was retained as a remand date even
       though the CPS decision had been delayed. On that date, the prosecution expressed a
       desire for the committal hearing to start in February, assuming the case had not been
       discontinued. It was common ground that, since there had been a police investigation
       into the case in 1990, the new regime for committal proceedings introduced by the

                                              3
       Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996 did not apply. The defence could
       therefore insist that the prosecution call its witnesses to establish a prima facie case.

12    The defence however made representations that leading and junior counsel had been
      instructed by each defendant, and neither leader could be available before 19th April
       1999. It was said by the defence that at least four weeks would be needed for the
      hearing. The magistrate agreed to fix 19th April.

The hearing o f 21s' December 1998

13    At a remand hearing on 21st December at Leeds District Magistrates Court, leading
      counsel for Murray, Mr Michael Harrison QC, told the magistrate in open court in my
      presence that an application for judicial review o f the CPS decision would definitely be
      made, and would be lodged within the first two weeks o f January. He also told the
      court, having announced a concluded intention to apply for judicial review, that the
      CPS had indicated that it would provide some reasons, or the criteria it had applied,
      possibly on 24th December, or early in the New Year.

14    At the specific request o f counsel for the prosecution for information, junior counsel
      for Duckenfield, Mr Isaacs, also told the magistrate that he would be applying for
      judicial review of the decision at the same time.

15    It was made absolutely clear that the decision would be the subject of an application
      for judicial review whatever the reasons, or the statement o f criteria that the CPS
      would produce. Mr Harrison also asserted positively to the magistrate in my hearing
      that he was making no application to vacate the date o f 19th April, because the date
      might act as a “lever” to ensure that the judicial review proceedings were heard
      promptly.

16    Out of concern that there might indeed be delay and prejudice to the date o f committal
      proceedings, I had already written to the solicitors for the Applicants on 18th
      December inviting them to apply promptly for judicial review if they decided to apply
      at all. On 22nd December 1998 I invited them to apply by 8th January, since their
      application did not turn on the statements o f reasons o f criteria expected from the
      CPS. I produce true copies of these letters and replies to them, and correspondence of
      March 1999 on the subject, as Exhibit AMA/1. The letter I referred to in my letter of
      22nd December was a letter to the South Yorkshire Police Authority arguing that the
      Authority’s decision to fund the defence was unlawful and an abuse of public funds.
      The last sentence of the letter asked that the letter itself be brought to the attention of
      the single judge if application were made for leave.

17    AMA/1 includes a copy of a letter written by Winckworth Sherwood to SYPA on 23rd
      December indicating that the application should be ready “within the first two weeksof
      January'”, and adding:

              “It is likely that the Court will order that the judicial review proceed
              expeditiously and there is some possibility that the full substantive hearing,

                                                4
              which will take several days, could be heard before the present committal date
              o f 19,h April.”

18    The funding issue is dealt with in the Grounds of the Applicant Duckenfield at pages
       12-3. On 5th February 1999 the Police Authority accepted the prosecution’s argument
      that the funding was unlawful. The hearing o f the Chief Constable’s full motion to
      quash that decision of his own Police Authority is to be heard by the Divisional Court
      on 22nd-24th March 1998 (CO 582/99).

20    The applications for leave in the instant case were lodged on 1st March and 5th March.
      They were not made promptly. Neither Applicant has funding even now from the
      Police Authority, and that issue cannot therefore be used as an excuse for not having
      applied for relief sooner. There is no indication that either Applicant has applied for
      legal aid.

The hearing o f T' March 1999

21    Neither Applicant refers in his Grounds or evidence to this hearing. A remand hearing
      took place at Leeds court on 1st March. Both defendants applied to the stipendiary
      magistrate to adjourn the hearing of the committal on 19th April because each
      defendant had been deprived o f his funding. I was present with counsel. This hearing
      took place on the day on which the papers o f the Applicant Duckenfield, dated 26th
      February, were lodged with the Crown Office.

22    The magistrate declined to vacate the date. He was told o f the applications for judicial
      review of the CPS decision. I had not been told beforehand that they were being
      lodged, in spite o f my letters o f December. Counsel for the prosecution argued that if
      such applications were made, the application for a postponement of the committal
      proceedings should be made as an application for interim relief to the judge. The
      magistrate agreed. It is clear from paragraph 55 of the Grounds that the Applicant
      Duckenfield had already prepared such an argument himself, but his grounds do not
      refer to the Leeds application of 1st March.

23    Paragraph 55 o f the Grounds settled by Duckenfield asserts that the magistrate at
      Leeds “has asked informally that the question o f a stay o f the criminal proceedings be
      raised for the consideration o f the Court .” I do not understand this. On 21st December
      the defence declined to ask the magistrate to vacate the date. On 1st March they did
      ask him to vacate the date. The magistrate expressed his agreement with the
      proposition that the judge considering leave should consider the matter, but he has in
      no way suggested that he considers that a stay ought to be granted.

24    It will be submitted that it is obviously prejudicial to good administration and to the
      rights of the prosecution to grant a stay now, when no application has been made since
      December, whether or not the Court grants leave to move. I have spoken to the Clerk
      to the Leeds court by telephone, and have been told that they do not know when a
      further four weeks could be set aside for the committal. If the court were minded to



                                              5
       grant leave, the hearing of the motion could take place after the committal, because
       section 6 (2) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 allows the CPS to take over the
       conduct of a prosecution at any time.

A Iternative remedies

25     If the committal proceedings take place, the Applicants can argue that there is no case
        to answer, and that the proceedings are an abuse o f process. Live evidence can be
        heard and tested on both these issues, including evidence from the defendants. It is the
        defence, not the prosecution, who asked for a committal of four weeks at least. The
        Applicants have remedies much more convenient than an application for judicial
        review, and the prosecution will willingly present evidence on the abuse of process as
       well as the substantive issues in the committal proceedings .If the matter is committed
       for trial, the Applicants will be able to argue the same issues before the judge and, if
       necessary, the facts o f the case before the jury.

26     Although no answers have yet been provided to the allegations of the prosecution by
       either the Applicants or the South Yorkshire Police, it is reasonable to believe that they
       will be controversial, and that different views o f the facts will be presented. It is
       submitted that these conflicting facts should not be judged by the Divisional Court on
       affidavit evidence. Reliance is placed on the practice referred to in R v. Croydon
       .Justices, ex parte Dean [1993] Q.B. 769 and the first holding, summarised in the
       headnote at 770C-D;

               “(1) that although an application to quash a committal ought normally to be
               made to the Crown Court, particularly if the indictment had already been
               signed, the High Court would, in exceptional cases, entertain such an
               application brought by way of judicial review if the point could be decided on
               the undisputed facts, together with any other facts which the court felt bound
               to accept as true, without hearing oral evidence; and that in the circumstances,
               the court would determine the application.”

27     Neither I nor counsel was provided with a copy of the grounds of either Applicant
       until Friday 5th March, in spite of my letters o f December 1998 and o f March 1999. On
       5,h March Winckworth and Pemberton supplied leading counsel with a file. On the
       same day I requested Walker Morris to send a copy of Mr Murray’s application by
       courier. I had to undertake to pay the costs o f this service. My letters o f December
       were not provided to the judge with the application. Neither Applicant explains the
       reasons for the delay in his application, as required by Form 86A.

28     I regret that it is almost certain that neither leading or junior counsel instructed for the
        prosecution can attend the hearing on 11th March. The Crown Office has already been
        informed o f this, but has fixed the 11th March because of the urgency o f providing the
        Leeds court with an answer. In that event I shall not seek to incur the expense of
        instructing fresh counsel to master the complicated facts and to appear, but will rely
        instead on the contents of this affidavit and the arguments of the Crown Prosecution
        Service. I propose to attend the hearing, in case any factual questions arise. Leading

                                                 6
        counsel instructed for the prosecution will be in the Royal Courts in the Court of
        Appeal (Criminal Division) and therefore available for consultation in adjournments.

SWORN this 9th day o f March 1999 by the above named Ann Marie Adlington at Liverpool
in the County o f Merseyside




Before me
            Solicitor/ Commissioner for Oaths


Name:
                       Quinn Melville Solicitors
Address:
                       15 Stanley Strert
                       Liverpool,      L16AA
                       0151 2383340
                       dx 14154 Liverpool




                                                7
             CO/856/99


IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
OIIFEN’S BENCH DTVISTON
CROWN OFFICE LIST




IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION
FOR LEAVE TO APPLY FOR JUDICIAL
REVIEW


BETWEEN:

THE QUEEN

and

THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC
PROSECUTIONS
          Respondent

EX PARTE

David Godfrey Duckenfield




Ann Adlington
Solicitor
Hillsborough Family Support Group
Central Buildings
41 North John Street
Liverpool L2 6RR
