                                              3560




                                               CRN/91 67/4/1

                                                12 July 1991




Dear

Thank you for your letter to the Home Secretary about the
Hillsborough Inquest verdict.  I am sorry that you have not
received an earlier reply.

I should first explain that although the Home Secretary has a
general responsibility for the law under which coroners work,
he has no authority to intervene in or comment upon the way in
which a coroner, who is an independent judicial officer,
carries out his duties in any particular case.

You suggest that the inquest verdict should have attributed
negligence to particular bodies.  However, this is not the
function of the coroners inquest.  The law specifically states
that the purpose of an inquest is to ascertain the identity of
the deceased and how, when and where he came by his death.
The Coroners Rules provide that neither the coroner nor the
jury shall express any opinion on any other matters. In
addition, the rules specifically prohibit the framing of an
inquest verdict in such a way as to appear to determine any
question of criminal liability on the part of a named person,
or civil liability.  Any issue of civil or criminal liability
is a matter for the civil or criminal courts and not the
coroners' inquest.

If anyone is dissatisfied with any aspect of an inquest, under
section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988, it is open to them to
apply with the authority of the Attorney General, for the High
Court to quash the verdict and order a fresh inquest to be
held, either by the same coroner or by a different one.
Coroners inquests are also subject to judicial review.

As you will know, there has already been a public inquiry into
the event by Lord Justice Taylor whose subsequent report
reached various conclusions on the cause of the event,
including that:

       1.   the immediate cause of the gross over-crowding and
       hence the disaster was the failure, when gate C was open,
       to cut off access to the central pens which were already
       over-full.
     2.   They were already over-full because no safe maximum
     capacities had been laid down (in the safety certificate
     issued by the local authority), no attempt was made to
     control entry to the individual pens numerically and
     there was no effective visual monitoring of crowd
     density.

In order to avoid a similar occurrence in future, Lord Justice
Taylor has recommended that such safety certificates should be
reviewed annually and this is fully supported by the
Government.

The question of the Council's possible negligence over the
issue of the safety certificate has been considered by the
Director of Public Prosecutions but I understand that he has
decided not to institute criminal proceedings.

I am sorry that I am unable to send you a more helpful reply.


                                    Yours sincerely




                                    G HARRISON(MISS)
                                    E Division
