   Pf^    CT.   C W ffiR S .     F a x :0 ll3 2 4 2 1 2 8 5

                                                                    19 Mar ’99         9:30       P.1?




                                                                                  £ 0 ^ 56/92
ns THE H I G H m U BX flEJX IgnCE

QUEEN’S BEKQi-DIYJ^lQH

BETWEEN:

                                       REGINA
                                         -v-
                           DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS

                                                   Ex parte

                               DAVID GODFREY DUCKENFIELD




                       SKELETON AB G l J M E m m m & m i C A K X



1.1    The Applicant adopts the Skeleton Argument o f the Bernard Dean Murray in so far as the
issues are common to both Applications.

Attempting to pervert the course o f justice
2.1   The ‘reasons letter’ o f 1 February 1999 states;
        ‘7 should add that, against that background and after specifically considering
       the appropriate course to take in these circumstances, J concludedfurther that
       it would not be right to intervene in respect o f the one remaining charge against
      Mr Duckenfield... albeit I had formed the view that there was clearly no case to
       ans»>er on that charge alom. The charge o f attempting to pervert the course o f
       justice is a serious one, particularly when levelled against someone who was, at
       the relevant time, a senior, serving police officer. Nevertheless, in the context o f
       the case as a whole that charge is not the gravamen o f the criminality alleged
       against Mr Duckenfield and I concluded that my approach to that charge should
       be led by my conclusions on the charges o f manslaughter and wilful neglect to
      perform a public duty. ”

 2.2   The decision is wholly unreasonable and perverse. It amounts to an abdication o f statutory
 responsibility and is a contravention of the Director’s policy.

 2.3     It is wholly wrong for the Director to allow an allegation o f such seriousness to remain
 in being when there is either no evidential or no legal justification for it. It is an accusation o f an
 offence with mens rea, whereas the other charges (although extremely serious) are based upon
 allegations of negligence.
i-'HKK. LI. LHHMBLKS.       hax■■0 1 132421285               19 Mar ’99        9:31       P. 18




   2.4     The decision has failed to take account o f relevant considerations,
   [1]     The private prosecutor is certain not to accept the Director’s judgment that there is no
   prima facie case. The allegation will be pursued at committal. The prosecutor insists that any
   application for a stay of proceedings must be heard concurrently with evidence called upon
   committal. The charge relates to events which took place in the aftermath o f the tragedy. Thus
   the evidence and issues at committal will be extended as a result o f the Director’s failure to
   intervene, and the Applicant will be forced to contest a charge he ought not to be facing at al).
   [2]     The private prosecution proceedings are being highly and frequently publicised. There is
   no means o f restraining the prosecutor or the press from repeatedly referring to the fact that this
   Applicant faces such a charge.

   2.5     The Applicant is further prejudiced by the unjustified existence of this charge in that the
   private prosecutor has deployed it as a reason for the Police Authority to withhold funding from
   him on the ground that it indicates an absence of good faith in his conduct as a police officer on
   the material date.
