                                                                                 CO/856/99

TN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE

QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION


BETWEEN:


                                        REGINA

                                            -v-

                    DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
                                                                                Respondent
                          Ex parte
                DAVID GODFREY DUCKENFIELD
                            and
      "RECEiVED*N B RNARD DEAN MURRAY
      CROWN OFFICE
                                                                                 Applicants
          11 WAR

              uJsaa:

              SKELETON ARGUMENT OF THE DPP




1.   The Applicants seek leave to apply for Judicial Review of the decision of the DPP

     and/or CPS not to take over the conduct of criminal proceedings commenced against

     them by Ann Adlington on behalf of the Hillsborough Family Support Group in July

     1998 with a view to discontinuing those proceedings. The application for leave is

     opposed on the grounds summarised in this Skeleton Argument.



2.   The proper approach

     For the purposes of this leave application it is accepted that the Court has jurisdiction
     judicially to review a decision of the DPP not to take over a private prosecution. The

     Divisional Court has already held that it should exercise the power to review a decision

     of the DPP not to prosecute sparingly (see, for example, RvD PP, Ex parte C (7/22)).

     It is submitted that the power of review should be exercised even more sparingly

     where, as here:

     (a)   criminal proceedings have already begun: the civil courts should, in principle,

            be very slow to interfere with the criminal process;

     (b)   the decision sought to be challenged is not the decision of the DPP not to

            prosecute but the decision not to take over a private prosecution (which has

            been lawfully commenced) with a view to terminating it;

     (c)   taking over a private prosecution with a view to terminating it would involve

            interfering with the well-recognised fundamental right of every citizen to bring

            a private prosecution and with criminal proceedings which have been lawfully

            commenced;

     (d)   the Applicants have alternative remedies available to them (see below);

     (e)   the consequences of granting leave (i.e. interfering with the criminal process)

            will be seriously to delay the criminal proceedings.



3.   The alternative remedies available to the Applicants are as follows:

     (1)   challenge the issue of the Summons (this has not been done since it has,

            presumably, been accepted that the proceedings have been lawfully

            commenced);

     (2)   resist committal upon the grounds that the evidence to support the charges is



                                            2
            insufficient (if that be the case) and/or that the proceedings are an abuse of

            process.

            It is to be noted that committal proceedings have already been fixed for 19 April

            1999.

     (3)    make similar submissions to the Crown Court if committed.

     It cannot be said that these alternative remedies are inadequate; on the contrary, they

     provide the same protection as is provided to any accused person.



4.   The Grounds relied upon bv the First Applicant (Duckenfield)

     Three grounds are relied upon. It is submitted that none is arguable.

     The first ground

     The decision was based on an unlawful policy.

     This ground is misconceived. The Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 (the Act) does not

     stipulate what should be the DPP’s policy as to taking over private prosecutions with

     a view to discontinuing them. Indeed, the Act does not stipulate what should be his

     policy as to the taking over of police prosecutions already instituted (as he is obliged

     to do by Section 3(2)(a)) or as to the institution of proceedings himself.        On the

     contrary, the formulation and content of such a policy has been expressly left by

     Parliament to the DPP. He has formulated a policy in relation to the taking over of

     private prosecutions with a view to terminating them in the terms set out in Mr

     Newell’s letter of 1 February 1999 (4/4). That policy is neither unlawful under the

     provisions of the Act nor is it inconsistent with them. It is different from his policy in

     relation to the taking over of all police prosecutions and the institution of proceedings



                                             3
     himself but that fact cannot make the policy unlawful. Nor can the fact that (if it be

     correct, which is not accepted) the policy differs in any respect from the views

     expressed by either the Philips Report or the Consultation Paper and Report of the Law

     Commission, make his policy unlawful. (In any event the policy was formulated before

     either the Consultation Paper or the Report were available).



5.   The second ground

     The DPP has failed to act in accordance with his published Code.

     This ground is also misconceived. The Director’s published Code (5/14) sets out the

     DPP’s policy with regard to taking over police prosecutions (as the Director is obliged

     to do under the Act). It does not set out the Director’s policy with regard to the taking

     over of private prosecutions with a view to terminating them. That policy is set out in

     Mr Newell’s letter of 1 February 1999 (4/4) and is a different policy (as is

     acknowledged by the Applicant). The Director’s duty is to act in accordance with that

     policy. He has done so.



6.   The Applicant also contends that Section 10 of the Act obliges the Director to issue a

     Code which gives guidance on general principles to be applied not only in relation to

     the institution of proceedings by the Director and his review of proceedings already

     instituted by the police but also with regard to the discontinuance of private

     prosecutions. Such a construction of Section 10 is erroneous. Properly construed,

     together with Sections 3 and 6, Section 10 (only) obliges the Director to issue a Code

     giving guidance on general principles to be applied in relation to proceedings instituted



                                             4
     by him and proceedings instituted by the police which, under the Act, he is obliged to

     take over. But even if the construction contended for by the Applicant were sound, it

     is nothing to the point: the consequence would be that the Director has failed to comply

     with his obligation under Section 10 to issue a Code giving guidance in relation to the

     taking over of private prosecutions with a view to terminating them; the consequence

     could not be that the Director had failed to act in accordance with his policy.



7.   The third ground

     The decision is perverse.

     It is submitted that this contention is bound to fail. True it is that the Director has

     concluded on previous occasions that, applying the principles which apply to the

     institution of proceedings by the police or by him (as set out in his Code), the Applicant

     should not be prosecuted. However, as acknowledged by the Applicant, the Director

     does not apply the same policy to the question whether he should take over a private

     prosecution with a view to terminating it. Nor is a private prosecutor obliged to apply

     the Code before instituting a private prosecution nor is the Magistrates’ Court obliged

     to follow it when deciding whether to issue a Summons. This reflects the importance

     of the right of every citizen to bring a private prosecution (explained by the Law

     Commission as follows: "... For some members of our society - those, for example,

     who have doubts about the impartiality of the prosecuting authorities, or who believe

     that an official prosecutor has misjudged the evidence in a case - the right of private

     prosecution provides an important safeguard against abuse. ’) and what the Law

     Commission described as the ‘fundamental principle” that the right of private



                                             5
     prosecution should be unrestricted unless some very good reason to the contrary exists

     (6/10). For the Director to intervene in this private prosecution because it failed to

     meet his two stage test for Police and his own prosecutions would be to usurp or

     seriously restrict the scope of the right to private prosecution. The Director’s policy

     with regard to taking over private prosecutions with a view to terminating them is

     lawful and rational and his application of that policy to the facts of this case cannot be

     said to have been perverse.



8.   The Grounds relied upon bv the Second Applicant (Murray)

     Three grounds are relied upon. It is submitted that none is arguable.

     The first ground

     The Respondent’s policy as to when he will take over and discontinue a private

     prosecution is “wrong and unlawful

     This ground is misconceived for the reasons set out at paragraph 4 above. As to the

     specific contentions relied upon:

     (1)    The thrust of the Second Applicant’s case seems to be (see paras. 3.4 and 3.6

            of his application) that in all cases of undoubted importance and difficulty where

            the Director has decided not to prosecute, he is under a duty to take over and

            discontinue a private prosecution since to do otherwise would amount to “an

            abdication of responsibility”. This contention is unsustainable. Had Parliament

            intended that the Director should be under such a duty, it would have so

            provided in the 1985 Act. In any event, it is precisely when the Director has

            decided not to prosecute that a private prosecution is likely to be brought. The



                                             6
            right to private prosecution would be emasculated were the duty contended for

            to arise.

     (2)    The Applicant contends that the “clearly no case to answer”test imposes an

            unwarranted fetter on the Director’s power to take over and continue a private

            prosecution. It does not such thing. The Director is entitled to have a policy

            as to the circumstances in which he will take over and discontinue a private

            prosecution. True it is that the test under the policy is different from the test

            under his Code but this does not make it unlawful, let alone “wrongJJ(whatever

            that is supposed to mean in public law terms).



9.   The second ground

     The Director’s policy is wrong and unlawful because it does not take proper account

     of the material public interest considerations.

     On analysis, this is a complaint not about the Director’s policy but about the application

     of that policy to the circumstances of this case (see paragraphs 6.1 - 6.5 of the

     application). True it is that Mr Newell did not identify the public interest factors either

     in favour of or against a prosecution in this case but:

     (a)    the Director is under no obligation to give reasons, let alone detailed reasons,

            for his decisions;

     (b)    in fact, as he explained in his letter of 1 February 1999, Mr Newell considered

            it “appropriate to explain the factors taken into account in more detail than was

            contained in the Service’s letter dated 18 December 1998” ;

     (c)    he stopped short of identifying any of the public interest factors in play but self-



                                             7
              evidently a very important public interest factor in favour of prosecution will

              have been the seriousness of the offences.



10.   The third ground

      The decision was perverse.

      For the reasons set out in paragraph 7 above, it is submitted that this contention is

      bound to fail.



11.   Discretion

      Even if any of the grounds relied upon are arguable it is submitted that as a matter of

      discretion leave should be refused for the reasons set out in paragraphs 2 and 3 above.



12.   Delay

      It is further submitted that these applications have not been made promptly for the

      reasons set out in the Affidavit of Ann Adlington and that leave should be refused on

      that ground also.



                                                                    PHILIP HAVERS QC




                                             8
                                   CO/856/99

TN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE

QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION


BETWEEN:


                REGINA

                   -v-

 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
                         Respondent
              Ex parte
    DAVID GODFREY DUCKENFIELD
                           Applicant




  SKELETON ARGUMENT OF
         THE DPP




           Treasury Solicitor
         Queen Anne’s Chambers
              28 Broadway
           London SW1H 9JS

         Ref. L98/8265K/SJR/D 1

          Counsel’s ref. C.64241
