                    Hillsborough Family Support Group




 2 March 1999

 The Crown Office
 Royal Court o f Justice
 Strand
 London WC2A 2LL


 Dear Sirs

 I am the prosecutor in the case o f David Duckenfield and Bernard Murray, formerly o f the
 South Yorkshire police, who are charged before the Leeds District Magistrates Court with
 manslaughter and other offences. I have spoken this afternoon on the telephone to Simon
 Slidders about the listing o f an application for judicial review by both defendants.

 I understand that they are seeking leave to challenge the decision o f the Crown Prosecution
 Service o f 18lh December 1998 not to take over and discontinue proceedings under the
 Prosecution o f Offences Act 1985.

  When the decision was made last December, I wrote to the defendants saying that I would
  wish to be represented at the application for leave, if one was made. In particular I wish to
  object through counsel to the application for a stay on the committal proceedings. These were
  fixed for 19"’ April 1999 on 7lh December last, at the request o f the defendants, who said their
- counsel were unavailable before then.

 Out o f concern that the committal proceedings might be delayed, I indicated to the defendants
 in writing that I would object on the grounds that the application had not been made promptly,
 if it was not lodged by 8th January. In my view this was reasonable because the challenge was
 to be on the grounds o f irrationality alone, as was made clear to the magistrate in Leeds on
 21st December 1 99 8 .1 was concerned that the committal proceedings should not be
 prejudiced. On that same day leading counsel for M r Murray told the magistrate he was not
 going to apply for the committal date to be adjourned because the date o f 19th April might act
 as a “lever” to ensure that the judicial review was heard promptly.

 Yesterday, l sl March, the defendants both applied for the committal proceedings to be
 adjourned at Leeds, but the magistrate declined to do so. He was told by counsel for
 Duckenfield that an application was being made yesterday, or had been made on Friday
 evening, for judicial review. I had not been told beforehand that the application was being
 made at this stage. I have not been served with papers.


                                                -   1
                                                    -




   Phone 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151 236 1936. E Mail info@hfsg.org
 1st Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR
In these circumstances, I contend that it is fair that counsel who knows about these things
should be present. Alun Jones QC has advised the prosecution throughout the case, and it is
the delay o f the defence that has caused this problem. Next week he is in the Court o f Appeal
before Rose LJ for five days. His junior, James Lewis, is working abroad. Both o f them are
free for several half days o f the week o f 15lh March or on Thursday or Friday o f this week.

The proposal for a stay is o f great importance, and the magistrate has expressed the
understandable and firm hope that he can have an answer by 22nd March as to whether a stay
has been granted. Four weeks have been set aside for committal proceedings in his busy
court. It is the decision o f the defence to make the application at this late stage. All I ask for
is some flexibility in the next two weeks.

I understand that Philip Havers QC is instructed for the Crown Prosecution Service.

This application for judicial review is not, o f course, to be confused with the judicial review o f
the decision o f the South Yorkshire Police Authority, also arising out o f the Hillsborough
disaster, to which I am also a Respondent. (CO/582/99)

The importance o f a stay is emphasised in the White Book at 53/14/48

Yours sincerely




Ann Adlington
Solicitor
