IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
                                                                      CO     lo ll         (99
QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION

CROWN OFFICE LIST

     IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION OF LEAVE TO APPLY FOR JUDICIAL
                                REVIEW

BETWEEN:

                                       THE QUEEN

                                            and

                       SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
                                                                                  Respondent
                                        EXPARTE

                              BERNARD DEAN MURRAY
                                                                                     Applicant



                            LIST OF ESSENTIAL READING


This list refers to the contents of the ‘core bundle’ which has been compiled for ease of
reference. The core bundle has been extracted from the main bundle (MB) and markers have
been inserted to indicate pages which have been copied and extracted. The page numbers below
correspond with the page numbers contained within the main bundle.
                                                                                         Page

I - (Section 2 - MB)
1.    Notice of application for leave to apply for Judicial Review Order 53 rule 3(2)     1-14

2 -(S ection3 -M B)
2.     Affidavit of Richard Bruce Manning                                                  1-8

3 -(Section 4 -MB)
3.    Summons issued against the Applicant dated 13 July 1998                               9

4 - (All Section 4 - MB)
4.    Letter dated 28 June 1998 from Applicant to Respondent                                 1
5.    Letter dated 3 July 1998 from Applicant’s Solicitor’s to DPP                         2-7
6.    Letter dated 27 July from CPS to HFSG                                              10-13
7.    Letter dated 20 November 1998 from Applicant’s Solicitor to South Yorkshire       14-15
                                                                                      Page
       Police Authority.
8.     Letter dated 18 November 1998 (in error should be 18 December 1998) from         16
       CPS to Applicant’s Solicitors
9.     Letter dated 22 December 1998 from HFSG to South Yorkshire Police Authority   22-28
10.    Letter dated 5 January 1999 from HFSG to South Yorkshire Police Authority     30-36
11.    Extract from HFSG website dated 11 January 1999 containing letter regarding   40-41
       defence costs
12.    Letter dated 13 January 1999 from South Yorkshire Police Authority to         45-46
       Applicant’s Solicitor
13.    Letter dated 1 February 1999 from CPS to Applicant’s Solicitor                53-55
14.    Letter dated 10 February 1999 from Respondent’s Solicitor to Applicant’s      67-71
       Solicitor

5 - (Section 4 - MB)
15.     Submissions on behalf of Mr. Bernard Murray to the South Yorkshire Police   58-63
        Authority                                                                 & 65-66


6 - (Section 6 - MB)
16.     Home Office Circular 77/1987                                                 14-16
17.     Home Office Circular 4/1988                                                  17-22

7 - (Section 7- MB)
18.     Extract from Hazell v Hammersmith & Fulham London Borough Council            17-20
        [1992] 2 A.C.l
19.     Extract from Associated Provincial Picture House v Wednesbury Corporation       34
        [1948] KB 223 CA
20.     Extract from R v Derbyshire Police Authority, ex parte Wilson & Dalton       41-45
        (Unreported), Judgment of 20th July 1989 DC
21.     Extract from R v Richmond Upon Thames London Borough Council, ex              114
        parte McCarthy & Stone (Developments) Ltd. [1992] 2 A.C. 48 HL
22.     Extract from Credit Suisse v Watham Forest London Borough Council             121
        [1997] QB 362 CA
23.     Extract from Sutton London Borough Council v Morgan Grenfell & Co Ltd.        163
        (1996) 29 HLR608HL

 8 -(Section 4 -MB)
24.     Extract from Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s Scrutiny, presented on the 18       84-89
        February 1998
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
                                                   CO               (99
QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION

CROWN OFFICE LIST

   IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION OF LEAVE TO APPLY FOR JUDICIAL
                              REVIEW

BETWEEN:

                               THE QUEEN

                                  and

                SOUTH YORKSHIRE PO LICE AUTHORITY
                                                           Respondent
                               EXPARTE

                       BERNARD DEAN MURRAY
                                                            Applicant



              AFFIDAVIT ON BEHALF OF THE APPLICANT
                                                     Affidavit o f : R B Manning
                                                     Affidavit num ber: 1
                                                     Sworn on behalf of the Applicant
                                                     Sworn on                 .................


IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE


QUEENS BENCH DIVISION                                                                   CO:       /99


CROW N OFFICE LIST


In the m atter of an application for Judicial Review


The Queen -v- The South Yorkshire Police Authority


Ex parte B ernard Dean M urray


Notice of application for leave to apply for Judicial Review O rder 53 Rule 3(2)


Judgem ent order, decision or other proceeding in respect of which relief is sought:




                     AFFIDAVIT OF RICHARD BRUCE MANNING




I RICHARD BRUCE MANNING, Solicitor and Partner in the firm of Walker Morris of Kings
Court, 12 King Street, LEEDS, LSI 2HL, a Solicitor of the Supreme Court MAKE OATH and
say as follows:


1.     I have been at all material times a Partner of Walker Morris Solicitors, Leeds. In 1989
       I was instructed by Mr Bernard Dean Murray to act on his behalf during the inquest
       proceedings relating to the Hillsborough Football Disaster which occurred at the
       Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield on 15 April 1989.


                                               1
2.   There is now produced and shown to me marked “ exhibit RBM1" a bundle of documents
     relevant to this application.


3.   In 1998 when the Hillsborough Family Support Group (HFSG) commenced private
     prosecutions against Mr Murray, I was further instructed by him in relation to defending
     him against these allegations.


4.   Bernard Murray worked as a Police Officer for 26 years. He attained the position of
     Police Superintendent with the South Yorkshire Police and was stationed at Hammerton
     Road Police Station in Sheffield. On Saturday 15 April 1989, Bernard Murray held the
     position of Sub-divisional Commander of the FI Sub-division which includes Sheffield
     Wednesday Football Ground at Hillsborough. On the day of the Hillsborough Disaster
     the Divisional Commander in charge of Police operations at the match was Chief
     Superintendent David Duckenfield. The match on 15 April 1989 was the FA Cup Semi-
     Final between Liverpool Football Club and Nottingham Forest Football Club. The
     events of the day led to 96 people losing their lives.


5.   On 17 April 1989 Lord Justice Taylor was appointed by the Government to carry out a
     public enquiry into the events of the disaster. On 4 August 1989 Lord Justice Taylor
     presented an interim report. Immediately after the disaster West Midlands Police were
     appointed to conduct a review of the policing operation of the South Yorkshire Police.
     In March 1990 their report was submitted to the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP)
     for his consideration as to whether there was sufficient evidence for prosecutions to be
     brought against 7 Officers who were in command during the Hillsborough Football
     Disaster (including Bernard Murray).


6.   The Director of Public Prosecutions referred this report to two experienced Queen’s
     Counsel for their opinions. Counsel considered whether there was sufficient evidence
     for charges o f manslaughter and offences of culpable misfeasance in public office to be
     made out against the Officers. On 30 August 1990, the Director of Public Prosecutions
     upon the joint opinion of Queen’s Counsel said that there was insufficient evidence to


                                              2
justify any prosecution for a criminal offence against any member of the South Yorkshire
Police force or any other party.


Between 19 November 1990 and 28 March 1991, a Coroner’s inquest was held, the Jury
returning a verdict of accidental death.


On 27 August 1992 Bernard Murray retired from the South Yorkshire Police on the
grounds of ill health having been certified as medically unfit for performing the ordinary
duties o f a member of the force. He has not worked since that date. He still receives
medical treatment as a result of what occurred at the Hillsborough Stadium and his wife’s
state o f health is also giving cause for concern.


Between March and May 1997 the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) conducted a further
review consequent upon a television drama documentary called “Hillsborough”. The
CPS concluded that the evidence at that time was not sufficient to provide a realistic
prospect of conviction of my Client.


On 30 June 1997, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was appointed to conduct an independent
scrutiny as to whether there was any new evidence relating to the Disaster. His report,
presented to the House of Commons on 18 February 1998, concluded that there was no
basis for reopening Lord Taylor’s enquiry, nor did he consider that there was any
material which could be put before the DPP or the Police Complaints Authority which
might cause them to reconsider decisions already taken.


On 26 June 1998 HFSG laid information before the South Sefton Magistrates’ Court
leading to the issue of summonses against my Client that on 15 April 1989 he had
unlawfully killed John Alfred Anderson, unlawfully killed James Gary Aspinall and
willfully neglected to perform a public duty. Those proceedings were withdrawn on 10
July 1998 but summonses in identical form were issued on 13 July 1998 in the Leeds
Magistrates’ Court. Those proceedings continue and committal proceedings have been
    12.   Upon receipt of the original summonses, I wrote by a letter dated 3 July 1998 to the
          Director o f Public Prosecutions. I requested that the DPP take over the conduct of the
          proceedings pursuant to Section 6 (2) o f the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 and
          discontinue them pursuant to Section 23 (3) o f the same Act.




    13.   On 18 December 1998 a letter was received from the Crown Prosecution Service on
          behalf of the Director of Public Prosecutions indicating that having considered the
          evidence and the representations o f the parties and the surrounding circumstances, they
          had concluded that they would not take over any of the charges.


    14.   I was extremely concerned that this important correspondence from the Crown
          Prosecution Service contained no reference to the factual matters upon which the Crown
          Prosecution Service had arrived at their decision and further that no information had been
          given by the CPS as to the way in which they had applied their discretion under the Code
          for Crown Prosecutors and Statutes. I therefore wrote to the Crown Prosecution Service
          on 18 December requesting that they supply this information by 10.00am on 21
          December 1998. In the event, despite oral assurances in a telephone conversation with
          Mr George Croston of the Crown Prosecution Service on 21 December that a reply in
          draft had already been prepared, the response from the Crown Prosecution Service was
          not provided until I received a letter from them dated 1 February 1999.


c   15.   I sought advices from Mr Michael Harrison QC and Mr Simon Myerson of Counsel.
          They advised inter alia that they considered the decision by the CPS to be plainly wrong
          and that it was open to challenge in the High Court by application for Judicial Review.
          On 22 December 1998 I wrote to the South Yorkshire Police Authority on behalf of my
          Client asking them to extend financial assistance so as to cover the proposed application
          for Judicial Review of the decision by the Director of Public Prosecutions not to
          intervene.


    16.   It appears although I did not know it at the time that on 22 December 1998 HFSG had
          written to the South Yorkshire Police Authority objecting to the provision o f funding.


                                                  4
A further letter dated 5 January 1999 was also submitted by HFSG to the Authority
setting out their objections in greater detail.


It is now necessary for ease of reference to seek leave to refer to Affidavits sworn in the
course o f the application for Judicial Review made by the Chief Constable o f South
Yorkshire Police under Crown Office reference CO/582/99.


In relation to the Affidavit of Ian Daines, Assistant Chief Constable o f the South
Yorkshire Police I would confirm that my Client has believed that the Police Authority
do have the power to assist him with payment of his costs and expenses in defending the
prosecution brought against him, arising from the course of his duties as a Superintendent
o f Police of the South Yorkshire Police Force. My Client had relied upon authority
previously granted to him in relation to legal representation at the inquest and the
authorisation of assistance with his costs in relation to these proceedings. Doubtless one
o f the factors that influenced the Chief Constable was that he knew that my Client had
taken out, as recommended on promotion to Superintendent, Legal Expenses Insurance.
The whole of the cover provided by the Legal Expenses Insurers had been used up during
the course o f the preparation for and representation at the Coroner’s Inquest. It was
consequent upon that position being established that the South Yorkshire Police
Authority assisted with ongoing funding.


My Client had to accept early retirement because of medical reasons as a direct
consequence o f the Hillsborough Disaster. By virtue of the stress of the continuing
prosecutions the health of both Mr Murray and his wife continue to deteriorate and give
cause for concern. Mr Murray has suffered substantial and continuing financial loss by
virtue of his retirement on medical grounds. He would have expected to have achieved
the rank o f Senior Superintendent and to have remained a Police officer until August
2001. There has been a further and significantly adverse affect upon his health in the
knowledge that without the assistance of funding from the South Yorkshire Police
Authority, he and his family would have to commit the whole of their available savings
and their home to fund the proceedings.
In the Affidavit of Ann Adlington, sworn on 26 February 1999 in the proceedings
CO/582/99 she says inter alia at paragraph 7 (2) “the Applicant has no sufficient interest
in the decisions of the Authority to make this application, alternatively no sufficient
interest in relation to some of the relief sought”.


It is because of the challenge set out at paragraph 7 (2)b and repeated at paragraphs 83
to 84 under the heading “locus standi” that this application has had to be made. There
is no doubt in my submission that Bernard Murray has locus standi. It would be
extremely unfortunate and I believe contrary to the interest of justice for there not to be
a determination of these very important issues simply because the Court took the view
that (contrary to my own belief) the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has no locus
standi as a person with “sufficient interest”, or for any other reason advanced by HFSG.




A substantial part of the Affidavit o f Ann Adlington deals with the merits of whether if
it is determined that the South Yorkshire Police Authority do have the power to provide
financial assistance they should then do so. It was made plain by the Solicitors advising
the South Yorkshire Police Authority that submissions made had to be confined to that
issue alone and for this reason I will not in this Affidavit deal with many of the issues
raised in this regard by Ann Adlington save insofar that it may be necessary and on the
clear understanding that many of the assertions are not accepted by me.


I specifically reject the allegation at paragraph 4 of the Affidavit that we have been
making profligate use o f public money in a way which would not be tolerated. HFSG
have retained the services of Mr Alun Jones QC and he has appeared personally at the
various Magistrates’ Courts hearings.        He prepared and signed a 28 paragraph
submission to the Clerk to the Justices as to the issue of summonses. He has been
attended by Junior Counsel. In contrast I conducted the hearings before the Leeds
Magistrates’ Court on 28 August, 7 December and 1 March. At the hearing on 21
December it is correct that Mr Michael Harrison QC and Mr Simon Myerson attended
at what was an important hearing which was within three days of the decision of the
Crown Prosecution Service not to intervene. As to the “retinue o f eleven lawyers and
ancillary staff’ at paragraph 17 it is untrue sofar as I was concerned that all of them were
at the expense of the South Yorkshire Chargepayers. I took along with me two para­
legals who assisted in the carriage of the papers and who went along for experience.


Whilst it is correct that Mr Michael Harrison QC considered the decision by the Crown
Prosecution Service to be plainly wrong, the application was not actually drawn until the
written reasons had been received from the Crown Prosecution Service.               On 21
December 1998 Counsel advised in writing that before finally advising and formulating
the basis o f a challenge to the CPS decision, they would wish to consider any response
that the CPS cared to make. At hearings that I had attended, it had been made plain to
me both by Mr Alun Jones QC and by Ann Adlington that if the DPP decided to
intervene then HFSG would immediately lodge an application for Judicial Review.
Furthermore when Mr Trevor Hicks, a member of HFSG, addressed the South Yorkshire
Police Authority he specifically said that if the authority confirmed that they would
continue to provide financial assistance to my Client HFSG would within 10 days take
out an application for Judicial Review of that decision.


I can say with absolute certainly that no advices tendered to me by Leading Counsel or
Junior Counsel would in any way be different if the Defendant were either funding this
action himself or if he had Legal Expenses Insurance or if he had the benefit of a Legal
Aid Order. All of the action undertaken by me and my firm and with the assistance of
Counsel have been necessitated because this prosecution has been continued
notwithstanding the fact that the Director of Public Prosecutions has long held the view
that there is no realistic prospect o f conviction.


Whilst HFSG purport to be concerned to protect the public purse, I would submit that
responsible expressions of concern about public expense should be the condemnation of
the unjustified prosecution which HFSG persists in bringing. Our submissions to the
CPS were made with a view to bringing the HFSG prosecution to a swift conclusion
thereby minimising the public expense which will inevitably arise from contesting the
proceedings before the Magistrate and in the Crown Court if committed. Leading
Counsel for the private prosecutor had indicated to the Magistrate an intention to call
             many witnesses in the committal proceedings, not all of whose statement have yet been
             served.   HFSG seek to insist that any application to the Magistrate to stay the
             proceedings must be heard concurrently with the taking of evidence. They refuse to
             agree to the Magistrate hearing any application to stay the proceedings as a preliminary
             to the committal proceedings. Our challenge to the CPS decision in the High Court is
             based upon a clear view that the Crown’s policy is wrong in law on a matter of
             considerable public importance.


      27.    I believe that the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire is correct in his view that it will
             have a significant effect upon the morale of Police Officers throughout the country if
             they know that at the time an Officer should be entitled to support including financial
             support from his employing authority that the authority does not have the power to assist
             him in this way.


      28.    I make this Affidavit in support o f an application that leave be granted for there to be a
             Judicial Review of the decision o f the South Yorkshire Police Authority’s refusal to
             provide the assistance that has been sought.




      Sworn at                                       )
                                                     )
                                                     )
                                                     )
f'A
c     This   )V     D a y o f / ^ ' tfwZ- ^ + V   1999

      Before me



      Solicitor/Commissioner for Oaths




                                                         8
                                                                          (1) R B M anning
                                                                         (2) F irst A ffidavit
                                                       (3) Sworn on behalf of the A pplicant
                                                                (4) Sworn / o / o S / 9 9
                                                                      CO                   (99
                                                  IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
                                                  QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION
                                                  CROWN OFFICE LIST

                                                   IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION
                                                   FOR LEAVE TO APPLY FOR JUDICIAL
                                                               REVIEW

                                                  BETWEEN:

                                                                THE QUEEN

                                                                     and

                                                       SOUTH YORKSHIRE PO LICE
                                                             AUTHORITY
                                                                         Respondent

                                                                 EXPARTE

                                                        BERNARD DEAN MURRAY
                                                                         Applicant



                                                    AFFIDAVIT OF RICHARD BRUCE
                                                             MANNING




                                                  Walker Morris Solicitors
                                                  11 Quebec Street
                                                  LEEDS
                                                  LSI 2HA
                                                  Tel: 0113 283 2500
                                                  Fax: 0113 245 9412
                                                  Ref: RBM.AQL.MURRAY

H:\WP\CRIM-MAT\TZB\DRAFT\MURR4.FUN\9 March 1999
                            SUMMONS TO DEFENDANT

                       IN TH E COUNTY OF W EST YORKSHIRE

                     LEEDS CITY PETTY SESSIONAL DIVISION


                                  The 13^-day of          1998



Informations have been laid this day before me, the undersigned Justice o f the Peace, by
ANN ADLINGTON, (Solicitor) acting on behalf o f the Hillsborough Family Support
Group that you BER N A R D D EAN MURRAY

of                                    Pontefract, W est Yorkshire

on the 15th day o f April, 1989

at     Hillsborough Football Stadium , Sheffield

1.     Unlawfully killed JO H N ALFRED ANDERSON
       Contrary to Common Law

2.     Unlawfully killed JA M ES GARY ASPINALL
       Contrary to Common Law

3.     Wilfully neglected to perform a public duty
       Contrary to Common Law



YOU ARE THEREFORE H EREBY SUM M ONED to appear o n T W u * * ^        the ^ K
day o f A v u W > 1998 before the M AGISTRATES’ COURT sitting at W ESTGATE,
LEEDS to answer the said informations, a *  \ Q ( P c im




J w ticc of the Peace for the County aforesaid
                                                                               CO00 0
                                        MA i M U uaiiiajaa



                                                R D Murray



                                                Pontefract
                                                West Yorks.

                                               Tel -
                                               oolh June 1998
                                               28


 Dear Mr W ells,

On 15th April 1 9 8 9 1 was a superintendent o f the South Yorkshire Police,
stationed at Hammerton Road Police Station and was on duty in charge o f
the control room at the F.A. cup semi-final at Hillsborough football
stadium, before and during the terrible events that occurred on that day. I
have always maintained that I acted in good faith and to the best o f my
ability. I gave evidence at the public enquiry that followed the tragedy,
and gave evidence at the subsequent Inquest, which resulted in a verdict o f
accidental death on those who lost their lives. At the Inquest I was legally
represented by Mr Richard Manning o f Walker M om s, solicitors o f
Leeds. After representation, the legal costs incurred were met by South
Yorkshire Police Authority.

As a result o f the trauma o f the events o f 15th April, 1989, and the
subsequent pressures, South Yorkshire Police retired me on ill health
grounds in August 1992.

On 26lh June 1998, my wife accepted a summons on my behalf, a copy o f
which is attached. I deny all the allegations and it is my intention to
contact Mr. Manning and seek his advice, but in order to seek proper
representation I would request that the Police Authority is approached,
with a view to reimbursing me any legal expenses that I may incur in
defending myself.

Yours sincerely




                                          I 8 1 9 W £11 M
Paine Rnrbara Mills QC                             Our ref    imM/ngw/MURRAY
Director o f Public Prosecutions
Crown Prosecution Servir.ti                        Your ref
50 Ludgatc 1Jill
) -ONDON
1X MM 7£X                                         3 July 199K




Pear Madam

O llR CLIENT : M R BlCKNAKl) MURRAY

We. refer lo our Jcllcr o f 'X July 199K, which for ease is copied herewith,

We attach to this Idler a copy of the summons dated 26 June 1998, issued against our
Clienl Bernard Dean Murray. It ulleges three offcnces ull of which arc said to arise
from ovynts at Hillsborough Foolball Stadium, Sheffield on 15 April 1989.

Wc are aware o f a letter of I July 1998 delivered by bund to you by Winckworth anti
Pemberton Solicitors acting on behalf of David Duckenfield. As indicated ill our
Idler o f 2 July, Mr Owxton of Winckworlh mid Pemberton has been good enough to
provide us with a copy of his; letter lo you. We loo have sent by lax, a letter to the
(.'Jerk o f the South SeAon Magistrates’ Courl. We attach a copy o f ihat letter.

In our submission, the matters that wc have set out in our letter to the Clerk lo the
Justices ut South SoAon is u cleur sUitcmcnt o f law and wc believe lhat the summons'
fthould be quashed.

We also believe that even if the present summons5 are quashed, the Solicitor acting
on behalf o f the Hillsborough Family Support Group will simply seek lo issue
proceedings in the appropriate petty sessional division in Sheffield. The purpose oJ‘
this Idler is therefore to ask you lo invoke the provisions o f Section 6 o f the
Prosecution o f Offences Ael 1985. You will be fully familiar with your ability under
Section 6 (2) o f that Act to take over conduct o f proceedings instituted by a private
prosecutor which you rimy have instituted yourself. Our request 10 you is then to
consider the issue* In this ease so that you can properly arrive at a decision under
Section 23 (3) o f the same Act that the proceedings should be discontinued. The
discontinuation under Section 23 may be because the evidence is insuflicicnt or if the
proceedings would be contrary to the public interest. As you will undoubtedly be
aware, the report or the Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure (1.981) (Command
8092) Page 161 Para 7.50 says “it provides a useful and ettcctive safeguard against
“improper action” by the prosecuting authority.
                                                                D am e llarbara M ills Q ('
                                                                              3 July 1998
                                                                                   Pago 2




Mtiy we respectfully:

1.       Following the tragedy on 17 April 1989 by 15 May 1089 Lord TnyJor had
         begun his public enquiry. 174 witnesses gave evidence. There were 72
         hours o f video 111m and much other material In written form, 'i'hc interim
         report o f Lord Taylor was published on 4 August 1980.

2.      West Midlands Police investigated as an independent investigating force.
        They look 3.776 statements from witnesses.

11.     The Director o f Public Prosecutions considered all of the evidence that had
         then been gathered. Advice was taken from two very experienced Queen’s
         Counsel who advised that Ihei-e wow not .sufficient evidenee to justify criminal
         proceedings against any person.

4.      On 19 November 1990 the adjourned Coroner’s Inquest resumed and at the
        inquest aome 200 witnesses gave evidence and the inquest also received
        documents, the Jury saw video’s and inspected ihe ground including the
        control room.

5.      In 1992 die Attorney General war. invited lo order new inquests on Ihe basis
         o f new evidence. The Attorney General refused.

6.      In April 1993 application was made by families for judicial review lo quash
         the inquest verdict and seek a fresh inquest w h i c h application the divisional
         Court dismissed.

7.      Civil claims were made and Ihe litigation concluded. These included claims
        by Policc Officers as welJ as by families.

8.      Lord Justice Sluarl Smith was appointed to scrutinise llic cvidcncc including
        lo consider “new evidenee”.

We invite attention lo the summary lo the scrutiny of evidence by Lord Justice Stuart
Smith and in particular the following paragraphs.

Paragraph 4.      Cannot allow compassion to cloud judgement.

Paragraph 5.      1 do nol consider llutl there is any material which should be put
                  before the Director o f Public Prosecutions which may cause her lo
                  reconsider the decision already taken.

Paragraph 6.     None o f Ihe evidence lhal 1 was asked to consider added anything
                 sign i/1cant to the evidence before Taylor or the Inquest.
                                                                                    jf' A • ‘ O -A Ck
                                                                                    4*u u o y J
                                                                Dame ltarbnra Mills Q c
                                                                           3 July 1998
                                                                                l’agc y


  Paragraph 7.      There is no   new   video cvidcnuc.

 Paragraph 8.       The suggestion thnl the Police Jailed to Spot overcrowding was due
                    to faulty ('.'(.TV is wrong.

 Paragraph 9.       The Police did not give false evidenee about CC'TV. The evidence
                    o f Holdsworth is not accepted.

 Paragraph 11.      Not eonr.idercd that the inquest was flawed.

 Paragraph 12.      No improper attempt lo interfere with witnesses.

 Paragraph 16.      Miss Marlin “vague and confused".

 Paragraph 18.     Paul Taylor changcd versions in various ways over the years.

 Paragraph 22.     No S'ouih Yorkshire Police statement rendered misleading. Taylor
                   not inhibited or impeded.

 Paragraph 24.     Iixdusion o f comments in witness statements, did not affect Ihe
                   outcome of the inquest or the decision of the DPP.

 Paragraph 25.     No further enquiry involving the examination of witnesses could
                   help afier thi.« lapse of time.

 Paragraph 32.     Neither of the new points ubout (he height o f the crush barriers and
                   capacity of Loppings Lane Tcnwee would give grounds for re­
                   opening of judicial enquiry or any other proceedings.

At Page 9 Paragraph 52 o f the scrutiny o f Lord Justice Stuart Smith, he confirmed
that he had read the joint opinion o f Leading Counsel dated 6 August 1990 which
gave the advice to the Director o f Public Pro.secution on possible criminal proceedings
against Mr Miuray and Mr Duckenficld. At Paragraph 53 Lord Justice Stuart Smith
said that he had not found any error or omission in the resume set out by Counsel nor
in his view was any particular aspccl understated or exaggerated. The Lord Justice
also considered the statement o f law as contained in the opinions o f Queen’s Counsel
and said they were plainly correct.

 In our respectful submission having regard to all o f these actions and particularly Ihe
'scrutiny o f evidence by Lord Justice Stuart Smith and his conclusion that “1 do not
 consider that there is any material which, should be put before the Director o f Public
 Prosecutions or the Policc Complaints Authority which might cause them to reconsider
 the decisions that they have already taken”, wc would submit thnt under Section 23
 o f the Prosecution o f Offences Act 1985 you must coneludc that the cvidcnce is
 insufficient.
                                                                                        0 00004
                                                               Dame Itarhara Mills QC
                                                                          3 July 1998
                                                                               Page A


As 10 the Jimb which allows you lo discontinue if the proceeding# would be contrary
to public interest or for any oilier good reason, may wc refer you to the possible
single most important cause for Lord Justice Stuart Smith to be asked to scrulinise the.
evidenee. This relates lo iho program on Granada Television “llillxborongh”,
broadcast on 5 December 1996, which incidentally was ropeutud without any
amendment. It was described us “highly emotive”. Lord Justice Stuart Smith said
that it was “not accurate as to ihc suppression of Police video tapes". "It was not
always easy for The viewer to loll what is reconstruction and what is original” awl
finally llial the program “also relies on Mr IToldsworth’s assertions.... 1 do not ueuept
this evidence”. This was only one o f a number of television program!.-. There has
been a huge amount o f oilier media interest.

In addition to (lie finding by Lord Justice Stuart Smith at Page 37 Paragraph 99 that
he was “unable to accept Mi Holdsworth's recollection of events as now being
accurate”, Lord Justice Stuart Smith also comments on two witnesses who he. saw.
namely Miss Martin who lie described as “vague and confused" and Paul Taylor
whose “ version changed in various ways over the years”. Tl is inconceivable that
witnesses nine years after llic unhappy event could now be relied upon as to their
memory. This has been made particularly difficult having regard lo ihe highly
charged and emotional slate of so many people and the media involvement with the
points above being some o f the worrying factors.

The Taylor report made a large number of recommciiduiions. The vast majority of
which have been implemented .so as lo both address the causes o f the disaster itself
and prevent repetition and for the safety of the public at large in attending spoiling
occasions.

Our Client, Bernard Murray, behaved with great fortitude during the *** of the
enquiries until a time came when his body could take no more pressure. He was a
career Police Ofiiccr who intended not to retire until at least he had 30 years Police
service. The consequence was a complete breakdown in his health such that lie was
obliged to retire from the Police Force on medical grounds some two and a half years
before liis earliest intended date o f retirement. He has not worked since his retirement
from the Police l'orce.

In assessing whether the continuation o f these proceedings would be contrary to the
public interest wc would also respectfully refer lo two final points.

a.       Paragraph 5 Chapter 7 of the Lord Justice Stuart Smith scrutiny at page H)3.
         Here he says that he has come to the clear conclusion that there is no basis
         upon which there should be:

         1.      A further judicial enquiry;

         2.      A reopening o f Lord Taylor's enquiry;
                                                                                   y 0 u li0 ii
                                                     Diinift Barbara Mills QC
                                                                  3 July 1998
                                                                        Page 5


3.     A iv.iw.wed application to the Divisional. Court;

4.     The evcreisc by the attorney General o f bis powers under the
       Coroner’s Act;

5.     Any material to put before the Director o f Public Prosecutions which
       might cause her to reconsider the decisions she has already taken;

6.     Any materia) that should be put before the Police- Complaints
       Authority which might cause them to reconsider the decision that
       they have already taken.

When the Home Secretary, Mv Jack Straw, addressed the House of Commons
on 18 February 1098 he made the following* comments,

1.     1, the. Attorney General and the Director of Public PjoseeuLions have
       considered Lord Justice Stuart Smith's rcpoii very carefully. Wc
       have no reason to doubt bis conclusions.

2.     Thu nilim country is united in sympathy with those who lost loved
       ones at Hillsborough. Wc cunnot take the pain from ihcm but I
       hope that ihc families will recognisc that tin: report represents,, as ]
       promised, an independent thorough and detailed scrutiny of all the
       evidence that was given to the committee. In his statement to the
       House o f Commons on 8 May 1998, the Home Secretary made the
       following remarks.

        L      Lord Taylor’s enquiry and icport were as thorough and
               impartial as one would expect of the work of such a great
               judicial figure.

       2.      The Granada documentary “Hillsborough” presented a
               powerful picturc o f the tragedy. H suggested that fresh
               evidence that had not previously been considered called
               into question the verdict so the inquest and other decisions.

       3.      Lovd Justice Stuart Smith, a senior Lord Justice of the
               Court of Appeal was eminently qualified to conduct and
               independent and thorough scrutiny of the evidence. I gave
               him very wide terms o f refercncc that enabled his 10
               establish conclusively whether any material evidence had
               been overlooked and to rcconunend appropriate action.

       4.       Anyone who has read the report thoroughly will, 1 believe,
                be bound to reach the same conclusion as he did that
                                                              Dame Durban* Mills QC!
                                                                        3 July 199#
                                                                             Page 6


                           reopening the enquiries would     serve   no useful purpose
                           whatsoever.

                   5.     The causes o f the disaster were clearly identified by Lord
                          Taylor in his 1989 report. It was right to consider as I
                          Jiuve done whether there was any subsequent information
                          that cast doubt on earlier docisionts. It was lor that reason
                          that. T establish Lord Justice Stuart Smith’*: thorough
                          scrutiny and 1 urn satisfied that he has, after that rigorous
                          examination reached the correct conclusion!;,

                   6.     J do not believe that a further enquiry could or would
                           uncover significant new evidence or provide any relief for
                           (lie distress of those who have been bereaved. Although 1
                          know that it is difficult for the families to accept that, such
                          a conclusion must be in their best interest':. To hold out
                           the possibility of u further enquiry, only and inevitably to
                          have that hope dashed when the enquiry reported would
                          lead simply to further anxiety and a dcejxjning of the
                          wounds of grief. Tliat would be no kindnefa; to the families
                          or lo their communities of Merseyside and elsewhere.

We would ask you to agree lo take over the conduct of these proceedings under
JScclion 6 (2) o f ihc Prosecution of Offenders Act 1985 and (hen to discontinue these
proceedings under S e c t i o n 23 (3) of that same act.

Yours faithfully




U 15 Manning
PARTNER
Keva Coombes
HFSG                                                                        456577
1st Floor
Central Buildings                                                           456595
41 North John Street
LIVERPOOL L2 6RR                                                          YBF/GC/3341/89




                                                                         27 July 1998


Dear Sirs

HILLSBOROUGH: Adlington v Duckenfield and M urray

Thank you for your letter of 20 July 1998 addressed to Mr C.H.Enzor and informing us that
you have taken over the conduct of the case from Watts Leather. Mr Enzor has asked me
to reply on his behalf as I am involved in the CPS review of the papers.

Following the receipt of the Watts Leather letter of 30 June we had been in communication
with them and were about to send a more substantive reply. I shall incorporate that
information in this letter.

I am aware that the original summonses issued at South Sefton Magistrates’ Court have been
withdrawn because of perceived problems with the court’s jurisdiction. Thank you for your
confirmation that summonses were issued on 13 July returnable for 20 August 1998 at Leeds
Magistrates’ Court.

You may already know that the two firms of solicitors acting separately for Mr Duckenfield
and for Mr Murray have formally requested the Director to exercise her power under section
6(2) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 to take over the conduct of the proceedings
instituted by the private prosecutor for whom you act, and then to discontinue under section
23 of the Act.

It may help if you were acquainted with our policy in cases of this type. The Code for
Crown Prosecutors contains the principles that apply to the CPS review of criminal
proceedings started by the police. There are two stages in the decision to prosecute. The
first being the evidential test. If the case does not pass that test, it must not go ahead, no
matter how important or serious it may be. If the case does pass the evidential test then a
Crown Prosecutor must decide if a prosecution is needed in the public interest. This second
stage is the public interest test which I shall come to later.

                                                                                       OOttOiO
The evidential test is an objective one and a Crown prosecutor must be satisfied that there
is enough evidence to provide a ‘realistic prospect of conviction’ against each defendant on
each charge. In other words a jury or bench of magistrates, properly directed in accordance
with the law, is more likely than not to convict the defendant of the offence charged.

Where there is enough evidence to provide a realistic prospect of conviction the public
interest must be considered. Crown Prosecutors must balance the factors for and against
prosecution carefully and fairly.

The policy where proceedings have been commenced by a private prosecutor builds on that
contained in the Code for Crown Prosecutors. The right to bring a private prosecution is
preserved by section 6(1) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 subject to the power under
section 6(2). The CPS will take over a private prosecution where there is a particular need
for it to do so on behalf of the public.

As you know the original review decision released in August 19S0 was made following the
joint advice received from two leading counsel. The advice was that there was "no sufficient
evidence to support criminal proceedings of any kind against those mentioned in the West
Midlands Report". The subsequent Press release made on behalf of the Director of Public
Prosecutions was that there was "insufficient evidence to justify the institution of proceedings
against any officer in the South Yorkshire Police Force or any other person for any other
offence".

Following the showing of the Jimmy McGovern drama documentary on national television
in December 1996 and the representations made to us by a number of parties including the
HFSG on 4 March 1997, the CPS commenced a further review of what was said to be ‘new
evidence’. Our responsibility focused on whether or not there was new material, which, if
properly investigated, might lead to a realistic prospect of conviction of any person. The
conclusion that was reached was that there were no grounds for reopening the police
investigation into the Hillsborough disaster. In the subsequent Scrutiny set up by the Home
Secretary, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was asked to ascertain whether any evidence exists
relating to the disaster which was not available to the Director of Public Prosecutions for the
purpose of discharging her statutory responsibility. His conclusions are laid out in detail in
his report and in Chapter 7 he says that he does not consider there to be any material that
should be put before the DPP or the Police Complaints Authority which might cause them
to reconsider the decisions they had taken. These decisions were made in accordance with
the principles laid down in the Code for Crown Prosecutors. It was decided that there was
insufficient evidence for a realistic prospect of conviction.

In the instant case where we have been asked by the defendants to take over the prosecution
in order to discontinue it, we would do so if one (or more) of the following circumstances
applies:

•     T here is clearly no case to answ er. A private prosecution commenced in these
       circumstances would be unfounded, and would, therefore be an abuse of the right to
       bring a prosecution.

•     The public interest factors tending against prosecution clearly outweigh those
      factors tending in favour.


                                                                                         0 u u y 11
•       The prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests o f justice.

The CPS would then regard itself as having to act in accordance with our policy.

If none of the above apply there would be no need for the CPS to become involved and we
would not interfere with the private prosecution.

Clearly there is a distinction between the "realistic prospect of conviction" test in the Code
and the "clearly no case to answer" test mentioned above. Accordingly we recognise that
there will be some cases which do not meet the CPS Code tests where nevertheless we will
not intervene. It has been considered that to apply the Code tests to private prosecutions
would unfairly limit the right of individuals to bring their own cases.

Before this decision can properly be made the CPS must be assured that all relevant material
has been considered. While we have access to material available to the Taylor Enquiry, the
Inquests, the judicial review hearing in the High Court and that submitted to us by the
Hillsborough Family Support Group, it may be that other important evidence is not known
to us. You have kindly provided the CPS with schedules of evidence in your possession and
we have asked the solicitors for the defendants for the same information. Where there is
evidence that we have not seen we shall be asking the relevant party for voluntary disclosure
of the same.

Until there has been a detailed review of the many papers in the case the Crown’s position
cannot be determined. This review will of necessity take some little time to complete. I
regret that at the moment we are not able to give a date for the promulgation of the decision
but I can assure you that our review will be expedited.

In order to be assist your review of the papers involved in the private prosecution I shall
arrange for a schedule of our papers to be sent to you as soon as possible. However this will
not apply to those documents subject to either public interest immunity or to legal privilege.

Under the circumstances outlined above we do not feel that it is appropriate for us to
consider your request for voluntary disclosure of our case papers until our decision has been
made.

We have advised the Chief Constable for South Yorkshire Police on disclosure of documents
in his possession in similar terms to those above.

I shall be writing to the solicitors for Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray enclosing for them a
copy of this letter.

Following our review I should be able to advise in more detail as to the stance we take on
the other issues raised by yourselves.
Please let me know if there is any way in which I can assist you further.

Yours faithfully



d x

George R Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
FAO Miss M V Oades                                       Our ref   rbm /bqw /murray
Assistant Clerk and Solicitor
South Yorkshire Police Authority
P O Box 37                                               Your ref MVO/POL
Regent Street
Barnsley
S Yorks                                                  20 November 1998
S70 2PQ

Dear Sirs

FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN                                      LEGAL
PROCEEDINGS - OUR CLIENT : M R BERNARD MURRAY

We refer to your letter by fax of 19 November. First I would restate that it is wholly
proper in my view that former Superintendent Murray should have the support o f the
Police Authority insofar as his legal costs are concerned when the allegations made
against him arise from his duties as a then serving Police Officer with your force. I
believe that there are numerous precedents for this view. It would be unconscionable
for my Client to have to use what savings he may have and to even sell his house to
defend himself. He has not himself claimed one penny by way o f compensation for
the trauma that he himself has suffered and which he continues to experience both as
a direct consequence of the disaster itself and the continuation of the Prosecution
against him.

I bear in mind the substantial sums paid to some of the people who form the
Hillsborough Families supporters Group and the fact that apparently £0.5 million was
raised at a pop concert in Liverpool last year. I leave you to decide the appropriate
way in which you will provide the information as to the financial support that has
been given.

May we now turn to the issue of an application to the Divisional Court for Judicial
Review. We have already spoken to Leading Counsel. He is strongly o f the view
that if the Director of Public Prosecutions decides to allow the Prosecution to continue
and not to intervene to take over the proceedings and then quash them, then this is a
matter that should go to the Divisional Court. It has also been made clear by HFSG
that if the DPP intervenes to take over the proceedings and quash them, they will
immediately make application to the Divisional Court for Judicial Review.

Either way, there is going to be the need for Client to be represented either as
Applicant or Respondent in Judicial Review proceedings.


H:\WP\CRIM-MAT\RBM\REVIEW\MURRAY3.LET\20 November 1998
                                                              FAO Miss M V Oades
                                                                20 November 1998
                                                                          Page 2



Please would you accept this letter as an application for further financial assistance
to Mr Bernard Murray to meet his legal costs and disbursements in relation to Judicial
Review proceedings whether as Applicant or Respondent.

Yours faithfully




R B Maiming
PARTNER




H;\WP\CRIM-MAT«BM\REVEW'MURRAY3.LET\20 November 1998
                                                                                                             *Calv
                                       01904 45 6666

Miaa D. H, Sharpling
Chief Crown Prosecutor                                                                      CPS
                                                                                            CPS Central Casework
                                                                                            United H m *.
                                                                                            Piccadilly
                                                                                            York YOl JPQ

                                                                                 SwitMoard; 01904-450070
 r   Walker Morris                                  1                                DXtfe: 65204 York 6
     Kings Court
                                                                     AamJc.- oisal56577
     12 King Street
     LEEDS                                                         Dina Lint: 0/ad&5()566
     LSI 2HL
                                                                 ow J Y B F / G C / 3 3 4 1 / 8 9
L                                                  J             t o Refmnu:
                                                                 Your ite,      r b m /b q w /m u r r a y


                                                                                18 November 1998



     Dear Sirs,


     RE:     A D LIN G TO N V DUCKENFIELD and MURRAY
             LEEDS M AGISTRATES’ COURT - 21 DECEMBER 1998


     In early July 1998, you wrote to the Crown Prosecution Scrvice asking that w e take over, in
     order to discontinue, the criminal proceedings against your client which have been brought,by
     Ms Ann Adlington on behalf o f the Hillsborough Family Support Group.

     We have considered this request in detail.

     Mr. Duckenfield feces two charges o f manslaughter, one o f wilful neglect to perform a public
     duty and one o f attempting to pervert the course o f justice. Mr. Murray faces two charges o f
     manslaughter and one o f wilful ncglect to perform a public duty.

     Wc have considered the evidence, the representations made by the parties and all the
     surrounding circumstances o f the case. We have concluded that we should not intervene to
     take over any o f the charges.

     Fot your information I enclose a copy o f a press notice.

     Yours faithfully.




     Christopher H. Enzor
     Branch Crown Prosecutor
                                      01 512361936

      • . •




                       . Hillsborough Family Support Group



W J Wilkinson BA(Econ) CPFA
Clerk and Treasurer
South Yorkshire Police Authority
P 0 Box 37
Regent Street
Barnsley
Soutli Yorkshire S70 2PQ

22 December 1008

Dear Sir


Adlinsj'ton v Murray: Adlinnton v Duckenfield


 !.      I am the prosecutor in the above case, in which the defendants are charged before the
          Leeds Magistrates Court with serious offences arising out o f the disaster at the
          Hillsborough Football Ground in April 1989. I write on the advice o f leading counsel,
          as solicitor to the Hillsborough Family Support Group to express concern about the
          decision to fund the defence o f these two men. As you know, the defendants were
          senior police officers on duty at the ground when the disaster occurred. Both are
          charged with manslaughter o f two representative victims, and with misfeasance. Mr
          Duckenfield is also charged with attempting to pervert the course o f justice.

2.       It has recently been admitted publicly by Mr Ian Daines. Assistant Chief Constable,
          that the South Yorkshire Police Authority has agreed to fund the defence o f these two
          men. We have suspected this for some time. The purpose o f this letter is to argue that
          the decision to provide finance appears to have been made irrationally and unlawfully.

.».      We refer to the following documents, all o f which are in your possession.

         A.       The Home Office Circular o f 4,h December 1987 No 7.7/87
         B.       The Home Office Circular o f 1T February 1998 HOC 4/1998
        * C.      Minute 38 o f the South Yorkshire Police Authority Meeting o f 1st August
                   1997
          D.      Minute 62 o f the South Yorkshire Police Authority Meeting o f 19th September

                                                -   1-

                 Pfcone 01512361919. Fax 0151 2 3 6 1936 . E M all info@ hfig.org
               1st flo o r Central Buildings 41 NorthOohn Street Liverpool 1 2 6K R          G 0 0 ti 2
                         01 512361936

         1997.
E.      Minute 151 o f the South Yorkshire Police Authority Meeting o f 27th February
        1998.'
F.    ' Minute 174 o f the South Yorkshire Police Authority Meeting o f 24th April
        1998;
G.     The letter o f 25"' September 1998 from Maureen Oades to me.
H.     Minute 86 o f the South Yorkshire Police Authority Meeting o f 30thOctober
        IQV8.                     ::
I.     The South Yorkshire Police Authority Scheme o f Delegation.
J.     A document headed “Standing Orders. Interpretation. Issued January 1996"
        on the headed paper o f the South Yorkshire Police Authority.

The Home Office Circular No 77/87. suggests that, in the case o f a private
prosecution, where a police officer has been acquitted and has not been awarded all his
costs, the police authority may make up the difference. It also suggests that, in the
ease o f a private prosecution, the authority should provide or fund legal advice and/or
representation if the authority is “satisfied" that the officer has acted “in good faith”
and has exercised his judgment “reasonably".

The Home Office Circular o f 17,h February 1998.4/1998, replaces with immediate
effect the 1987 circular, and suggests that under the very wide terms o f section 111(1)
o f the Local Government Act 1972, “it could be argued” that payment o f money to
“officers (either former or serving) involved in criminal proceedings would in some
way facilitate or.be conducive to a police authority's broad functions.” The Circular
emphasises that a police authority must take its own advice. It is noticeable that the
“guidance” has been prepared after consultation with “ACPO“, the Superintendents
Association, the Police Federation, and the Association o f Police Authorities; it does
not purport to be an independent legal opinion.

This Circular seems to have coincided almost exactly with the report o f the “Scrutiny"
o f Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in February o f this year. I note that on 27,h February this
year, your authority agreed to authorise the Clerk and Treasurer to consider
applications from officers^ serving or retired, for financial assistance in relation to
possible private prosecutions arising out o f the “Scrutiny".

For a reason which is not clear, the Resolution was taken under the replaced 1987
Circular. There is therefore no lawful authority to validate the decision taken on that
day. The assertion, recorded in the minutes, that the members o f the Authority
“remain o f the opinion'that the officers acted in good faith” is extraordinary. The
Enquiry o f Lord Justice Taylor o f 1989 found that there had been negligence, and
blamed the two defendants (among other police officers). The failure o f these two to
seal o ff the runnel to the central pens at the Leppings Lane'end o f the ground was a
“blunder o f the first magnitude*', and the immediate cause ofcleath. The then Chief
Constable o f South Yorkshire Police, uneqOiVocably accepted these findings.

Further. Lord Taylor found, at page 16, paragraph 98 o f his Interim Report that Mr
Duckenficld misled Graham Kelly and GfewKirton o f the FA and Graham Mackrell o f

                                        -2-

                                                                                       000023
          o is i^ o iv o o                ii i o a                                            r g . uo
                                      01512361936

        Sheffield Wednesday, at a time when he knew there were fatalities (and that there
        would therefore be an inquest and no doubt other formal inquiries). Duckenfield
        indicated that a gate had been forced and there had been an inrush o f supporters, and
        pointed out to them the fate allegedly forced on the screen.

9.      In 1998. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith upheld these findings after, his '‘Scrutiny”, referring
        scathingly to Duckenfield’s “disgraceful lie”.

10.     In July 1991. the Police Complaints Authority directed that charges o f neglect of duty
        be preferred against both men. These charges were never determined because the
        Chief Constable o f South Yorkshire retired Mr Duckenfield on “health grounds”, and
        it was thought to be unfair to try Mr Murray,

11.     It is impossible in the light o f this history to understand how your authority could have
        been satisfied in February 1998 that “the officers had acted in good faith”; and also
        impossible to understand how the other condition in the 1987 Circular, namely, that
        the officers had exercised their judgment reasonably, could be thought to have been
        satisfied. The minutes show that this condition was not even considered.

The 199X Circular            ------

12.     The 1998 Circular was not applied. Ifit had been, it would have, become clear in my
        view that its terms, were not met, and thatthere_was no lawful authority for the
        provision o f tax-payers* money in this way to fond the defence in this case. There is
        no statutory authority. There is a limited power in relation to civil proceedings to pay
        damages and costs; but no power ev.enjn civil proceedi.ngs.to fund an action brought
        against an individual officer. Section 88 of the Police Act 1996 deals with “Liability
        for wrongful acts o f constables”, and allows for the provision o f costs incurred and not
        recovered.

13.     Parliament has not provided for the payments of any lines incurred by constables; or
         for reimbursement o f costs incurred and not recovered. To have done so would have
         been surprising, since criminal liability is individual and personal. You will note that
         the Circular indicated at the highest that ”it could be argued” that to allow the payment
         to be made to officers, (either former or retired) involved in criminal proceedings
         would “in some way facilitate or be conducive to a police authority’s broad functions.
         For example, failure to provide financial assistance could adversely affect the morale of
         the force if officers had to meet their costs after acquittal.”

14.     This is legal nonsense. The case law indicates that section 111(1) o f the 1972 Act
         cannot be used In this way.. The practice in relation to costs incurred by an acquitted
         person is set out in the Practice DirectionCL'dists in Criminal Proceedings) .93 Cr.
         App.R.8 which provides that a person acquitted after trial bn indictment should
         normally have his costs paid out o f central funds except where the defendant has
      * brought suspicion upon himself andlias misled the prosecution into thinking the case
         against him is stronger than it is;' or where he has been acquitted on a meritless
         technicality. How can it be said that police morale woulH suffer if the officers o f a

                                                     -3-

                                                                                            000024
                                                                                                     «
                                                                                            * a- u<
                               01512361936

       force heard that one o f its members had been refused its costs on one o f the reasonable
       grounds set out in this direction?


15.    In any event the South Yorkshire Police Authority seems to have gone way beyond
       this highly dubious guidance in the 1998 Circular and authorised, in February 1998,
       any financial assistance tb be given by the Clerk and Treasurer in respect of
       applications from serving or retired officers for potential and future criminal
       proceedings, in which, o f course, a defendant could be convicted. (Is counsel
       instructed on this basis able to advise that a defendant plead guilty?).


Delegation and l-lxctusion of the public

16.    Maureen Oades' letter to me o f 25,h September 1998 says that the public were
       excluded from that part o f the meeting when this matter was dealt with as it was a
       matter relating to “any action taken in connection with the prevention, investigation or
       prosecution of any crime.” It seems to have been the basis for granting the financial
       assistance that there was no crime at all, and that the officers had acted in good faith.
       In any event it is submitted that paragraph 14 of Schedule 12A to the Local
       Government Act 1972.'refers to prosecutions by South Yorkshire Police and not by a
       private prosecutor against two former police officers.

17.    Furthermore, I do not understand how such a decision, even if it could be lawfully
       made, could be delegated to the Clerk and Treasurer. The Authority resolution of 27
       February 1998 purports to delegate, absolutely, the decision making process to the
       “Clerk and Treasurer’ who is one and the same person. -The report presented to the
       Authority on 30lh October was a joint report of the Clerk and Treasurer and the Chief
       Constable. I understand that the Clerk and Treasurer is not a Solicitor. It is implicit in
       your standing order 5.2.5, that any consideration of applications for financial assistance
       for legal proceedings ought to be Undertaken by a person who is legally qualified and
       would thus understand the danger of granting open-ended financial provision.

Somefeatures o f the current criminal proceedings

18.    You also suggest in that letter that this delegation “was not viewed as a delegation
       which would extend beyond six months”. This may have been because M r Daines,
       Assistant Chief Constable o f the South Yorkshire Police, publicly asserted earlier this
       year that he believed that any private prosecutions would “fall at the first hurdle”. Did
       he repeat this at the meeting of 27*>ebriiary? We do not know what applications have
       been made by Mr Murray and Mr Duckenfield. but we assume, for reasons that appear
       below, that authority has been given for any judicial review proceedings of the CPS
       decision not to discontinue the case, and for leading and junior counsel to appear at
       old style committal proceedings, as well as at trial.

ro.    On 18,h December 1998, the Crown Prosecution Service; after five months o f careful
       study, rejected the applications o f the defendants to take over and discontinue the

                                               -4-
                                                                                                   I a • uv
                                      01512361936

              prosecutions. It is clear that the criminal proceedings are now likely to be protracted,
              complex and very expensive.




      20.     The prosecutions are straightforward. We enclose for your guidance a copy o f the
              informations presented to the Leeds Magistrates Court last July on the basis o f which
              the summonses were issued. You will see that the allegations are based upon the
              findings o f the Taylor Enquiry in 1989, supported by evidence that has come to the
              Family Support Group in 1997-98. Negligence has been admitted again and again by
              the Chief Constable in court proceedings. It has never been disputed that the acts
              alleged against the defendants were the acts of negligence that caused the deaths of the
              96 people.

      21.     Before the decision o f the Crown Prosecution Service was announced on 18lh
              December, the solicitor for Mr Murray indicated that it was highly likely that an
              adverse decision o f the CPS would be challenged by judicial review proceedings. At
              the hearing o f the case before the Leeds Magistrates Court on 2 1* December, it was
              made clear by leading and junior counsel for Mr Murray, in the presence of his
              solicitor, Mr Manning, and by junior counsel for Mr Duckenfield, that a decision had
              already been made to seek judicial review of the CPS decision. The magistrate was
              told this by counsel for the defendants when he was dealing with the questions of
              timetable and voluntary disclosure o f documents.

      22      However, it was also made clear, although a concluded decision had been made to
              apply for judicial review, that the defendants had asked the CPS for their “reasons”;
              alternatively, their “policy" behind the decision, and that those reasons'of policy might
              be received by 2/llh December.

      2.V    No legally-aided lawyers could proceed in this way. Professional obligations exist
              which require that a lawyer must assess the prospects o f success before committing
              hard-pressed public funds to an expensive application for judicial review. I am advised
             by leading counsel that the prospects of quashing the CPS decision in such proceedings
             are small on the following, among other, grounds. The CPS have told us all what
( ’          criteria they were applying; the defendants argued that the CPS were in a good
             position to assess the public interest involved in the prosecution; the CPS, Police
             Complaints Authority and Coroner were air misled by a cover-up by Ihe South
              Yorkshire police, the magnitude of which has become apparent only after the Home
             Office ordered the release o f documents this year, and the defendants have alternative
             remedies in the Magistrates’ court.

      24.    The fact that the court was assured that applications for judicial review would be made
              suggests that the South Yorkshire Police Authority has already agreed, before the CPS
              decision, to fund these applications, irrespective o f their merits. Counsel would not
            * have told the court that the applications would be made, if funding was not in place.
              Neither would they have told counsel for South Yorkshire Police of their decision to
              apply to the High Court; they knew that the fact o f impending applications was

                                                      -5- ‘ '*

                                                                                                    000026
        u ia iu o iy jo             n r a » -                                                VB.
                               01512361936

       material to decisions that the South Yorkshire police and the CPS were making that
       day about voluntary disclosure to the prosecution o f documents in their possession. It
       is clear that both those bodies decided to defer any decision on voluntary disclosure
       because o f the assurance from counsel that judicial review applications would be
       lodged (“in the first two weeks of January”) on behalf of both defendants.


25.     The prosecution and the Court have also been told that both defendants have estimated
        that four weeks at least will be needed at committal proceedings. The court has set
        aside four weeks beginning 19* April 1999, and the time was chose to accord with the
        convenience o Heading counsel for the defence. The court has been told that two
        leading counsel will appear, one for each defendant. No doubt two juniors will also
       appear, and two solicitors. Leading counsel for Mr Murray has indicated that there
        will also be an abuse of process application to the magistrate to stay the proceedings.
        He intends to argue that this should be heard on a different occasion from the
       committal, and before it. I suspect that the defendants will seek leave to move for
       judicial review o f any adverse decision upon this issue. This is hardly surprising as
       your Authority does not appear to have placed any restriction as to the amount or
        duration o f the financial assistance to the defendants.

26.   I am advised by leading counsel that the prosecution has <T5trong prima facie case on
       the charges alleged; and that an abuse o f process application is likely to fail. We have
       a mass o f evidence in our possessioiTwhich has come to us in the last year, indicating
       that the South Yorkshire Police force hasj:overed up facts which are embarrassing as
       to the nature and extent o f its admitted negligence, and that the CPS, Coroner and
       Police Complaints Authority, inter alia, were misled when they were pursuing their
       various enquiries between 1989 and 1992. I shall willingly help you further about this
       on request.

27.   O f coursc, the trial o f this matter could take many months. From all these facts, you
      will see that the exposure of the South Yorkshire taxpayer (in relation to its own costs,
      let alone ours) is o f the order of millions o f pounds. I should make it clear that neither
      1 nor the Hillsborough Family Support Group, on whose behalf I act. wish in any way
      to deprive either defendant of the means to conduct a proper defence to these charges.
      They should surely apply, like anyone else, for legal aid if they are unable to fund the
      costs o f the defence themselves. In that event they would be subject to the usual
      restraints and disciplines o f the legal aid system. I believe that the defence, with access
      to public funds'from your authority, are seeking at present to inflict unnecessary
      expenses upon us by recourse to every possible type o f legal hearing, in the knowledge
      that we do not have such access, and are instead dependent on private donations and
      fund-raising events. Neither defendant lives in South Yorkshire, but the South
      Yorkshire Police has a strong interest o f its own in the discharge or acquittal of these
      defendants.

( 'tmdusion

28.    The decisions taken pursuant to the Resolutions o f the South Yorkshire Policc
                                         01512361936

                 Authority appear, on the information available to. me, to be unlawful, irrational, ultra
                 vims and procedurally improper on various grounds. We have an interest as do you
                 and South Yorkshire taxpayers, in ensuring that public money is not wasted or spent
                 wrongly in the course o f this criminal litigation. I look forward to your reply. You
                 will appreciate that we are obviously considering an application for judicial review
                 ourselves, supported by some South Yorkshire tax-payers, and an approach to the
                 District Auditor. We invite you to reply by the 15* January 1999.


          Yours sincerely




          Ann Adlinglon
          Solicitor




v   \.J




                                                         -7-

                                                                                                        0 00 028
          Hillsborough Family Support Group


All members o f the South Yorkshire Police Authority
South Yorkshire Police Authority
P.O. Box 37, Regent Street,
Barnsley, South Yorkshire
S70 2PQ

5 January 1999

Dear Member,

Adlington v Murray: Adlington v Duckenfield


1      I am the prosecutor in this case, and the solicitor to the Hillsborough Family Support
       Group (“HFSG”), an association whose members are families of the victims of the
       Hillsborough disaster of April 1989. The prosecutions were commenced in the Leeds
       Magistrates Court in July 1998.1 am writing to you about the decision taken pursuant
       to the Resolution of your authority of February 1998 to fund the defence of these two
       former senior officers in these criminal proceedings. Much of the contents of this
       letter is based upon submissions and facts that have been supplied by the HFSG to the
       Crown Prosecution Service on the advice of leading counsel, who has also advised on
       the present funding issue. I understand that the subject matter of last February’s
       Resolution, and other discussions and decisions later in the year, are to be considered
       at your meeting of 8th January 1999. Attached to this letter is a bundle o f documents
       to which I shall refer in this letter.

2     Annex A is a copy of a letter that I sent to Mr W. J. Wilkinson, Clerk and Treasurer,
       on 22nd December, setting out objections in law to the grant o f the funding, and to the
       way in which decisions were.taken. That letter may conveniently be read first. At
      Annex B are copies of earlier correspondence between Miss Oades and myself and the
       two circulars from the Home Office in relation to these issues, to which reference was
       made in Annex A.

3     You will appreciate that my argument is that decisions to grant funding pursuant to the
      Resolution last February were unlawful, irrational and procedurally improper, and that
      a further such decision would now be unlawful in any event.




                                               1
  Phone 01512361919. Fax 01512361936. E Mafl info@hfsg.org
1st Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR
/


    Thefacts o f the case; Manslaughter and Misfeasance

    4       It is necessary to set these out, because the South Yorkshire Police Authority
            (“SYPA”) is recorded as having resolved on 28th February 1998, less than two weeks
            after publication o f the report o f the “Scrutiny” conducted by Lord Justice Stuart-
            Smith,

                   “That in the light o f the findings o f Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s inquiry and his
                   comments on the outcome, members do not believe that there is any evidence
                   to cause them to reconsider the Authority’s previous view, and remain o f the
                   opinion that the officers acted in good faith”.

           Lord Justice Stuart-Smith reinforced the findings o f Lord Taylor, whose original
           interim report was published in August 1989. Home Office guidance requires, of
           course, that you have regard to the particular circumstances o f the case, although this
           does not seem to have been recognised by the Resolution o f last February', when
           decisions were made in principle, before it was known who if anyone was going to be
           prosecuted, and, more importantly, for what offences.

           It is clear from the minutes o f the SYPA. meeting o f last February, part of Annex B,
           that M r Daines made a presentation to the meeting, and on that factual basis the
           Authority made its decision. Members o f the SYPA ought therefore to be aware o f the
           attitude o f the South Yorkshire police, as expressed to the Leeds District Magistrates
           Court on 21st December 1998 in connection with an application by the prosecution that
           the South Yorkshire force should disclose documents in its possession. Counsel, Ms
           Louise Varty, instructed by Hammond Suddards said;

                   “South Yorkshire Police are not privy to the nature o f this prosecution and the
                   issues within it and therefore are not able to say or agree what is or is not
                   relevant.”

           So that the Authority can inform itself o f the issues with greater confidence, and from
           an informed source, I attach for guidance a summary o f the evidence on the charges o f
           manslaughter and misfeasance charges as Annex C, and a copy o f the relevant parts of
           the Taylor Report as Annex D. The charges are soundly based in law and fact.

    The attitude o f the South Yorkshire Police to the allegation o f negligence

    8     In an offence in this class o f involuntary manslaughter, according to the 1995 House of
           Lords decision in R v. Adomako. the prosecution must prove: (a) a duty o f care; (b) a
           breach o f that duty; (c) that that breach was a substantial cause o f death; (c) “The
           essence o f the matter which is supremely a jury question, is whether having regard to
           the risk o f death involved the conduct o f the defendant was so bad in all the
           circumstances as to amount in their judgment to a criminal act or omission.” per Lord
           Mackay LC [1995] 1 A.C. 187E.

    9     It is submitted that all elements but the last have never been seriously disputed. The

                                                    2
                                                                                                      000 0 31
        remaining element is for the jury. Lord Taylor found, and it is inherent in the
        acceptance o f liability by South Yorkshire police in the various negligence cases, that
        the police were under a duty o f care, and that there was a breach o f that duty,
        causative o f death. See also Frost v. Chief Constable o f the South Yorkshire Police
        [1997] 1 A11.E.R. 540, 544b-c, in the High Court action brought by police officers at
        the ground, per Rose LJ;

               “The immediate cause o f the disaster was a senior officer’s decision to open
               the outer gate without cutting off access to the pens. Liability for the deaths
               and injuries o f those spectators has been admitted by the three defendants, the
               first o f whom is the Plaintiffs Chief Constable.”

        and per Lord Steyn in the House o f Lords appeal in the same case (White v. Chief
        Constable o f the South Yorkshire Policed (December 1998)


               “It is admitted by the Chief Constable that the events were caused by the
               negligence o f the police in allowing the overcrowding o f two spectator pens.”

10      The Taylor report was accepted by the Chief Constable o f South Yorkshire in August
        1989; anH after the Scrutiny, M r Richard Wells accepted that M r Duckenfield had been
        rightly blamed as negligent. On Yorkshire Television’s “Camera” on 18th February
        1998 this exchange took place;

               Interviewer,    “Well if somebody has been to blame, who is that person?”

               Wells;          “David Duckenfield has been blamed, by Lord Justice Taylor.
                                The South Yorkshire police are culpable, in the sense of, that
                                they lost senior officer control that day. We’ve said that
                                repeatedly.”

11     The Stuart-Smith report, it should be pointed out, rejected claims made on behalf o f
       the HFSG that there was important new evidence. However, it supported the original
       Taylor findings strongly, and emphasised the criticisms o f the police that had been
       made. Copies o f relevant parts o f the report will be made available on request. It must
       be appreciated that the charges brought by the HFSG do not in any way contradict the
       Stuart-Smith report. They are based upon the original findings o f the Taylor report as
       supported by the Stuart-Smith report. For this reason, it is puzzling to read that on
       27* February 1998, the SYPA relied on the Stuart-Smith findings to confirm a view
       previously held that the officers had behaved in good faith. As set out below, Lord
       Justice Stuart-Smith referred in withering terms to Duckenfield’s “disgraceful lie”

Attempting to pervert the course o f justice

12     It is important to set out the extent o f the evidence in support o f this charge, because it
       will not be apparent from previous Reports and documents on the case. The charge
       against M r Duckenfield is that he lied to a number o f people, either himself or through
       others, in the hour after the disaster, in a careful and calculating way, as the bodies
       were being carried away from the field and terraces. He did so to influence falsely the
       persons or courts who would investigate the circumstances of the disaster. He alleged
       that the supporters had burst the gates opened, whereas he had himself, after
       consideration, ordered that they be opened. He failed to correct this lie after the event,
       and continued, together with many senior officers o f the South Yorkshire police, to
       allow the lie to have effect for several weeks. The evidence in support o f this charge is
       summarised at Annex E.

The decision o f the Crown Prosecution Service

13    At the beginning o f July 1998 the solicitors for the defendants asked the Crown
      Prosecution Service to take over the prosecutions and discontinue them. The CPS is
      entitled in law to take over any prosecution begun by a private individual, and it will
       discontinue any prosecution o f which it has the conduct (including those which it has
      taken over) if there is clearly no evidence, or if there are public interest factors such as
      ill-health, unacceptable delay, or if the prosecution is likely to damage the interests o f
      justice.

14    The CPS conducted a most painstaking and professional review over a period o f nearly
      six months, before deciding on 18th December 1998 that they would not take over and
      discontinue the case. The ability o f the CPS to make an informed and balanced
      decision was recognised by Winkworth Sherwood for Mr Duckenfield, when they
      wrote to the CPS on 9th October 1998 in these terms;

              “It is submitted on behalf o f M r Duckenfield that the power o f the Director is
               o r i v t H o r f K o t l o t n o r o o c c a c c r n o n l r\-pf l i o o x n / ' l A n p o o r » H o m K r o p a c a n n n c i / ' l o r o f i o r t
              fku Y   Viuvi lliuil A iiivi w u jjv jjiiiv iit w              i> UiV vriuvuvv) CuiU viiiviuvvj u vviwiuviuuwu

              o f the wider public interest. The Director is well placed to assess where the
              public interest lies having had involvement in the case over a period o f nine
              years and having seen the Taylor report, the Stuart-Smith report, the coroner’s
              verdict, the judgement o f the Divisional Court and the review o f evidence, and
              the advice o f leading counsel obtained when the Director made the decision to
              prosecute.”

15    The representations put forward by the prosecution included the above assertions
       about the strength o f the evidence. Contrary arguments were put forward by the
       defendants, but were obviously rejected. It is very doubtful that the facts were set out
       in detail before the SYPA last February, or indeed thereafter. Mr Daines wrote in a
       published article last spring that “It is hard to imagine a private prosecution getting
       past the first hurdle.” Presumably he ventured a similar opinion to the SYPA in
      February 1998, but was not aware o f the full facts about the prosecution, nor the
      public interest factors set out below, the existence o f which has allowed the
      prosecution to clear the first hurdle and face the next hurdles with confidence.

Widerpublic interest considerations.

16    The SYPA will no doubt wish, in accordance with paragraph 6 o f the Circular

                                                                         4

                                                                                                                                                               r> n i i o **i
                                                                                                                                                              o uy u3
       HOC/1998, to “decide in tkeparticular circumstances o f tke case, and on the basis
       o f legal advice, whether to make financial assistance available to officers in criminal
       proceedings.” (Emphasis added.) It is obviously doubtful that such detailed
       consideration was given on 27* February 1998, but the SYPA, in considering whether
       to fund the defence in this case, might wish to be aware of the wider public interests
       matters that were put to the CPS before the review was decided in the prosecution’s
       favour. It may also wash to consider whether the advice given by the South Yorkshire
       police themselves is dispassionate and detached.

17     It was argued by the prosecution to the CPS that reliance could not be placed on
       previous inquiries that had exculpated the defendants, such as the coroner’s inquest,
       which had returned verdicts o f accidental death, and the DPP’s decision in 1990 not to
       bring prosecutions. The prosecution argued that evidence has been available to the
       HFSG since the publication o f the Stuart-Smith report in February 1998 which showed
       that the previous inquiries had been misled. These wader considerations, are set out in
       Annex F, and documents referred to therein at Annex G and Annex H. They show
       the South Yorkshire police has maintained a tight and unjustified control o f the
       paperwork; that previous investigations were misled; and that the proclaimed
       independence o f the West Midlands police was false. That force was in reality acting
       as an agent o f the South Yorkshire police, a force which put the protection o f its own
       interests at all time before the public interest.

The interest o f the prosecution in thefunding issue

18     I have already set out in Annex A that the HFSG has no wish to deny the defence
       o /^gcc t o T>rnr\t*r   r<mr<»e<»ntatirm T      att<»ntir»n in th a t IpttAr tr> tViA fa^t t h a t tViA

       defence seemed able to call upon the SYPA for unqualified and indefinite funding. I
       should inform you that I have had since then received written confirmation that Mr
       Murray’s lawyers are indeed going to apply for judicial review, whatever the reasons
       o f the CPS. I have presumed that this decision to apply for judicial review was made
       pursuant to funding arrangements made pursuant to the Resolution of the SYPA last
       February. It is not reasonable to believe that that firm decision was made in the mere
       hope that the SYPA would agree to fund it on 8* January next.

19    Another concern is the closeness o f the connection between the defence and those who
      hold the archive in the case. At three court hearings at the Leeds Magistrates Court
      (24* August, 7* December and 21st December) the lawyers for the defence have
      refused to support the prosecution in calling for the disclosure o f papers held in the
      case by the South Yorkshire Police. I am in no doubt that this is because they believe,
      with every good reason, that the archive will assist the prosecution more than the
      defence. However, it is clear that it will be difficult for the defence in this case to ask
      for the disclosure o f information which is embarrassing to the South Yorkshire police:
      the police argued successfully last year that the SYPA should fund that defence.

20    From the outside it looks as if a decision has been made to close ranks. It would be
       usual in decisions such as this to inquire what financial consequences would flow to
       the authority if funding were not granted. I f would have been quite wrong for
       agreement to have been made on the basis that funding by the SYPA was the best way
       to ensure that the South Yorkshire force would not face further civil actions.

21    Winkworth and Sherwood, who represent M r Duckenfield, represented the South
      Yorkshire Police in the “Scrutiny” last year. It is not known whether they, or
      Hammond Suddards advised the SYPA last February, upon this funding question.
      Generous funding arrangements have been sought and granted in an apparent attempt
      to exhaust the resources o f the prosecution, who do not have access to legal aid, and
      who have not applied for funding to the SYPA. I f the prosecution did so apply, asking
      for funding to maintain the morale o f the force, on the ground that junior officers
      would know that the negligent actions o f the senior officers o f the force would not be
      protected from a proper criminal inquiry, its claim would surely be more attractive than
      the present claim to fund the defence.

22    So far, the substantial decision to authorise the funding in the two individual cases has
      been taken in private. Both the defence and the SYPA has an interest in keeping as
      much o f the archive private as possible. The interest of the public and the prosecution
      is different. The force is sitting on material'that is deeply discreditable to the integrity
      o f the previous investigations. That is why it has refused to disclose it to the
      prosecution, and why it now seeks to insist on the most demanding conditions.

Tke alternative o f legal aidfunding

23    It is submitted that there is no reason why the South Yorkshire taxpayers should
      provide such potentially large and apparently unlimited funds to defend people who are
       entitled, like every' other citizen, subject to means, to the provision o f legal aid. Those
      taxpayers would surely be disturbed if they were given full information about this.
       The lawyers that would be instructed under legal aid would be subject to the ususal
      constraints and disciplines o f the scheme, but would at least be able to give
      independent advice; even, if appropriate, to plead guilty. There can be no doubt that
      the legal aid fund would be less profligate with its public money than it appears the
      SYPA has decided to be. The legal aid authorities would certainly have demanded
      down payments by way o f contributions from the defendants. They would have
      required a certification by the defendants’ lawyers that there were solid prospects o f
      success for a judicial review, before authorising expenditure.

24    No doubt you will wish to show a copy o f this letter and the enclosures to your
      lawyers and to the police. O f course, I have no objection, and would encourage you to
      ask them to deal with the matters I have set out in detail, and for which evidential
      references have been given. A good test o f the strength o f the arguments I have
      presented is whether the police will be able to answer them. Since millions o f pounds
      are potentially at stake, a proper and informed public debate can be expected, even if
      you have to postpone your hearing on 8* January. Members o f the HFSG will wish to
      attend that meeting, whenever it occurs, and I request that we be kept informed o f
      relevant dates. I shall be pleased to deal with any queries in advance that any member
      o f the SYPA might have, or supply copies o f any documents to which I have referred.
      I shall myself send a copy o f these representations to the defendants’ solicitors, so that
that they can make their own submissions.



Yours sincerely,



Ann Adlington.
Solicitor




                                            7

                                                & iil?2 6
- Hillsborough Family Support Group - Letter to Sheffield                                     Page 1 o f 1



                                               uSBO




              Letter regarding Defence Costs
  Ed Walker has drafted a letter which people in the Sheffield area may wish to send to the Chief
  Executive o f the city council. It regards the half a million pounds which has been set aside for the
  defence costs o f Duckenfield and Murray. Anyone in South Yorkshire who is opposed to the rate
  payers paying for the representation of the two former South Yorkshire Police Officers should
  print a copy o f the letter and sent it to the address at the top.

  If you would like a copy o f the letter in another electronic format, such as Word or PDF, please
  contact Sarah Hinksman who will forward you the appropriate file.

  Phil Hammond o f the HFSG would be interested in your views on paying for this representation,
  and would welcome emails on the subject to info@hfsg.org.


                                      f t j J g p H F S G HOM E




http://www.hfsg.org/letterl .htm                                                                11/01/99
 Draft letter to the chief executive o f Sheffield city council                                Page 1 o f 1



  Mr. R.W. Kerslake,
  Chief Executive,
  Sheffield City Council,
  Town Hall,
  Sheffield SI 2HH

  Dear Mr. Kerslake,

  I should like to register my concern at the way some o f South Yorkshire's council-tax-payers'
  money is being spent.

  On February 27th 1998, at a meeting o f the South Yorkshire Police Authority, it was resolved that
  defence costs in relation to private prosecutions of South Yorkshire police officers that may arise
  out o f the Hillsborough football stadium disaster would be met by the Authority, which is of
  course in turn funded by the people of South Yorkshire. Private prosecutions have now begun
  against two o f the police officers, David Duckenfield and Bernard Murray. Both are retired. One
  was severely criticised by Lord Justice Taylor's report into the disaster, and also took early
  retirement on ill health grounds before he could face a disciplinary investigation by the Police
  Complaints Authority. I understand that so far five hundred thousand pounds has been set aside to
  cover defence costs, and no doubt more will be made available if the need should arise.

  The former chief constable of South Yorkshire police, Richard Wells, was interviewed on YTV's
  'Calendar' on Wednesday 18th February 1998. This is a partial transcript:

  Mike Morris: "Well if somebody has been to blame, who is that person?"
  Richard Wells: "David Duckenfield has been blamed, by Lord Justice Taylor. The South
  Yorkshire police are culpable, in the sense of, that they lost senior officer control on the day.
  We've said that repeatedly."

  Assistant Chief Constable Daines argued nine days later that the officers involved had "acted in
  good faith", and therefore the expenditure o f half a million pounds was justifiable.

  I am concerned that this is not a reasonable way to spend such a large sum of public money. I
  welcome your comments. You may receive more than one copy o f this letter.

 Yours sincerely,




                                                                                                00004;

http://www.hfsg.org/letter.htm                                                                   11/01/99
                                        0226 772899

  South Yoifcstiire Joint Secretariat
  P.O. Box 37, Ragwrt Street,
  Barnsley, Sooth Yorkshire S70 2PQ.
  Fax: Barnsley (01229) 772OT9
  W J. W ilkinson, BA(Econ), CPFA. Cfork and Tnasunr

                                                                                           SOUTH YO RKSHIRE
  Our ref: WJW/JLL                                                                                   POLICE
                                                                                                  AUTHORITY
  Your ref; RBM/BQW/MURRAY


  Date: 13 January 1999

 This metier is beiriQ de^R with iff.    Bill Wilkinson               Direct Une:   0 12 2 6 7 7 2 8 0 3

 Mr R Manning
 Partner
 Walker Morris
 Solicitors
 Kings Court
 12 King Street
 LEEDS LS1 2HL

 Dear       tv /                    f

 HILLSBOROUGH: FINANCING O F D E F E N C E C OSTS

 Having yesterday sought the advice of Leading Counsel following receipt of
 representations concerning the financing of your client’s defence costs, I will shortly be
 asking the Authority to consider the issue of financial assistance, and to review the
 decisions taken to date. I will at the same time ask the Authority to give consideration to
 your further applications for support.

In these circumstances I have agreed with the Chairman of the Authority that the
presentations by representatives of the defendants and the Hillsborough Family Support
Group, which we had originally planned for Friday 15 January, should now be deferred to
a later date. I apologise for any inconvenience this may cause.

In these circumstances, I must draw three further matters to your attention:

1    I am not at this stage in a position to authorise further payments in respect of legal
costs in relation to your client’s defence to the private prosecution.

2    As you are aware, no decision has been taken as to funding any judicial review
proceedings against the Crown Prosecution Service or any proceedings by way of review
or appeal of any future adverse decision as to costs by the Sefton Magistrates Court.
Clearly no costs should be incurred in respect of either of these matters unless your client
has other sources of funding.

3     One of the matters which will fall to be considered by the Authority both in relation to
funding your client’s defence costs and in relation to funding any potential judicial review
is the extent to which your client is entitled to legal aid. It is essential* therefore, that you



                                                                                                           G Q Q ( j 41)
                                        RECEIVED TIME13. JAN. 14:45
13 JAN ’99   15:38       FKUD b YUKKti j u i m    ate                                 r nvac .
                          0226 772899

  provide me with a full assessment of your client’s eligibility for legal aid, your estimate of
  any contribution which might be required and an analysis of how such a contribution might
  impact on his personal financial position. This information must be supplied in advance of
  any meeting of the Authority at which the future funding of your client is to be considered.
  Please, therefore, treat this as a matter of urgency.

  I will correspond with you further as matters develop.

  Yours sincerely




  Bill Wilkinson
  Cleric and Treasurer




                                                                                       U0 0 0 4 6.

                          RECEIVED TIME13. JAN. 14:45                 ** TOTAL P A G E .003 **
CW P Newell                                                                                                 CPS
and-6hrefin«pecfc»
                                                                                                            Headquarters
                                                                                                            50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                                                            London EC4M 7EX


                                                                                             Direct Line    0171-273 1226
 r                                                                                           Switchboard:   0171-273 8000
     Messrs Walker Morris                                                                      Facsimile:   0171-329 8366
                                                                                                  DX No:    300850 Ludgate EC4
     Solicitors
     DX 12051 Leeds 24

                                                                          Your Ref: RBM/MT/MURRAY

                                                                          1 February 1999
 L                                                      J




                                                                                 i
     Dear Sirs                                                               J

     ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

     You wrote to the Crown Prosecution Service on 18 December 1998, following the receipt of a
     letter from the CPS, also dated 18 December 1998, informing you of the Service’s decision
     not to exercise its power under Section 6(2) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 to take
     over the criminal proceedings against your client with a view to discontinuing them.

     You ask for further information: first, as to the factual matters on which the CPS relied,
     identifying which parts o f the evidence is “new” since the Crown last considered the case; and
     secondly, as to the way in which the Service applied the Code for Crown Prosecutors in
     deciding whether to intervene.

     These questions indicate that you misunderstand the factors that the CPS considers when
     deciding whether to take over a private prosecution at the request of a defendant, with a view
     to discontinuance. It may help if I indicate again in broad terms the approach that the Service
     adopts to these decisions.

     As you know, the Code for Crown Prosecutors sets out the general principles applied by the
     Service when (inter alia) deciding whether to continue a prosecution it has taken over; or
     whether to institute proceedings, or to advise the police whether to do so. It is correct that the
     CPS decided in 1997 that the evidenca available at that time was not sufficient, in its view, to
     provide a realistic prospect o f the conviction of either your client or Mr Duckenfield for any
     offence. However, it does not follow that, when considering the evidence and the
     representations submitted by the private prosecutor, and by yourselves on behalf o f your
     client, the CPS should seek merely to identify whether there is now any new evidence
     sufficient to provide a realistic prospect o f a conviction. The decision whether to intervene in



                                                                                                                      000053
                           Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests of justice
 a private prosecution with a view to terminating it calls for different considerations to be
 applied. It is quite possible for a private prosecution to continue, notwithstanding that the
 CPS is not satisfied, on the basis o f its own assessment of the strength o f the evidence that
 the evidence would pass the evidential sufficiency test in the Code (that there should be a
 “realistic prospect o f a conviction”).

 In broad terms, the reason for this is that Section 6(1) of the Prosecution o f Offences Act
 1985, the Act which established the Service’s powers and duties, specifically preserved the
 right o f private individuals and prosecuting authorities or bodies other than the CPS to bring
 criminal proceedings. This right is subject (among other limitations) to the limitation in
 Section 6(2) that the CPS may nevertheless take over the proceedings with a view either to
 conducting or to terminating those proceedings.

 Private prosecutors are not bound to apply the Code for Crown Prosecutors when deciding
 whether to institute proceedings, nor do the courts apply the evidential sufficiency test in the
 Code when deciding whether there is a case to answer. The Service therefore recognises that
 it is not appropriate to intervene to terminate a private prosecution without good reason. That
 general principle has recently been endorsed by the Law Commission in its Consultation
 Paper No. 149 “Consents to Prosecution” (see paragraphs 6.3 and 6.4).

 The Service’s policy is that it will not take over a private prosecution with a view to
 terminating it unless one or more of the following applies:

  (i)   there is clearly no case to answer. A private prosecution started in these circumstances
        would be unfounded and ought not to be permitted to continue; or

 (ii)   the public interest factors tending against prosecution clearly outweigh those in favour
        (examples might be where the prosecution is malicious, or vexatious; or the offence is
        one for which the defendant should clearly have been cautioned; or where, although
        the offence may be serious, the defendant is terminally ill); or

(iii)   the prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests of justice.

In this case, I took the decision not to intervene. After careful consideration, I concluded in
respect o f the charges of manslaughter and wilful neglect to perform a public duty (which, for
the avoidance of doubt, were each considered against each individual separately) that I could
not say that there is clearly no case to answer. It was not right, therefore, for the Service to
take over the proceedings with a view to terminating them.

I should add that, against that background and after specifically considering the appropriate
course to take in these circumstances, I concluded further that it would not be right to
intervene in respect o f the one remaining charge against Mr Duckenfield, of attempting to
pervert the course o f justice, albeit I had formed the view that there was clearly no case to
answer on that charge alone. The charge o f attempting to pervert the course o f justice is a
serious one, particularly when levelled against someone who was, at the relevant time, a
serving, senior police officer. Nevertheless, in the context o f the case as a whole that charge
is not the gravamen of the criminality alleged against Mr Duckenfield and I concluded that
my approach to that charge should be led by my conclusions on the charges of manslaughter
and wilful neglect to perform a public duty.




                                                                                             000054
I also considered whether, nevertheless, there were overriding public interest factors that
should lead to the Service intervening with a view to discontinuance, but I came to the
conclusion that any public interest factors tending against prosecution did not clearly
outweigh those in favour; nor did I consider that the prosecution is clearly likely to damage
the interests o f justice.

The Crown Prosecution Service is not obliged in law to provide detailed reasons for its
decisions, let alone any analysis of the evidence. However, in the circumstances of this
particular case I consider it appropriate to explain the factors taken into account in more detail
than was contained in the Service’s letter dated 18 December 1998.

I have written in similar terms to those representing Mr Duckenfield and enclose a copy of
that letter, for your information. I have sent copies of both letters to Ms Adlington.

Yours faithfully




C W P NEWELL
Director, Casework
                                                   G arretts


                                                                                                      1 City Square
                                                                                                      Leeds LSI 2AL
 10 February 1999                                                                                     0113 207 9000 Telephone
                                                                                                      0113 207 9001 Facsimile
                                                                                                      DX 26444 L eeds Park Square

 Walker Morris                                                                                        Direct line   0113 3996136
 Solicitors
 Kings Court                                                                                          O ur ref      D H /K H
 12 King Street
 Leeds                                                                                                Your ref
 LSI 2HL

                                                   For the attention of R Manning

 Dear Sirs

 South Yorkshire Police Authority

 We refer to the meeting on 5 February 1999 of the South Yorkshire Police Authority. You will
 recall that the meeting considered whether the Authority had power to provide financial
 assistance to Mr David Duckenfield and Mr Bernard Murray in relation to their costs and expenses
 on the private prosecutions and various applications for judicial review.

 The matter was considered in private meeting by the Authority, although submissions were heard
 from or on behalf of HFSG, Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray. After giving careful consideration to
 these submissions, the views of the Chief Constable and our advice, the Authority resolved that it
 did not have power to provide the financial assistance. This resolution was in accordance with our
 advice.

Our advice, which incorporated the views of Ms Presiley Baxendale QC and Mr Mark Shaw of
Counsel, was to the following effect:

1          Section 6 Police Act 1996, which confers on the Authority a wide duty to maintain an
           effective and efficient police force, in conjunction with Section 111(1) Local Government Act
           1972, appeared to give a very broad discretion to the Authority to preserve the morale of the
           police force without which, an effective and efficient police force could not be maintained.
           Accordingly, if it was, in the Authority's view, genuinely and reasonably necessary, in order
           to maintain police morale, to meet the out of pocket costs and expenses of police officers,
           incurred in defending themselves against criminal or civil proceedings, it was arguably
           w ithin Section 6 of the Police Act 1996, coupled with Section 111(1) of the Local Government
           Act 1972, to pay such costs.
2          However, that there were powerful arguments against this interpretation including the
           following:

       a            If there were a general power under section 6 Police Act 1996 to indemnify officers
                    against the costs of legal proceedings arising from the performance of their duties,


Garretts is a member of the Andersen Legal         A list of the names of the partners is open to
                                                                                                                                      u: u u u 6 /
                                                                                                          O ffices in: Birmingham Cambridge Leeds
                                                                                                                                                  6
international network of law firms.                inspection at the above office. The partners are       London Manchester Reading
                                                   either solicitors or registered foreign lawyers.       Associate firm in Scotland: Dundas & Wilson CS

j:\garrett\south yorkshlre polke\le-00021.doc\$b
                                                 G a r r etts

                                                     -2-                          10 February 1999



                    there would be no reason for section 88(4) Police Act 1996 specifically to allow the
                    recovery of such costs in tort proceedings. Section 88(4) would simply be unnecessary.

       b            The issue turns on the proper construction of the Police Act 1996. In London Borough of
                    Sutton -v- Morgan Grenfell & Co Limited (1996) the Court of Appeal stated that where
                    Parliament had enacted specific provisions setting out how a local authority was
                    intended to perform its functions, there was no room to imply other means of carrying
                    out those functions under section 111(1) Local Government Act 1972. In particular,
                    where a local authority was intended to have power to incur financial obligations that
                    power m ust specifically be identified by statute. This was an example of a well-
                    established general principle of statutory interpretation: where Parliament specifies
                    one particular matter, it impliedly excludes any other allied matters. In addition,
                    section 6 of the Police Act 1996 is so wide in its language that it was doubtful that
                    recourse to section 111(1) Local Government Act 1972 could usefully expand it. The
                    real question is the relationship between section 6 and section 88 Police Act 1996.

       c          InK p Derbyshire Police Authority ex -parte Wilson and Dalton (1989), both parties had
                   accepted that the basic power to meet the officers' costs existed, and accordingly this
                   did not fall to be decided by the court. The power to pay costs was therefore assumed
                   not decided. Similarly, a Home Office Circular is only guidance. It does not define or
                   modify the law and should not be assumed to be correct.

       d          Mr Justice Denning stated in Askey -v- Golden Wine Co Limited (1948) the public policy
                  that the punishment inflicted by a criminal court is personal to the offender and that
                  such an offender is not entitled to recover from a third party an indemnity against the
                  consequences of the criminal proceedings whether that be a fine, an award against him
                  of the other party's costs or the accused's own legal costs. This public policy helps to
                  explain why section 88(4) Police Act 1996 does not cover criminal proceedings.

       e          A judge would not necessarily consider it desirable for the Authority to have such a
                  power. In the light of Askey -v- Golden Wine Co Limited, it was doubtful if a police
                  authority was intended to have power to indemnify officers against costs of a case in
                  which they were found guilty. An acquitted defendant would, in any event, normally
                  receive an award that h is/h er reasonably incurred non legally-aided costs be paid in
                  full out of central funds, unless the accused was at fault in bringing suspicion on
                  himself or was found not guilty on a technicality see Practice Direction (Crime: Costs)
                  (1991) 1 WLR 498. Accordingly, in the normal run, an acquitted police officer should
                  have no (or few) costs to pay himself/herself, which a police authority would need to
                  meet.
3          The issues raised were difficult and that there was no guarantee which way a Court would
           decide. There were certainly strong policy reasons why the Authority should have power to
           support its officers (current and former) in this way. Given the points summarised in
           paragraphs 2 (a) to 2 (e) above, however, there were considerable doubts about the power of
           the Authority to support the costs either of the criminal proceedings or the judicial review

                                                                                                     liOuO

j:\gurett\southyorkshlre polke\le*00021.doc\sb
                                                    G a r r etts

                                                        -3-                    10 February 1999



           proceedings (neither being covered by Section 88(4) Police Act 1996), particularly before any
           judgm ent had been given in those proceedings.
 4        It was also necessary to be mindful of the terms of the latest Home Office Circular. One
           w ould not lightly advise that it is wrong but it is much more hesitant that its predecessor.
           Therefore, it was sensed that the Home Office may have its own doubts about the existence
           of this power.
 5        Accordingly, whilst it was wished to review the matter further in the light of any
          representations made on behalf of the officers, the Chief Constable or the HFSG, the current
          recommendation was that the Authority should resolve to reverse its earlier decision and
          decide that it has no power to provide the financial assistance which had been sought. It
          should then co-operate with those parties in bringing the matter before a court for an early
          decision on whether that view of their legal powers was correct.

In disclosing the effect of our advice, the Authority shall not be regarded as having waived its legal
privilege whatsoever. This disclosure is made solely for the purpose of providing the Authority's
reasons.

We enclose:

1           The Resolutions of the Authority;

2           The Statement of the Chairman of the Authority which was released following the meeting.

You may also be aware that the Chief Constable has announced his intention to seek judicial
review of the Authority's decision. You may wish to consider whether to make representations at
that hearing.


Yours faithfully



Enclosures




                                                                                              £ o uy 69

j:\garrett\touthyorkshire po!ice\ le-00021.doc\sb
 RESOLUTIONS OF THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY ON
 FRIDAY, 5 FEBRUARY 1999

 1. In the light of legal advice, including advice from leading Counsel, members are
       recommended to resolve that, on balance, the Authority has no legal power to
       provide financial assistance to Mr David Duckenfield or Mr Bernard Murray in
       relation to their costs and expenses of defending the private prosecutions brought
       against them by the HFSG, by Information dated 10 July 1998, and accordingly to
       determine that any previous decision of the Authority, or any officer acting
       under its authority, to make such assistance available is null and void.

2. In the light of legal advice, including advice from leading Counsel, members are
       recommended to resolve that, on balance, the Authority has no legal power to
       provide financial assistance to Mr David Duckenfield or Mr Bernard Murray in
       relation to the costs of any judicial review proceedings brought by either of them;
       whether relating to the decision of the Crown Prosecution Service not to take
       over the conduct of the private prosecutions and discontinue such prosecutions,
       or to any decision of the Clerk to the Sefton Magistrates' Court to challenge the
       payment of the officers' costs of proceedings before that court from central funds,
       or to any other decision of any court, authority or body arising from such
       prosecutions; and, accordingly, to reject the applications of Mr Duckenfield and
       Mr Murray for financial assistance in relation to such proceedings.

3. In recognition of the fact that the legal advice provided to the Authority is that it
       remains arguable that power exists to provide the assistance referred to in 1 and 2
       above, to take such action as the Clerk and Treasurer, in consultation with the
       Chief Constable, the Authority's legal advisers and the Chairman of the
       Authority, may decide as appropriate to have the decisions referred to in 1 and 2
       reviewed by the High Court and to expedite such review with a view to
       clarifying the Authority's powers in this regard.

4. To defer consideration of the procedural issues raised by Ms Adlington, in her
       letters of 22 December 1998 to the Clerk and Treasurer and 5 January 1999 to the
       members of the Authority, until the legal power of the Authority to provide the
       financial assistance referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 has been resolved to the
      satisfaction of the Authority.




                                                                                           0 G U0 7 0

le-00024
     CHAIRMAN'S STATEMENT


     South Yorkshire Police Authority has met today to consider issues relating to the
     funding of the defence costs of former police officers in legal proceedings relating to
     the Hillsborough disaster.


     As well as considering various legal advice, we heard representations from the
     Hillsborough Families Support Group and solicitors representing two former
     officers.


     Questions have been raised recently about the powers of Police Authorities to pay
     the defence costs of police officers in legal proceedings. We have taken extensive
    legal advice on the matter. On balance, our advisers have concluded that Police
    Authorities do not have the powers and we have felt obliged to support that view.


    However, the issue is far from clear cut. We have heard this morning from several
    other legal advisers - including the Chief Constable's adviser - who are firmly of the
    view that Police Authorities do have the powers. We are therefore co-operating with
    the Chief Constable to have the true legal position determined by the court.


    The implications of this matter go beyond South Yorkshire and could affect the
    Police Service as a whole.

A
j




                                                                                          000071
     -00014
    pp
SUBM ISSIONS ON LEGAL AUTHORITY


These are subm issions on behalf o f M r Bernard M urray.


1.      The discretion to authorise funding in this case is derived from the statutory power under
section 111(1) o f the Local Government Act 1972 and the statutory duty under section 6 o f the
Police Act 1996.


The power
2.2    The power o f the police authority: Section 111 (1) LGA 1972, so far as is material:
        “... a local authority shall have power to do anything (whether or not involving
        the expenditure ... o f money...) which is calculated to facilitate, or is conducive
        or incidental to, the discharge o f any of their functions.”
“... the word “functions” embraces all the duties and powers o f a local authority; the sum total
o f the activities Parliament has entrusted to it. Those activities are its functions.” (Per Lord
Templeman, Hazell -v- Hammersmith L.B. C. [1992] 2 A.C. 1 at page 29F.)


2.3     The sub-section is couched in the widest possible terms. It is elementary that such a broad
enabling provision cannot empower a local authority to do an unlawful act, or to do anything
which is expressly or by necessary implication prohibited by other statutory provisions, or to do
anything which is not truly in discharge of its functions. But unless so limited the power exists
and is exercisable subject only to challenge on the basis o f an improper exercise o f discretion
amounting to Wednesbury unreasonableness.


2.4    Section 111(3) is an example o f an express limitation. It restricts the power to raise or
lend money except in accordance with other statutory provisions relating to those matters. But
this has no relevance to the present case. The police authority’s resolution does not involve
borrowing or lending money.


The duty
3.1    The duty o f the police authority: Section 6(1) o f the Police Act 1996 (re-enacting s.4 o f
the Police Act 1964 as amended):


                                                 1
                                                                                               000053
          “Every police authority ... shall secure the maintenance of an efficient and
          effective police force for its area.”
Discharge o f this statutory duty is a function o f the authority within the meaning o f section
 111(1) above. The scope o f the duty under section 6(1) is not restricted to fulfilment o f the
objectives provided for by sub-sections (2) and (3). The matters there mentioned are not
exhaustive o f the objectives which the police authority may promote in discharge o f the section
6(1) duty.


3.2       Ini? -v- Derbyshire Police Authority, ex p. Wilson (unreported, 20 July 1989), the scope
o f section 6, (then section 4 o f the 1964 Act) was said to define the duty o f the police authority
and the purposes for which the authority may spend the money provided, namely to secure the
maintenance o f an adequate and efficient police force: Ralph Gibson L.J., (pp.4-5).


3.3       Adapting Lord Templeman’s speech in Hazell -v- HammersmithL.B.C.:
“Accordingly a local authority can do anything which is calculated to facilitate or is conducive
or incidental to the local authority’s function o f [securing the maintenance o f an efficient and
effective police force fo r its area],” (ibid. page 29F).


3.4       A police authority is entitled to be guided by Home Office advice in determining the
scope o f its duty to secure the ‘maintenance o f an efficient and effective police force’, (see R -v-
Derbyshire Police Authority, ex p. Wilson (unreported, 20 July 1989), per Ralph Gibson L.J. 6-
7). Home Office circulars 77/1987 and 4/1998 have both stressed the importance o f police
officers being able to carry out their duties in the confidence that their police authority will
support them if they act in good faith and exercise their judgment reasonably. With reference to
the scope o f the power under section 111(1) of the 1972 Act, paragraph 5 o f Circular 4/1988
states:
          “... It could be argued that to allow payment to be made to officers (either former
          or serving) involved in criminal proceedings would in some way facilitate or be
          conducive to the police authority’s broad functions. For example, failure to
          provide financial assistance could adversely affect the morale o f the force if
          officers had to meet their own costs after an acquittal.”
It is important to note that payment of costs after an acquittal is given by way o f example only.
The principle at issue is as to the provision o f financial assistance in general. Paragraph 6 states:
        “It is for individual police authorities to decide in the particular circumstances of
        a case and on the basis of legal advice whether to make financial assistance
        available to officers in Criminal Proceedings.”
The purpose o f this submission being to deal with the legal basis for funding, we shall not
rehearse the plain case which we have established on the merits showing that to deny funding
to M r Murray in the circumstances of his case would be wholly contrary to the statutory duty of
securing an effective and efficient police force. The original decision o f the police authority was
correct in principle and well within the proper exercise o f a discretion under section 6 o f the
1996 Act. The proposed payments were rightly judged to be calculated to facilitate, to be
conducive to, and to be incidental to, the discharge of the functions arising from section 6.


The Section 88 fallacy
4.1    Section 88 o f the Police Act 1996 (re-enacting section 48 of the Police Act 1964) does
not determine or affect the scope of the section 6 duty with respect to funding the defence of
criminal charges brought against individual officers.


4.2    The section exists simply to extend the common law doctrine o f vicarious liability for tort
to the relationship between the chief constable and his officers: (the original statutory provision
reversed the decision in Fisher -v- Oldham Corporation [1930] 2 K.B. 364), and to make
consequential provisions as to the payment o f damages and costs by the police authority which
would otherwise fall upon the chief constable by operation o f sub-section (1). Sub-sections (2)
and (4) are necessary to relieve him from the ordinary civil consequence of bearing the damages
and costs, which is the usual position o f a vicariously liable employer.


4.3    Once the provisions o f the section are properly understood in this way, the principle
expressio unius can be seen to have no application to the true interpretation o f the scope of the
power under section 6. There is no basis for the suggestion in the letter (1 February 1999) from
the Authority’s solicitors that section 88(4) might be interpreted as precluding financial
assistance for non-tort claims. It is not, and cannot possibly have been intended to be, a provision
circumscribing the authority’s powers in discharge o f its wide-ranging statutory duty under
section 6.


                                                 3
Cases on Section 111(1)
5.1     The A uthority’s solicitor has suggested that the scope o f section 111(1) as it applies to
this case, might be affected by recent case law. We have identified such case law as might have
a bearing upon the true interpretation o f that section. We have concluded that, upon careful
reading, none o f the cases establishes any basis for undermining the propositions outlined above.
It is unnecessary to set out any extensive analysis o f the cases. We believe it sufficient to identify
and extract the essential ratio o f each case, as follows. None o f the cases jutifies a conclusion
that the section 111(1) power is limited by other provision or authority so as to preclude the
police authority from deciding to authorise expenditure in what it perceives to be a proper
discharge o f its duty under section 6.


5.2     Hazell -v- Hammersmith and Fulham L.B.C. [1992] 2 A.C. 1. Two main issues arose:
first, whether swap transactions were within section 111(1) o f the 1972 Act; second, whether an
interim strategy of damage limitation after it appeared the swaps might be ultra vires was within
the sub-section. The swap transactions were held to have been ultra vires because they were not
incidental to the authority’s borrowing function “having regard to the provisions and
limitations of the A ct of 1972 regulating th at function”. (See Lord Templeman, p.3 IE.) This
is a clear example o f the general power of section 111(1) being circumscribed by other specific
statutory provisions, namely Schedule 13 o f the 1972 Act, which Lord Templeman said (page
33H-34A): “establishes a comprehensive code which defines and limits the powers o f a local
authority with regard to its borrowing. The Schedule is in my view inconsistent with any
incidental power to enter into swap transactions.” Transactions under the interim strategy were
struck down because they could only have been incidental to transactions which were themselves
ultra vires.


5.3     McCarthy & Stone (Developments) Ltd -v- Richmond Upon Thames London Borough
Council [1992] 2 A.C. 48. The House o f Lords held that pre-application planning advice was not
a function within section 111 (1), and that to charge for such a service did not facilitate, nor was
it conducive to or incidental to, functions of considering and determining planning applications.
It follow ed that to charge for such a service could not be brought within the sub-section. Lord
Lowry (page 75A) categorised such charges as “incidental to the incidental and not incidental
to the discharge o f the functions.”

                                                  4
                                                                                                  000081
5.3     Credit Suisse -v- Waltham Forest L.B.C. [1997] Q.B. 362 [C.A.] Here the Court of
Appeal struck down the authority’s guarantees to a bank in respect o f loans to a company the
authority had set up in breach of its statutory powers; similarly, an agreement to   in d em n ify   the
company was ultra vires. Again, the basis o f the successful challenge to the authority’s action
was that it contravened other express statutory provisions. Neill L.J. said (374 C): “... where
Parliament has made detailed provisions as to how certain statutory functions are to be carried
out there is no scope for implying the existence o f additional powers which lie wholly outside
the statutory code.” (It is important not to be misled by the immediately following reference in
his judgment to section 111(3): “Section 111(3) makes it clear the power to enter into financial
obligations is subject to any statutory controls which may be imposed.” ‘Financial obligations’
refers to lending and borrowing only; there are no relevant statutory controls affecting the
present situation.) Credit Suisse -v-Allerdale Borough Council [1997] Q.B. 306 [C.A.] is to the
same effect in different circumstances.


5.4     Sutton L.B.C. -v- Morgan Grenfell & Co Ltd (1996) 29 H.L.R. 608. Here, guarantees and
indem nities were struck down because they were held not to be incidental to the authority’s
legitimate function; this was an example o f the incidental to the incidental. Peter Gibson L.J.
approved a formulation of Elizabeth Appleby Q.C.:
        “Where Parliament has expressly enacted provisions which define the means by
        which local authorities are to carry out their functions, section 111(1) cannot be
        relied upon in support of performance o f those functions by other means not
        expressly empowered by relevant provisions.”
We respectfully agree with that. It is necessary to be careful about the passage in the judgment
of Peter Gibson L.J. which immediately follows the citation: (page 617). It is not intended to say
any more than that the authority’s powers under section 111(1) are not circumscribed unless
there exist specific statutory provisions regulating the exercise of powers in particular
circumstances:




Conclusion
6.1     There is no identifiable statutory provision which can properly be said to circumscribe
the application o f section 111(1) to the issue before the police authority. Their discretion is, to


                                                 5
that extent, unfettered subject only to Wednesbury unreasonableness.


6.2     Comparisons with other areas of local authority functions regulated by statutory schemes
are likely to prove unhelpful. The Police Act 1996 is predicated on the basis that Police
Authority and Chief Constable will work together. The former’s ability to act is circumscribed
by the requirement to take advice from the latter and from the Secretary o f State and the
community (see sections 7, 8 and 96). The latter’s ability to act is circumscribed by the
requirement to follow the guidance o f the former. Thus, the power given to the Police Authority
is wide. The instrument o f regulation o f that power is not statute or statutory instrument, but
consultation and agreement. In other words, precisely the exercise thus far undertaken in this
case.




                                                              Michael Harrison Q.C.


                                                              Simon Myerson.




3 February 1999.
SUPPLEM ENTARY SUBM ISSION ON LEGAL AUTHORITY


On behalf o f M r Bernard Murray.


Section 88 (4) o f the Police Act 1996.
1.1    In view of the emphasis apparently being placed upon this sub-section, we wish to amplify
our submission. We re-state our submission that the provisions of the section as a whole are
consequential upon the effect of sub-section (1) which imposes vicarious liability upon the chief
constable. Viewed from the standpoint of the parliamentary draftsman, sub-sections (2) and (4)
are made necessary by what goes before.


1.2     Sub-section (2) imposes a duty to indemnify the chief constable in respect of damages as
well as costs. This is on the premise that he is liable only as a joint tortfeasor by operation of sub­
section (1).


1.3    Sub-section (4) becomes necessary to accomplish two objectives which would not arise
by necessary implication if it did not exist. First, it makes clear that the police authority may
relieve the principal tortfeasor of liability. But secondly, and importantly, it has effect that the
authority may make a payment in respect of damages as well as costs. This establishes an
important principle which would not necessarily be derived from the terms of section 111(1) of
the Local Government Act 1972 if that were the only statutory authority for such a payment.
Having provided authority for payment of damages, it is a natural and necessary next step to
associate that with express power to make payment in respect of costs.


1.4     There is nothing inherently contrary to ordinary canons of statutory construction in
parliament making an express provision for something which might arguably be derived by
implication from another statutory provision, especially where to omit an express provision might,
in the context of other express provisions, be mis-interpreted.


1.5    On its proper construction, sub-section (4) cannot be interpreted as demonstrating that
parliament has given no power to a police authority to fund a criminal defence.
Funding the applicationfo r Judicial Review o f the Director’s decision
2.1     For reasons set out in our first submissions to the police authority concerning the merits
o f Mr Murray’s case, the arguments we seek to advance on his behalf are arguments which are
the legitimate concern of the chief constable and police authority, because they deal with a vitally
important question o f whether the D.P.P. or Attorney-General have a duty to intervene and stop
a private prosecution mounted against individual officers in a case where the public prosecutor
has repeatedly said that there should be no prosecution and that there is no realistic prospect of
conviction.


2.2    We submit that the authority has power to fund a police officer (serving or retired) in such
proceedings, applying section 111(1) of the 1972 Act and section 6 o f the 1996 Act.




                                                       Michael Harrison Q.C


                                                       Simon Myerson.




4 Februry 1999.




                                                                                             00 00 66
                                                                                         PPEMD1X

                                                                       i

H OC 4/199S                                                                                                    17 F e b r u a r y 199S


T H IS C IR C U L A R IS A B O U T :            F IN A N C IA L A S S IS T A N C E T O P O L I C E O F F I C E R S IN
                                                L E G A L P R O C E E D L N 'G S


FROM :        P O L IC E R E S O U R C E S U N IT                       E X PIR Y DATE:         NONE


LAST DATE FOR -
IM P L E M E N T A T IO N : I M M E D I A T E                           THIS CANCELS HOC:            77/19S7

_r»R M O R E IN F O R M A T IO N C O N T A C T :                        STEV ESCH OLEY
                                                                        P O L I C E R E S O U R C E S U N IT
                                                                        R O O M 610
                                                                        50 Q U E E N A N N E ’S G A T E
                                                                        L O N D O N S W 1 H 9AT
                                                                        T E L : 0171 273 3 60 6
                                                                        F A X : 0171 273 3 74 2


T H IS C I R C U L A R IS A D D R E S S E D T O :                       CHEF OFFICERS OF POLICE
                                                                        (ENGLAND & WALES)

C O P IE S A R E A L S O B E IN G S E N T TO:                           C L E R K S T O T H E P O L IC E A U T H O R IT IE S
                                                                        R E C E IV E R F O R T H E M E T R O P O L I T A N
                                                                        P O L I C E D IS T R I C T




          Dear Chief Officer/Clerk,
 (.)
         This circular:

          •    Drovidss updated guidance to police authorities on financial assistance to p olice
               officers in legal proceedings.

          • distinguishes between officers involved in civil pro-eedings, criminal
            proceedings and other types of legal proceedings.*

               replaces HO Circular 77/1987.
Introduction

1.     It is important that police officers should be able to carry out their duties in
the confidence that their police authority will support them, if they act in good faith
and exercise their judgement reasonably. The following guidance, which has been
prepared in consultation with ACPO, the Superintendents Association, the.Police
Federation and the Association of Police Authorities', should be read against this
principle.

Civil Proceedings                                    .

2.     Under section 88 (1) of the Police Act 1996 which re-enacts section -48(1) of
the Police Act 1964, chief officers axe liable for torts committed by officers under
their direction and control. Section SS(2) provides that any damages or costs
awarded against the chief officer and any costs they incur themselves (which are not
recovered) should be met from police authority funds.

3.     Alternatively, a court may award damages against individual police officers.
Section 8S(4) of the Police Act 1996 empowers a police authority “to such an extent
as appears to it to be appropriate" to pay any damages or costs awarded againsc
officers (this includes both officers of other forces serving in the police area under
mutual aid arrangements and special constables), any costs incurred by the officers
themselves and any sum paid in connection with the settlement of a claim. It is for
police authorities to decide when to make assistance available, taking account of the
circumstances of a particular case.

4.     Police authorities are reminded that the discretionary powers in sections
SS(4) and (5) of the Act, enabling them to provide financial assistance to officers
involved in legal proceedings, apply to civil proceedings only. Sections SS(4) and
SS(5) may also apply to police officers who were members at the time of the action
which gave rise to the claim but who are no ionger members.

C r i m i n a l Proc e ed in g^

5.     Section 88(4) does not apply to criminal proceedings, but police authorities
may wish to consult their legal advisers as to whether they have any other power to
provide such assistance (whether in respect o f private prosecutions or prosecutions
brought by the CPS). In this context, they may wish to note that section 111(1) of
the Local Government Act 1972 enables police authorities to do anything ^\yhich is r
calculated to facilitate, or is conducive or incidental to, the discharge of any of their
functions". The provision applies to provincial authorities (but not the Metropolitan
or City of London police) by virtue of Section W6A of the 1972 Act (as inserted
by Schedule 14 to the Local Government Act 19S5 and amended by Schedule 4 o f
the Police and Magistrates' Courts Act 1994). It could be argued that to allow
  payment to be made: to officers (either former or serving) involved in criminal
  proceedings would in some way facilitate or be conducive 10 a police authority's
  "broad functions. F or example, failure to provide financial assistance could
  adversely affect the morale of the force if officers had to meet their own costs after
  an acquittal.

  6.     It is for individual police authorities to decide in the particular circumstances
  of a case, and on the basis of legal advice, whether to make financial assistance
  available to officers in criminal proceedings.

  O th e r fvppc oF Ipgal proceedings

   7.     Similarly, there is no express statutory authority- for providing financial
   assistance in proceedings brought against police officers in tribunals other than the
f ^courts. It is for police authorities outside London (hearing in mind the
‘^recommendations o f chief officers) to decide whether to make financial assistance
J vaiiable to officers (either former or serving) involved in Public Inquiries and
   Tribunals. Police authorities will therefore need to consider whether section 111(1)
   of the Local Government Act 1972 provides sufficient scope to enable financial ’
   assistance to be given in any particular case. In this respect tribunals may include
   certain industrial tribunals where it is clear that officers have acted in good faith in
   pursuance of their duties and the interest of the force as a whole is involved. It is to
   be expected that, where appropriate, the service’s grievance procedure
   arrangements should be exhausted before there is recourse to legal proceedings.
   These arrangements are set out in Home Office Circular 16/93, issued 10 March
   1993.

  S.     There are specific provisions in the Race Relations Act 1976 and the Sex ‘
  Discrimination Act 1975 for compensation, costs and expenses awarded against the
  chief officer of police and any sum required for-settlement, if approved by the
  oolice authority, to be paid from the police fund.
,r )       There is no express statutory authority for providing financial assistance to
   an officer wishing to initiate court proceedings. The considerations set out in
  paragraphs 5 to 7 above apply to such cases.




  LYNDA LO CK Y ER - v 7 ‘  :             - "'
  P O L IC E RESOURCES UNIT
                          I 0 Z 7 /1 /2




The C l e r k to the Police Authority

The C h i e f Officer of Police
                                                                     4 December 1SS7




Tear Sir


KOHZ O F F I C E CIRCULAR NO 7 7/S7

F I N A N C I A X ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IK LEGAL PROCEEDINGS


There is statutory authority in section 43 of the Police Act 1964 fcr
payr.er.ts ~o be rads fron the police fund to neet expenditure incurred
by p o l i c e officers in defending’ proceedings in tort.       Also, acting in
p u r s u a n c e of its    general   -statutory duty to   maintain an adequate and
efficient           police "force for its area,the police          authority has
d i s c r e t i o n to r.eet expenditure incurred bv officers in all kir.cs of
* egal procee di ng s where the officers have acted in good faith in
 I '■suar.ce of their duties, or the interests of the force as a vhcle
-< f    involved.        The purpose of this 'circular is to give guidance to
p o l i c e authorities to help then in considering requests on behalf cf
o f f i c e r s for financial assistance.      This guidance has been discussed
ana a g r e e d wit h       the local authority     and with the    police staff
associations.
2.         The      central principle which should guide consideration "of
i n d i v i d u a l cases is that, where a police authority considers that an
o f f i c e r has acted in-.good.rfaith:- in: pursuance /of ,.his~..'duties or-that
-he i n te re st s of a ’ force as a whole a r e .involved, the o f f i c e r . s h o u l d
hav e -the support of-the police authority to e n s u r e ' t h a t •he_...has'>the
services; .of}av 1 awyer.-and .that.-he^/should -‘not'-be Tout/Vo'f.^pocJcetr:-t-y-The'
f o l l o w i n g . paragraphs' provided general'-'--1guidance.'‘-to"-'the ‘"diffe'rent
c lasses o f proceedings.         Payments-cade*to officers in accordance with
this g u i d a n c e will be eligible for police grant.



                                                                                         1
   CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS

   P ro s e c u tio n bv th e Crown P ro s e c u tio n S e rv ic e

    3.       An o f f i c e r who i s th e s u b je c t o f a p u b lic p ro s e c u tio n f o r an
    a lle g e d o ffe n c e com m itted w h ile c a r r y in g o u t h is d u tie s as a p o lic e
    o f f i c e r i s in th e same p o s it io n as any o th e r d efen d an t and must be
    expected t o b e a r t h e c o sts o f h is d e fe n c e .          I f he i s a c q u itte d , he
    s h o u ld ,     lik e    an y   o t h e r d e fe n d a n t,  lo o k t o     th e   c o u rt f o r
    reim bursem ent o f h is expenses.               I f t h e c o s ts a re n o t p a id , o r n ot
    p a id in f u l l fro m c e n t r a l fu n d s , t h e p o lic e a u t h o r it y a re in a
   p o s it io n t o d e c id e , on th e f u l l f a c t s , w h eth er o r n o t t o make a
   payment t o th e o f f i c e r o r t o th e P o lic e F e d e ra tio n i f th e y have
   p ro v id e d th e fu n d in g .      There may be cases where i t i s p ro p er to
  ‘p ro v id e l e g a l a d v ic e a n d /o r le g a l r e p r e s e n ta tio n even where th e
   o f f i c e r i s found g u i l t y .     T h is may a r i s e f o r example in t e s t cases
   where th e o f f i c e r has been c a r r y in g o u t a p r a c t ic e h it h e r t o
   approved o f b u t i s found g u i l t y as a r e s u l t o f t h a t p r a c t ic e being
   found u n la w fu l b y th e c o u rt in th e l i g h t o f th e circum stances o f
   t h a t p a r tic u la r case.

\: '
 "“Private Prosecutions

  4.     A p o lic e o f f i c e r should be a b le t o c a r r y o ut h is d u tie s in th e
  c o n fid e n c e t h a t ,      if    he a c ts in good f a i t h and e x e rc is e s h is
  judgem ent re a s o n a b ly , h is p o lic e a u t h o r it y w i l l sup po rt him .          If,
  i n a case where a member o f th e p u b lic b rin g s a p ro s e c u tio n a g a in s t
  an o f f i c e r , th e a u t h o r it y i s s a t i s f i e d t h a t th e o f f i c e r has acted
  in t h i s wav, t h e a u t h o r it y sho uld p ro v id e o r fund le g a l advice
  a n d /o r r e p r e s e n ta t io n .

   5.        Where a c o u r t d ec id e s t h a t a p ro s e c u tio n b ro u g h t a g a in s t an
   o f f i c e r was n o t b ro u g h t in good f a i t h , i t may o rd e r th e p ro secu to r
  t o pay th e w hole o r any p a r t o f th e c o s ts in c u rre d by th e defence;
   a g a in , i f th e o f f i c e r i s a c q u itt e d on in d ic tm e n t, h is c o sts may be
  met from c e n t r a l fu n d s .        I n e i t h e r o f th e s e cases, th e q u es tio n o f
  t h e p o lic e a u t h o r it y p r o v id in g f i n a n c i a l sup po rt t o th e o f f i c e r may
   n o t a r is e .      How ever, where th e c o s ts o f an a c q u itte d o f f i c e r are
, ^ io t awarded by th e c o u rt o r awarded o n ly in p a r t , th e p o lic e
Y A u th o r ity sho uld c o n s id e r w h e th e r t o reim bu rse any costs not
 C o v e r e d , t a k in g i n t o accou nt t h e re a s o n s , i f an y, g iv e n by th e
   c o u r t f o r f a i l i n g t o award a l l c o s ts c la im e d .


  C IV IL PROCEEDINGS

  C i v i l A c tio n s   A g a in s t   t he   C h ie f   O ffic e r - f o r   W ron gful   Acts    of
  ■C onstables
  6.      U nder s e c tio n 4 8 (1 ) o f t h e P o lic e A c t 1964, t h e c h ie f o f f i c e r
  o f a f o r c e i s l i a b l e i n r e s p e c t o f t o r t s com m itted b y constables
  tin d e r h is d i r e c t i o n and c o n t r o l (w hich in c lu d e s s p e c ia l constables
  and o f f i c e r s o f o th e r fo r c e s s e r v in g i n th e p o lic e a re a tinder
  m u tu a l    a id    a rr a n g e m e n ts )   in   th e  p e rfo rm a n c e    o r purpo rted
  p erfo rm an ce o f t h e i r fu n c tio n s .     U nder s e c tio n 4 8 (2 ) any damages or

                                                                                                       2
     c o sts awarded a g a in s t th e c h ie f o f f i c e r i n such proceedings, any
     c o s ts he in c u rs h im s e lf , and any sun p a id i n connection w ith th e
     s e ttle m e n t o f .a c la im , p ro v id e d th e s e ttle m e n t i s approved by th e
     p o lic e a u t h o r it y , must be p a id o u t o f th e p o lic e fund.              I n such
     cases, t h e r e f o r e , th e p o lic e a u t h o r it y 1^ d is c r e t io n extends o n ly to
     w h e th e r o r n o t t o approve a proposed s e ttle m e n t o f th e c la im .


     C i v i l A c tio n s A g a in s t In d iv id u a l P o lic e O f f ic e r s

      7.      A l t e r n a t i v e l y , th e p l a i n t i f f may be awarded damages a g a in s t an
      in d i v i d u a l p o lic e o f f i c e r , though he cann ot re c o v e r th e damages
      tw ic e o v e r a g a in s t th e c h ie f o f f i c e r as w e l l .           S e c tio n 4 8 (4 ) o f th e
      P o lic e A c t 1964 s p e c i f i c a l l y empowers a p o lic e a u t h o r it y " to such
      e x te n t as th e y t h i n k f i t ” t o pay o u t o f th e p o lic e fund any damages
      o r c o s ts awarded a g a in s t an o f f i c e r , any c o s ts he in c u rs h im s e lf,
     and any sums p a id i n c o n n e c tio n w ith t h e s e ttle m e n t o f a c la im .
     T h is       p r o v is io n        a p p lie s  to      a c tio n s a g a in s t    o ffic e r s    o f th e
     a u t h o r i t y 's own fo r c e , o f f i c e r s o f a n o th e r f o r c e s e rv in g th e p o lic e
   r a re a u n d er m u tual a id a rran g em en ts, and s p e c ia l co n s tab le s f o r th e
  :'P > o lic e a r e a .         I n c o n s id e rin g w h eth er t o . g iv e f i n a n c i a l a s s is ta n c e
   "“t h e a u t h o r it y w i l l w is h t o c o n s id e r in p a r t i c u l a r w hether th e
     o f f i c e r concerned a c te d in good f a i t h and e x e rc is e d h is judgem ent
     re a s o n a b ly .       Where th e c o u rt fin d s f o r th e o f f i c e r , he may seek h is
     c o s ts         fro m th e p l a i n t i f f ;         should th e c o s ts n o t be awarded               or
     awarded o n ly in p a r t , th e p o lic e a u t h o r it y s h o u ld c o n s id e r w hether
     t o re im b u rs e any c o s ts n o t c o v ere d ,                    t a k in g ’ in t o account th e
     re a s o n s , i f any, g iv e n by th e c o u rt f o r f a i l i n g t o award a l l c o s ts
     c la im e d .
    8.       J o i n t a c tio n s naming b o th th e c h ie f o f f i c e r and an in d iv id u a l
    p o lic e o f f i c e r may be b ro u g h t in some c a s e s .        I n such cases i t is
    im p o rta n t t h a t any d is c u s s io n o f th e m e r its and quantum o f th e
    proposed s e ttle m e n t sh o u ld in v o lv e a l l th e p a r t ie s named in th e
    c la im          to g e th e r w ith a d v is e rs even i f th e y a re re p re s e n te d   by
    d i f f e r e n t a d v is e r s .


/   C i v i l A c tio n s Under t h e D ata P r o te c tio n A c t 1984
I r
  ^9.         U nder s e c tio n s 22 and 23 o f th e D ata P r o te c tio n A c t 1984 an
    in d i v i d u a l who s u f f e r s damage as a r e s u l t o f t h e in a c c u ra c y , lo s s
    o r u n a u th o ris e d        d is c lo s u r e     o f p e rs o n a l d a ta       is   e n title d    to
    com pensation from t h e d a ta u s e r .                   I n t h e absence o f any case law on
    th e s e p r o v is io n s ,        it    is     u n c le a r w h e th e r t h e a c ts covered by
    s e c tio n s 22 and 23 amount t o t o r t s , t o w hich th e guidance in
    p a ra g ra p h s 6 and 7 above a p p lie s .                 I f n o t , s e c tio n 48 o f t h e P o lic e
    A c t 1964 does n o t a p p l / .                  However, t h e p o s it io n i s b ro a d ly th e
    same.             U nder s e c tio n 3 8 (3 ) (a ) o f th e 1984 A c t c o n s ta b le s                a re
    t r e a t e d as s e rv a n ts o f t h e c h ie f o f f i c e r f o r t h e purposes o f th e
    A c t.        A c h i e f c o n s ta b le i s t h e r e f o r e l i a b l e f o r th e a c ts o f h is
    o f f i c e r s f a l l i n g v i t h i n s e c tio n s 22 and 23 i n t h e same way as he is
    l i a b l e f o r t h e i r t o r t s u n d e r s e c tio n 4 8 ( 1 ) .         The p o s itio n o f non­
    p o l i c e o f f i c e r s i s le s s c l e a r b u t i t i s p o s s ib le t h a t i n some cases
    t h e c h i e f c o n s ta b le n ig h t be re g a rd e d as h a v in g l i a b i l i t y f o r t h e i r
    a c ts .      I t fo llo w s t h a t i t w ould be p ro p e r f o r t h e p o lic e a u t h o r it y
                                                                                                                  3



                                                                                                            t* u U U
 t o meet a l l c o s ts , in c lu d in g any award o f com pensation, a r is in g
 from t h i s l i a b i l i t y .    I t sho uld be noted t h a t th e l i a b i l i t y o f th e
 "d a ta u s e r" u n d er th e A c t i s n o t v ic a r io u s b u t h is p ers o n al
 lia b ility .       T h e re fo r e h is own c a re in h a v in g i n s t i t u t e d a system o f
 o b ta in in g , c h e c k in g and ra c o rd in g d a ta w hich would re as o n ab ly guard
 a g a in s t e r r o r and lo s s u nd er s e c tio n 2 3 (3 ) o f th e A c t should meet
 h is r e s p o n s i b i l i t y under s e c tio n 2 2 (3 ) and he should n o t be h e ld
 l i a b l e i f one o f h is o f f i c e r s d is re g a rd s t h e system e s ta b lis h e d .

 10.       Where com pensation i s sought from an in d iv id u a l o f f i c e r , th e
 p o lic e a u t h o r it y w i l l w is h , i n c o n s id e rin g w h eth er t o meet th e
 c o s ts w hich w ould o th e rw is e f a l l on th e o f f i c e r , t o ta k e account o f
 t h e same m a tte rs as i n e x e r c is in g t h e i r power u nd er s e c tio n 4 8 (4 )
 o f t h e P o lic e A c t 1964 (s e e p ara g rap h 7 ) .              P o lic e a u t h o r it ie s
 s ho uld a p p ly t h e same b road p r in c ip le s and in p a r t i c u l a r , meet th e
 c o s ts o f any com pensation awarded a g a in s t a c h ie f c o n s ta b le where a
 n o n -p o lic e o f f i c e r i s a t f a u l t and th e c h ie f c o n s ta b le i s found t o
 have l i a b i l i t y f o r th e a c tio n s p erfo rm e d .


„ ->lice Officers Bringing Civil Actions for Defamation

 11.       T h ere may be occasions when f i n a n c i a l a s s is ta n c e is sought
 from a p o lic e a u t h o r it y t o e n a b le an o f f i c e r t o b r in g o r c o n s id e r
 b r in g in g    a c iv il    a c tio n  fo r    d e fa m a tio n .     An a u t h o r it y has
 d is c r e t io n t o g iv e such a s s is ta n c e b u t i t w i l l be e l i g i b l e f o r
 p o lic e g ra n t o n ly i f th e f o llo w in g c r i t e r i a a re a l l m e t:-

         (a )    th e d e fa m a tio n i s s e r io u s ;

        (b )     i t r e l a t e s t o t h e a c tio n s o f an o f f i c e r a c tin g o r
        s a id to be a c tin g i n t h e d is c h a rg e o f h is d u ty ;

        (c )    i t has a t t r a c t e d p u b lic a t t e n t io n ;

         (d )       t o b r in g th e a c t io n      is    co n s id e red t o be in th e
        i n t e r e s t s o f th e fo r c e o r       of    th e p o lic e s e r v ic e as a
        w h o le ; and
v y     (e )    th e a c t io n s ta n d s a re a s o n a b le    chance o f success.

C r it e r io n     (d) i s c e n t r a l . I f o n ly th e r e p u t a tio n o f th e in d iv id u a l
o f f i c e r i s i n q u e s tio n , he i s i n th e same p o s itio n as any o th e r
c i t i z e n and m ust be e x p e c te d t o seek h is own rem edy.                          But an
a l l e g a t i o n a g a in s t a p a r t i c u l a r o f f i c e r may w e ll r e f l e c t on th e
r e p u t a t io n o f t h e w hole f o r c e o r be an example o f w id e r a lle g a t io n s
a g a in s t th e f o r c e o r a s i g n i f i c a n t s e c tio n o f i t .       I n such cases
th e p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y , p r o v id e d th e o th e r c r i t e r i a a r e s a t i s f i e d ,
may re a s o n a b ly b e e x p e c te d t o h e lp t o d efend th e r e p u ta tio n o f th e
fo rc e .
        INQUESTS, PUBLIC ENQUIRIES AND TRIBUNA3-S •

        L e g a l R e p re s e n ta tio n f o r C h ie f O f f ic e r s

     - 12,        Any in t e r e s t e d  a r t y nay be l e g a l l y re p re s e n te d a t an in q u e s t
       b u t a t h is own expense s in c e expenses a re p ay ab le o n ly t o w itn e ss es
       and j u r o r s .       An in t e r e s t e d p a r ty w i l l n o rm a lly be e n t i t l e d t o be
       l e g a l l y re p re s e n te d a t a p u b lic e n q u iry o r o th e r p u b lic t r i b u n a l .
       Where th e i n t e r e s t o f th e fo r c e i s a f f e c t e d , i t w i l l be a p p ro p r ia te
       f o r t h e p o lic e a u t h o r it y t o p ro v id e a t i t s expense f o r th e c h ie f
       o f f i c e r t o be l e g a l l y re p re s e n te d on b e h a lf o f th e fo r c e .


        Lecral Representation for Individual Officers

        13.               S e p a ra te r e p r e s e n ta t io n f o r in d iv id u a l o f f ic e r s whose i n t e r e s t
        i s in v o lv e d n ay be n e c e s s a ry . F o r e x a n p le , th e r e w i l l be occasions
        when (a ) th e c h i e f o f f i c e r ' s l e g a l r e p r e s e n ta t iv e cannot re a s o n a b ly
      : be e x p e c te d t o r e p r e s e n t th e s e p a ra te i n t e r e s t s o f such o f f i c e r s
        and (b ) th e p o l i c e a u t h o r it y c o n s id e rs t h a t such in t e r e s t s should
r    , be re p re s e n te d .         I n such cases th e a u t h o r it y should g iv e f i n a n c i a l
         a s s is ta n c e t o       th e    o ffic e r s .        In    c o n s id e rin g   (b)      above,  th e
        a u t h o r it y w i l l w is h i n p a r t i c u l a r t o assess w hether th e o f f ic e r s
        a r e a t r i s k o f b e in g h e ld t o blame f o r a c tio n s in c o n n e c tio n w ith
        t h e d ea th t o w h ic h t h e in q u e s t r e la t e s and w hether any such fin d in g
        n ig h t g iv e r i s e t o l e g a l p ro ceed in g s f o r th e costs o f which th e
        p o l i c e a u t h o r it y w ould be l i a b l e u nder s e c tio n 4 8 (1 ) o f th e P o lic e
        A c t 19 64 o r f o r w hich f i n a n c i a l a s s is ta n c e n ig h t be a p p ro p r ia te
        w i t h i n th e te rm s o f t h i s c i r c u l a r .


       APPLICATIONS FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE

        14.         An o f f i c e r w is h in g t o seek f i n a n c i a l a s s is ta n c e from h is
        p o l i c e a u t h o r it y s h o u ld have th e o p p o r tu n ity in advance o f as w e ll
        as on th e c o n c lu s io n o f th e p ro cee d in g s t o subm it t o th e c h ie f
        o f f i c e r an a p p l i c a t i o n f o r f i n a n c i a l a s s is ta n c e . The c h ie f o f f i c e r
        s h o u ld p u t t h i s , t o g e th e r w ith h is own recommendation t o th e p o lic e
        a u t h o r it y f o r d e c i s i o n . ’- The o f f i c e r should n o rm a lly be g iv e n th e
, ( . o p p o r tu n ity by t h e p o lic e a u t h o r it y t o nake re p re s e n ta tio n s t o them
U () ( ^ i f he w ishes t o do s o .

       15.          I f i t d e c id e s t o g iv e f i n a n c i a l a s s is ta n c e , t h e a u t h o r it y
       s h o u ld in fo rm t h e o f f i c e r concerned t h a t , i f th e in fo r m a tio n on
       w h ich th e y based t h e i r d e c is io n t o g r a n t th e a s s is ta n c e i s shown in
       subsequent l e g a l p ro c e e d in g s t o be in a c c u ra te o r in c o m p le te , th e
       a u t h o r i t y w i l l n o r m a lly e x p e c t t o re c o v e r th e noney u n le s s i t is
       s a t i s f i e d t h a t no c i l p a b l e n is r e p r e s e n ta t io n was in v o lv e d and t h a t
       t o re c o v e r t h e noney w ould in v o lv e t h e a p p lic a n t i n s u b s ta n tia l
       h a r d s h ip .     On t h e o t h e r hand, i f an a u t h o r it y re fu s e s f i n a n c i a l
       a s s is ta n c e and th e n d is c o v e rs i n t h e l i g h t o f subsequent even ts
       t h a t .such a s s is ta n c e would have been w a rra n te d , th e n f i n a n c i a l
       a s s is ta n c e s h o u ld be g ra n te d i n o r d e r t o n e e t th e re a s o n a b le costs
       in c u r r e d by t h e o f f i c e r i n s e e k in g l e g a l a d v ic e o r a s s is ta n c e .


                                                                                                                    5
A s s is ta n c e from P o lic e F e d e ra tio n Funds

16.       Under R e g u la tio n 19 o f th e P o lic e F e d e ra tio n R e g u la tio n s 1969,
as amended, F e d e ra tio n funds nay be used t o d e fra y le g a l charges
in c u r r e d by a member i n co n n ec tio n w it h c r im in a l proceedings
b ro u g h t     a g a in s t him f o r an o ffe n c e u n d er th e road t r a f f i c
enactm ents (o th e r th a n o ffe n c e s in v o lv in g d r iv in g when im p aired by
d r in k o r drugs o r ta k in g a V e h ic le w ith o u t a u t h o r it y ) , o r f o r
o ffe n c e s o f c a u s in g th e d eath o r i n j u r y o f any p erson , o r f o r any
a s s a u lt , o r i n c o n n e c tio n w ith h is a c tio n f o r l i b e l o r s la n d e r. An
o f f i c e r s e e k in g f i n a n c i a l a s s is ta n c e i n circu m stances covered by
R e g u la tio n 19 s h o u ld seek such a s s is ta n c e from th e p o lic e a u t h o r it y
i n th e f i r s t in s ta n c e .        I f th e p o lic e a u t h o r it y does n o t c o n sid e r
th e re q u e s t t o f a l l w it h in th e term s o f t h i s c i r c u l a r , th e
F e d e r a tio n may th e n c o n s id e r th e a p p lic a t io n w it h in th e term s o f
R e g u la tio n 1 9 .       I f th e o f f i c e r re c e iv e s l e g a l a s s is ta n c e from th e
F e d e r a tio n th e term s o f Home O f f ic e C ir c u l a r No 26/1967 w i l l
c o n tin u e t o a p p ly .

17.    G e n e ra l e n q u ir ie s about th e c o n te n t o f t h i s c ir c u l a r may be
add ressed t o Mr Waghorn, Home O f f ic e , F I D iv is io n on (01) 213 4208.

[                                                                    Yours faithfully




                                                                       /v^v . T~-




                                                                      M J ADDISON
            28
            L o rd Tem plcman      H« e ll v. Hammersmith L.B.C. (II.L.fK.))                „
                                                                                                                                                                                         29
                                                                                                            2 A.C.                 Maxell v. Hammersmith L.B.C. (H.L.(E.))   Lord Temple man

            - e . p ^ £ g a“ d ^ ' , r ^         ! \ ' nK rHln' 0 ! ~ l » f“      P™ 1«« of             A       The banks contend that swap transactions which are intended to
           d iffe re n c e b c tw e e n re^rohlirv!  h     donc *>■ B“ ' >' "hire i,                    A   ••replace” or “re-proiile” existing interest obligations are within the
           ?»n ,s m u * be               » S L | a » mf S l r ? l“ ' i' ,n lhc notional                     words of section 111 “calculated to facilitate” or are "conducive to” or
                                                                                                            arc “incidental to” the discharge by the local authority o f its adm itted
           in terest obligations. Basically t h e r e f o r T '^ r e n m r ?  S° mC exis,lnB
           extension o f “ replacing.”                           re-profiling  is only im                   function of borrowing or an alleged function of debt management.
                                                                                                                Counsel for the auditor subm itted that a local authority’s pow er to
                                                                                                            borrow is not it “function” within the meaning of section 111 and that
           floors, gilt options°and'eash^opUons and T * * ' |WaP op,ions- C:,PS ;" ul
                                                                                                            the local authority can do nothing which only facilitates o r is conducive
           w hich are explained                           . h ^ ' f ra,C l'*r c m ^ »« of
          C o u rt [1990J 2 Q .B . 697 7 3 9 - 7 4 1 AlMh       udgment of 'h e Divisional                  to or incidental to the power o f borrowing.
                                                                                                                In Attorney’-General i\ Great Eastern Railway Co. (1880) 5 App.Cas.
          banks, with some hesiution t fa; £ , i T             ,ransac,ions arc «««> by the
                                                                                                            473, Lord Blackburn said, at p. 481:
          lawful if undertaken by a local author,. o p ,'? ns arc concerned, to be
          “replacem ent” o r “re-nrofilino” «.           ^ provided the transactions are                         “where there is an Act o f Parliament creating a corporation for a
          be em ployed i n V K t a o H m e ' S                             Pr° ,i,lc      --                     particular purpose, and giving it powers for that particular purpose,
          are limited to profits and losses n! J                pair!lculnr borrowings and              C        what it docs not expressly o r impliedly authorise is to be taken to
          principal sums borrowed The most                       !•      d° not excecd ,llc                      be prohibited; . .
          contracts and oth er types o f swan t r a S v ,            !nc,lon between swap
                                                                                                               In the same case Lord Selborne L.C. said, at p. 478, that the
          not usually require the n avm m i Tf          ac,.,ons ,s ,flat swap contracts do
                                                                                                            doctrine of ultra vires:
          o - h e r ^ O? ^ M ,.Pr r j X           T   ^ 'S       Sr   P• f " -                                       “ought to be reasonably, and not unreasonably, understood and
          paid. T he rate o f interest which win I Z prov,dc f° r a premium to be
                                                                                                                     applied, and that w hatever may fairly be regarded as incidental to,
          exercised is negotiated in the light o f he size'^nd0")          i " 0p,k’n ‘S 0                           or consequential upon, those things which the legislature has
         o f th e prem ium . Swap transactions whirh in i             ° ,he p;l.v n,c'"
                                                                                                                     authorised, ought not (unless expressly prohibited) to be held, by
         exercisable at future dates mav incn.nJ .iI      i   prenuums !,,ul options
                                                                                                                     judicial construction, to be ultra vires.”
         distort the local authority’s pattern o f ho elen?cnt o f speculation i,nd
         should, so far as                                         A loc;" authority                         In the same vein Lord Blackburn said, at p. 481:
         over present and future taxpayers a m l T ^ r      Cap,*al borrowing evenly
                                                                                                                     “those things which are incident to, and may reasonably and
         received by a local authority in IQwi      f pay*rs- A premium which is        r
                                                                                                                     properly be donc under the main purpose, though they may not be
         in 1990 J     in o ™ ,! " ™ ! : S                      f              ““ h° row i"«                         literally within it, would not be prohibited.”
         A prem ium which is paid by a loe-il                           °f” " m ls *-‘xcrcLscd,
         im m ediate cos, o f ,h e b o ™ 2 „ ! t o f i i T S V           ‘T    b c " " * ‘ ,hc              Section 111 embodies these prjncinles*-
                                                                                                                t agree with die Court o f Appeal [1990] 2 Q .B . 697, 785c that in
                      r en ,he op' ,on b“ « " “ « " * ■ ! *                          coa " "                section 111 the word “functions” embraces all the duties and powers of
         « » ,e ? A » t ; r ^ r c : i X T b h,o„,i'i“ ■“ * • » ■ » » * » >o                                 a local authority; the sum total of the activities Parliament has entrusted
         have a n implied pow er to enter i n t ^ “£ n |C° n     !,hat local " “ thoritics         *’       to it. Those activities arc its functions. Accordingly a local authority
         swap contracts. The c o u n c ?           replacement ’ and “re-prof,li„g"                         can do anything which is calculated to facilitate o r is conducive or
         “replacem ent” o r “re-profiling” sw™           Cn,Cr^d ,n,° sonic l;iwlul                         incidental to the local authority’s Junction o f borrowing,
         contend that the council was em itted to         ? S' ■ addi,ion ,hc banks                             .'in rtk question is w hether a swap transaction is “calculated to
                                                                                                            facilitate, or is conducive o r incidental to ,” the discharge o f the local
                                                                                                            authority’s function o f borrowing.
                                                                                                                Swap transactions could be said to “facilitate” borrowing if the
                                                                                                            prospect of being able to reduce the burden o f interest by swaps
                                                                                                            encouraged the local authority to enter into a borrowing which it would
                                                                                                            otherwise decide against. But this approach is impermissible. A local
             section but subject^to t ^ p r o v t s T o ” eX/ r<?isable apart fro'" this                    authority when considering expenditure must carefully consider the
             authority shall h ive p ! ,le r to                    S A c,    ‘ • » '«eal                    amount required to be borrow ed and the resources available for payment
■ cr„.       th e expenditure, borrowing or lendJne o f                 ° r not involvil)K                  of interest and capital. A local authority which borrowed in reliance on
 C:          o r disposal o f any property o r r i ohl *   f. l!,Mney or th e acquisition         11         future successful swap operations would be failing in its duty to act
 C-          o r is TOnducive o r incidentar to the*,("r * CS" CUla,Cd to faci,ita“-'’                       prudently in the inlerests o f the ratepayers.
 cr          functions.”                       ’      discharge o f any of their                                 Similarly, swap operations cannot be said to be “conducive to”
                                                                                                             borrowing because -i!l authorities should not be encouraged to borrow
         30                                                               pA
                                                                                              2 A t.               Ilazell v. Hammersmith L.B.C. (H .L .(E .»   U r d Tem pttm an
         L o rd Templeman     Haztll v. lUmm ersmilh L.B.C. (II.L.(E.))         ||*W2|

         b y the prospect o f swap transactions. It was submitted that swap              /\   Lord Macnaghtcn said, at p. 417:
         transactions are “incidental to ” borrowing. T he first difficulty is that a             “T he question is this: Is the business of omnibus proprietors as the
         sw ap transaction is a separate collateral contract which may be                         defendants were carrying it on when the action was brou^h
         u n d erta k en long after a borrowing has been effected. The local                      reasonably incidental to their business as authorised by their special
         auth o rity hopes that by a successful forecast o f future interest trends it            Acf> T he principle to be applied is perfectly clear. The difficulty is
         w ill provide itself with an income which can be employed in paying the                  all in the application. H undreds of cases may be suggested where
         interest on a borrowing. Assuming that this objection is not fatal, it is                the thing done comes very near the line and may fairly be open to a
         th e n necessary to consider what kinds o f operations have been held to                 difference of opinion. . . . H ere, I think, the responden s ha
         h a v e been incidental to the discharge of the functions of a statutory                  transgressed the line. It may be in doing what they wish to do they
         corporation.                                                                              cannot help it. But that, in my opinion, is nojustification f o r t h e r
              In Small v. Smith (1884) 10 A pp.Cas. 119, a building society which                  action If they wish to extend their undertaking beyond the imits
         h a d pow er to enter into a second mortgage was held not to have an                      authorised by their charter, the proper course is              appty to
                                                                                                    Parliament for further powers. In my opinion a m atter of this sort
         incidental power to guarantee payment o f a prior mortgage. The Earl of
                                                                                                    is much better left to Parliament. T here everybody who has a right
         S elborne L .C . said, at p. 133:                                               C
                                                                                                    to be heard will be listened to , and there the interests of the public
              “ But the argument really is that because the rules permit (his kind                  will be protected.”
              o f security to be taken, that is to say, give very large and general
              powers as to securities, which do not exclude the taking o f a                   T he same considerations apply in the present case.
              security on which there is a prior mortgage, therefore there is a                      Several other authorities were cited to illustrate incidental powers
              potential necessity for entering into a transaction of this kind (o              but each case turned on its own facts.
              protect that security, and therefore there is a reasonable implication     D           The authorities deal with widely different statutory functions but
              that there is power to do it. But 1 wholly deny that there is any                establish the general proposition that when a power .s                             be
              potential necessity at all. . . . there is no more potential necessity           incidental, the provisions o f the statute which confer and >'mit functions
              for doing this in order to meet a temporary inconvenience than                   must be considered and construed. The question is not whether swap
              there is for doing anything else in the world which in the opinion of             transactions are incidental to borrowing but w hether swap transactions
              the directors might tend to obviate that inconvenience.”                          are incidental to a local authority's borrowing function having regard to
                                                                                         C      the provisions and limitations of the Act of 1972 r e g u l a t i n g that function^
             T h e same reasoning could be applied to the argument that a local                      T he authorities also show that a power is not incidental merely
         authority needs pow er to swap because it has pow er to borrow.                        because it is convenient o r desirable or profitable. A swap transaction
             In Baroness Wenlock v. River Dee Co. (1885) 10 A pp.Cas. 354, a                    undertaken by a local authority involves speculation in fu ure interest
         statutory river company possessed express pow er to borrow £50,000                      trends with the object o f making a profit m order to increase the
         secured by bond or mortgage. Any implied power to borrow was                            available resources of the local authorities. ThcJ . \ are. . ^ an^ .
         negatived by the express power to borrow not more than £50,000. Lord                    currency and commercial swap transactions which eliminate o r r ^ uce
         W atson said, at p. 362:                                                         F      speculation. Individual trading corporations and others may speculate
                                                                                                 as much as they please o r consider prudent. But a local authority is no
              “T he qualification attached by the legislature to the borrowing
                                                                                                  a trading o r currency o r commercial operator with no limit on the
              powers sanctioned by the Act of 1851, was, in my opinion, fatal to
                                                                                                  method or extent of its borrowing o r with powers to speculate. T h
              the continued existence of any implied power which the company
                                                                                                  local authority is a public authority dealing with public moneys,
              had under their previous statutes.”
                                                                                                  oxercisinu powers limited by Schedule 13.
         A s will be seen, Part I of Schedule 13 to the Act of 1972 imposes              Ci           Section 172 of the A ct of 1972 directs that Part 1 of Schedule 3
         restrictions on the borrowing powers of local authorities.                               • shall have effect with respect to the powers of local authorities to
             In Attorney-General v. Mersey Railway Co. |I907] A .C . 415. a                        borrow and lend money and with respect to their funds . . . Part
         railway company was held not entitled to run a num ber of omnibuses                       Schedule 13, so far as material, provides as follows:
         which it claimed were incidental to the railway enterprise itself. Lord                         •1 W ithout prejudice to section 111 above—(a) a principal council
         L oreburn L.C. said, at p. 415:                                                                may borrow money for the purpose o f tending m oney to another
                                                                                                        authority . . . ( b ) a local authority . . . may borrow money for any
              “The rule of law has been laid down in this Mouse to the effect that it ' '
                                                                                                        other purpose or class of purpose approved for the purposes o f this
cr..-         must be shown that the business can fairly be regarded as incidental lo                    i L w      h by the Sccrctary of State and in accordance w.th any
c             o r consequential upon the use of the statutory powers: and it is a
                                                                                                         conditions subject to which the approval is given.
C .-          question in each case whether it is so or whether it is not so."
c ,:.'

00
                                                                                                                f ')
                                                                                                                                                                           33
 L ord T em pltm an      Hazell y. Hammersmith L.B.C. tll.M fc .))         1 |<W2 |
                                                                                           2 A.C.             lla 7.eN v. Ilamm ersmilh L.B.C. (I!.L.(E.))     Lord Templeman
        T h e Secretary o f State from time to time issues block borrowing            A         payment of interest at the due rate on the outstanding principal
 a n n rn v a JLfi " f k S'Ve 3 specific a P P r o v a l , The block borrowing                  together with the repayment of the principal not later than the end
 approval defines the purposes for which money may be borrowed, the                             of the fixed period.”
 p erio d during which borrowings must be repaid and limits the aggregate
 a m o u n t which an authority can borrow. For example, money may be                          If a loeal authority borrowed at a fixed rate and entered into a swap
 bo rro w ed for a maximum period of 60 years for land purchase ami                        contract to “replace” the fixed rate by a variable rate, paragraph 7 does
                                                                                           not enable any variation to be m ade in the required annual debit and
 M r f f a r 9n     r°r    y e rre f° r ° thcr buildi"g and landscaping works         f)   does not take into account profits made or losses suffered as a result of
 and fo r 20 years for some furniture and other equipment. The maximum
 p eriod s relate roughly to the expected life o f th i asset for which the                the swap.
 m o n ey is to be borrowed.                                                                    “8. A loeal authority who borrow money . . . may during the fixed
                                                                                                period borrow further sums, without the approval o f the Secretary
          2(1) W here a local authority are authorised by or under this Act
                                                                                                of State under that sub-paragraph, for the purpose of repaying the
        o r any other enactm ent to borrow money, they may raise the
                                                                                                money so borrow ed.”
        m oney— by m ortgage, by the issue of stock, by the issue of
        d eb e n tu res or annuity certificates, by the issue of bonds, by the        C        Paragraph 8 thus confers an express power on the local authority
        issue o f bills and “( / ) by an agreem ent entered into with the Public           truly to replace a loan. This power could be exercised, for example, if a
        w o rk s Loan Commissioners under section 2 of the Public Works                    fixed loan of 15 per cent, could be replaced by a fixed loan o f 10 per
        L oans A ct 1965, or (g) by any other means approved by the                        cent, if rates had fallen. Such a true replacement would not involve the
        S ecretary of State with the consent of the Treasury,"                             local authority making gains or suffering losses associated with swap
                                                                                           transactions.
 P W ? r R » i ngS fr0rV he Public Works Lw' n Commissioners (“the                    1^        “ 10(1) A local authority may, without the approval o f the Secretary
 P .W .L .B . ) account for some 80 per cent, or m ore of loeal authority
                                                                                                of State . . . borrow by way o f temporary loan or overdraft from a
borrow ings T he P.W .L .B . offer loans to local authorities at fixed Jr
                                                                                                bank or otherwise any sums which they may temporarily require—
variable rates both o f which are below the market rate because of the
                                                                                                (a) for the purpose of defraying expenses . . . pending the receipt
po w er o f the government to negotiate its own borrowings. If a local
                                                                                                of revenues.”
autho rity borrow s at a variable rate from the P.W .L.B. the locil
autho rity may elect thereafter on one occasion by the terms o f the loan                  I lere again what might have been thought to be an incidental power is
 o change from a variable rate to a fixed rate without penalty. II,                        made the subject of express enactment.
th erefore, a local authority is compelled to borrow at a time when                              “20. A person lending money to a local authority shall not be
interest rates are thought to be abnormally high, the authority can                              bound to inquire w hether the borrowing of the money is legal or
              T    ® P W L -B. at a variable rate and then convert into a                        regular or whether the m oney raised was properly applied and shall
fixed ra te when interest rates have fallen.                                                     not be prejudiced by any illegality or irregularity, or by the
co n sen t) ofrhf L ST°re,ary ° f S tate.u may by regulations made with the                      misapplication or non-application of any of that money.”
consent o f the T re asu ry ’ prescribe the form of any mortgage deed
                                                                                      ,.       T he banks concede that this paragraph cannot be construed so as to
m fv         • T 6 a StOCk,S and bonds includ'ng the terms on which they                   afford protection to persons who enter into swap transactions with local
may b e issued, and regulate the manner of transfer dealing with and
                                                                                           authorities.
redeem ing any mortgage deed, stocks or bonds. Thus the Secretary of
                                                                                               When a local authority considers whether to expend money and if so
    « J ? ! air S.COmp      eontro1 over local authority .borrowings.                      w hether to borrow and on what term s, the local authority must have
urifhin !->        .K1 ? U,horl,y may borrow by the issue o f bills, payable               regard to the provisions of Schedule 13, the method of borrowing and
within 12 m onths from the date of issue,” inter alia, such sums as may
                                                                                           terms of repayment, the prevailing interest rates and the possibility that
be required for the purpose of defraying expenses pending the receipt of
                                                                                      G    interest rates may rise or fall during the period of the loan. If the local
o f X Ue; „ S t , e. am ° Um so borrowcd is KmWd to a specified propoSio,,                 authority finds that after it has borrowed that there has been a violent
of the authority s estimated gross income derived from rates. It might
                                                                                           change in interest rates which affects a particular borrowing, the local
a n f h o i w " f ° “ght *?■* a Sll1li,ar P°wer was incidental to the local                authority is not without remedial action. It can convert a loan taken out
authority s function o f borrowing but any incidental power is negatived
by this express provision.                                                                 with the P.W .L.B . from variable rate of interest into a fixed rate of
                                                                                           interest. It can pay off an expensive loan and take out a new loan. It is
       “7(1) W here expenditure incurred by a loeal authority lor any                      said that the cost of paying off an old loan and taking out a new loan
       purpose is defrayed by borrowing, the local authority shall                         would be greater than the cost of entering into swap transactions. But
       r f . ‘he account from which that expenditure would otherwise fall                  this fact alone cannot render swap transactions legal.
       I n n ?,,? ?      TI-   ST equiva,cnt * 0 an instalment of principal                    Schedule 13 establishes a comprehensive code which defines and
       a n d interest combined such that if paid annually it would secure he               limits the powers of a local authority with regard to its borrowing. The
                                                                                                                                                             2 A .C .- 1992-2
    34
                                                                                                                                                                                                         35
    L o rd T ' m pkm ,m                H«*M v. Hammersmilh L.B.C. (II.U E .))                                    1 1992|   1 A.C.              Ilazell v. Ilamm ersm ilh L.B.C. (H.L.(E.))   Lord Tcmplematt

                                                                                                                           authority £10,(KK) if L IB O R falls by one per cent, is more akin to
   hjtcTswap transactions*                   “"y                      « “                                                  gambling than insurance.
   the to S o . a„ff£!h" dim“ "y- S" P tmnsiictions arc M ental to                                                             The Court o f Appeal were impressed by the argument that if swap
   th e function o f borrowing, it would appear that swap transactions can                                                 transactions were unlawful a local authority could not take advantage of
                                                                                                                           reductions in interest rates. But the sucess of swaps depends on a
   o f f i ^ Section loi?*!’5'  ^               a" d n0t by a con,mi,,C1-' «r
                                                                                                                           successful forecast o f future interest rates. T he power of a local
            r        10K6), before its am endm ent by section 45(5) of the
   Local G overnm ent and Housing Act 1989 provided that:                                                                  authority to choose between long-term and short-term borrowings and
                                                                                                                           to choose between variable and fixed interest rates, and the power of a
             **A ,oca’ authority’s functions with respect to levying, or issuinu a
                                                                                                                           local authority to borrow from the P.W .L.B. on favourable terms and to
           thTaeuPtho°ritya” rate ° r                           m° " ey sha" bc C h a r g e d only by                      changc from variable to fixed rates o f interest and the power of the local
                                                                                                                           authority to replace a borrowing with another borrowing, provide
                                                                                                                           opportunity for the local authority to consider whether the overall rate
  101«)edi?not°{w
  101(6) did not. T hePcourt
                       ^ ai fOUnd
                             managed toSeCU° n this
                                         reach         thf
                                               Ul app,ied   butby
                                                    conclusion  ,hat s‘-'c,i()"
                                                                  acceptinR                                                of interest paid by the local authority is reasonable and is protected
                                                                                                                           against volatility of interest rates. The greater the volatility o f interest
  fnnr-H     fCh      SW3P !ransactlons are not so much incidental to the                                                  rates, the greater the risk o f loss to a local authority as a result of swap
  function o f borrowing as incidental to the function o f debt management
                                                                                                                           transactions. Despite the urgings of counsel for the banks to the
                                          ^       reaS°nab,C Care to                             it K n S                  contrary, it seems to me there are substantial risks. T here is no
        / V ht ^       in,ereS,S ° f ,he ratepayers. Beftire this House                                                    evidence that local authorities which have abstained from the swap
 not incidental to h ’           ‘hC Submission      SW:'P transactions; ii                                                market have forfeited substantial profits. These are all matters for
 m anagem em                "8’         neVCr,helcss incide" ‘a ' to deb,                                                  Parliament to consider and the banks are not debarred from impressing
                                                                                                                           upon Parliament the advantages to local authorities of a power to enter
      ° ebt managem ent is not a function. Debt management is a phrase
                                                                                                                           into swap transactions.
 which has been coined in this case to describe the activities of a person
                                                                                                                                In the case of a building society Parliament has conferred express
 w ho enters the swap m arket for the purpose of making profits which can
                                                                                                                           power to enter into swap transactions but that power was only conferred
 be em ployed <n the payment of interest on borrowings. The expression
                                                                                                                           after the building societies had been given wide powers o f entering into
 d eb t management could be employed to describe the duty of a local
                                                                                                                           commercial transactions. T h e powers to enter into swap transactions
   S V P.W
 variable w .L.B
              ? .r loan
                    r from,
                         into,ime^          whc,her
                               a fixed interest              ,,ime
                                                loan; hwhether it should«
                                                                                                                           were at first limited and when extended, Parliament continued to insist
                                                                                                                           that the power should be subject to the approval of the members of the
 [s conTemoU ph"                     ° U.‘ ano.lhcr: Whether when a ncw borrowing                                          society who will suffer if the power is ineptly exercised.
  s c o n , e m p t i e d , the borrowing should be at a variable or fixed rale                                                 T he Building Societies Act 1986 conferred power on a building
 m a lia o '      ac.count aI1 the other borrowings o f ,he local authority Debt                                           society to provide, inter alia, banking, investment and insurance services.
the nart'«5*»h* P                 u        descr'bes prudent and lawful activities on                                      Section 23 authorised a building society to effect contracts of a
the p a rt o f the local authority. If swap transactions were lawful a local                                               description to be prescribed by the building society’s commission with
authority would be under a duty to consider entering m o w•                                                                the consent of the Treasury for the purpose of reducing the risk o f loss
transactions as part o f its duty o f debt management. But il a sw'm                                                       arising from changes in interest rates, currency rates, o r other forms of
transaction is not lawful then it cannot be lawful for a local authority to                                                prescribed risk which affects its business. Section 23(5) directed that
      T h T n " SW3P t.ransact,o n under the guise o f debt management,                                                     this power to hedge should only be exercisable if adopted by the society.
that it          MSluna! Cour.t I ,99°l 2 0 B - 6 9 7 ’ ™ came to The conclusion                                             The Building Societies (Prescribed Contracts) O rder 1986 (1986 S .l. No.
that it would be inconsistent with the structure o f the Act of 1972 as i                                                   2098) made by the commission pursuant to the Act of 1986 authorised a
w h o le ,    to     w h ic h   th e   p ro v isio n s o f se c tio n     1 1 1 (1 ) a r e   e x p re ssly   m u le         building society to enter into sterling interest rate swaps and capital and
a g r e e ? 1' ' °   rC 8 a rd SW 3p t r a n s a c t i o n s a s f i l i n g w ith in t h a t s u b s e c t i o n . 1       interest currency swaps but by article 3:
                                                                                                                                "(2) A society may only effect a prescribed contract where it has
insuFran c ihew hirhkL i,h r aS      that SWap ,ranSi*c'ions are akin «o                                                        borrowed o r intends to borrow a principal sum and the prescribed
insurance which enables provision to be made for possible risks Bv
                                                                                                                                contract relates to a principal sum equal to it or less than it. (3) No
insurance, an assured sacrifices a premium which when aggregated with
                                                                                                                                prescribed contract may be effected by a society save where another
p re m iu m s fro m         o t h e r a s s u r e d , w ill f o r m a p o o l f r o m w h ic h t h e i n s u r e r
                                                                                                                                party is a bank authorised . . . to hold funds of societies . . .”
insured G a i n s t A Unf° rtUnate vic,1| m <if an V> who suffers from the risk
insured against. A swap contract based on a notional principal sum of                                                          Thus in 1986 Parliament conferred on building societies, which by
if L I B O R H ^ s h     ,OCal aUth° rity promises to Pay the bank £10,000                                                 the Act of 1986 were given wide functions, a power to en ter into swap
if L IB O R rises by one per cent, and the bank promises to P~ . the local                                                 transactions which '" “ re limited to parallel contracts, could only be
230                                   KING S BENCH DIVISION.                            [1
      C. A.           should be a tta c h e d to th e g ra n t of th is licence. N ob
                      th is tim e of d ay , could say t h a t th e well-being a n d th e p h
       1947
                     a n d m oral h e a lth of children is n o t a m a tte r w hich a
 A s s o c ia te d
 P ro v in c ia l    a u th o rity , in exercising th eir powers, can properly h ave in
t P ic tu re         when those questions are germ ane to w h a t th e y have to consid
   H o u ses,
       Ld.           H  ere Mr. G allop d id not, I th in k , suggest t h a t th e council
        v.           directing th e ir m in d to a purely ex traneous a n d irrelevant matt,
  W ed nes-
     bury            b u t he based his argum ent on th e w ord “ unreasonable'
  C o rpo r a ­      w hich he tre a te d as an independent ground for attacking
     t io n .
                     decision of th e a u th o rity ; b u t once it is conceded, as it mi£
  L ord Greene
      M.R.
                     be conceded in th is case, th a t th e p articu la r su b ject-m atter di
                     w ith b y th is condition was one w hich it was com petent
                     th e a u th o rity to consider, there, in m y opinion, is an end of th?
                     case. Once t h a t is granted, Mr. Gallop is bound to say th a t t h | | f :
                     decision of th e a u th o rity is w rong because it is unreasonable®
                    an d in saying th a t he is really saying th a t th e u ltim ate arbiter®
                    of w h at is a n d is n o t reasonable is th e co u rt an d n o t th e local |§
                    a u th o rity . I t is ju s t there, it seems to me, th a t th e argumen£J|
                    breaks down. I t is clear th a t th e local a u th o rity are entrusted | |
                    b y P arlia m e n t w ith th e decision on a m a tte r which th e know^H
                    ledge a n d experience of th a t a u th o rity can b est be tru sted to*j |
                    deal w ith. T he su b je ct-m atter w ith w hich th e condition deals^jl
                    is one relev an t for its consideration. T h ey have considered it: |>.
                    an d come to a decision upon it. I t is tru e to sa y th a t, if
                    decision on a com petent m a tte r is so unreasonable th a t no* s-:
                    reasonable a u th o rity could ever h ave come to it, th en the;
                    courts can interfere. T h at, I th in k , is quite right              but to:
                   prove a case of th a t kind w ould require som ething over-' | |
                   whelm ing, and, in th is case, th e facts do n o t come anywhereTJ|
                   near a n y th in g of th a t kind. I th in k Mr. Gallop in th e end p
                   agreed t h a t his proposition th a t th e decision of th e locaTJ|
                   a u th o rity can be u p se t if it is proved to be unreasonable, re a lly ^ ,
                   m ean t th a t it m u st be proved to be unreasonable in th e sense | | :
                   t h a t th e c o u rt considers it to be a decision th a t no reasonable^
                   b o d y could h av e com e to. I t is n o t w h a t th e court considers;!
                   unreasonable, a different th in g altogether. I f it is w h at t h £ |
                   court considers unreasonable, th e co u rt m ay v ery well havefj
                   different view s to th a t of a local a u th o rity on m atters of f
                   high public policy of this kind. Som e co u rts m ig h t th in k th aS |
                   no children o u g h t to be a d m itte d on S undays a t all, somf
                   courts m ig h t th in k th e reverse, a n d all o ver th e c o u n try I
                   no d o u b t on a th in g of th a t so rt h o n est a n d sincere
                   h old different views. The effect of th e legislation is n o t to set?
                                                                              T0               901132459412         P .05


02-FEB-1999 17=20
02 FEB iy
                                    “ INO<U0RTH
                                        nni
                                        0171 ^3*099
                                             5935099
                                                     S^M
                                                       >d
           A u d i t o r ’ s in q u ir y , and         t o th e terms o f h is r e p o r t , and                   i n th e

           l i g h t o f th e power o f                th e P o lic e A u th o r ity to              expend        money on

           c o s ts in c u r r e d by p o lic e o f f i c e r s and o f th e purposes f o r w hich

           t h a t power was            g iv e n ,     it      was        sub m itted       t h a t th e d et c is io n        to

           r e je c t th e        a p p lic a t io n      was one            nob      re a s o n a b ly open        to        th e

           P o lic e A u t h o r it y .          I n a d d it io n , i t was s a id t h a t th e A u th o r ity

           to o k i n t o account v a rio u s                   m a tte rs to which i t should                     have had

           no r e g a r d .


                     It   i s n ecessary f i r s t to d es c rib e th e n a tu re and powers o f

           th e P o lic e         A u th o r ity       and        of       th e     S e c re ta ry    of     S t a te        w ith

           r e f e r e n c e t o th e s e m a tte r s .


           The P o lic e A u th o r ity


                     The P o lic e A c t 1964 by s e c tio n 2 p ro v id e s                          t h a t th e P o lic e

           A u t h o r it y f o r a        p o lic e a re a           c o n s is tin g o f a         n o n -M e tro p o lita n

           c o u n ty s h a l l       be     a       com m ittee o f              the C o u n c il o f      th e        County

           c o n s t it u t e d i n accordance w ith                      th e p ro v is io n s o f        t h i s s e c tio n

           t o be known            as th e         P o lic e Comm ittee.                   The P o lic e          Committee

           c o n s is ts o f such number o f persons as may                                 be d eterm in ed by th e

           C o u n c il o f th e County and, o f t h a t number,, two t h ir d s a re to be
  VT   \
  1
           members o f - th e County C o u n c il appointed by t h a t C o u n c il and one

           th ir d    s h a ll     be a p p o in ted from                 among the         m a g is tra te s f o r           th e

           County b y th o s e m a g is tr a te s .


                     By s e c tio n 4 (1 ) o f th e                1964 A ct " i t s h a l l be th e               d u ty o f

           th e P o lic e         A u th o r ity       . •.      to        secure th e        m aintenance              of     an

           a d e q u a te and         e ffic ie n t           p o lic e     fo rc e f o r th e         a re a ,    and         to

           e x e r c is e f o r       t h a t purpose             th e powers c o n fe rre d               on a         P o lic e

           A u t h o r it y by t h i s A c t" .

                                                         -3                                                                     0 U 0 i)

                                            REC EIVED TIME 2. FEB. 17:21                         _ .        ... .
                                                                                                        901132459412               P .06
                           FR0M UilNCKUIORTH SHERWC.43D                           TO
02-FEB-1999   17=20
                                         0171 5535093


                 S e c tio n 8           d e a ls      w ith         f i n a n c ia l        p ro v is io n s            It
                                                                                                                                           a ll
        r e c e ip t s O f th e             P o lic e A u th o r ity                 ...     s h a ll    be p a id i n t o                 th e

        P o lic e fu n d and                a l l e x p e n d itu re o f              any such P o lic e                 A u t h o r it y

        e h a l l b e p a id o u t o f t h a t                  fu n d ."            Then by s u b -s e c tio n                    (3 } o f

        s e c t io n 8 :         ”      ...     an account to be known                             as th e p o lic e acco u n t

        s h a l l be k e p t              of a ll        e x p e n d itu re and                 r e c e ip ts o f th e             P o lic e

        A u t h o r it y    ..              and by       s u b -s e c tio n (4 ) "No stun s h a ll                             be p a id

        o u t o f t h e P o lic e Fund . . .                    w ith o u t th e             a p p ro v a l o f th e C o u n c il

        o f th e County . . . ”                 e x c e p t in c e r t a in cases i r r e l e v a n t                          to th is

        case


                 P a rt      II        of      th e     A ct         d ea ls         w ith       c e n tra l      s u p e r v is io n ,

        d i r e c t i o n and          fa c ilitie s .               By       s e c tio n        26      th e S e c r e ta ry               of

        S t a t e " s h a l l e x e rc is e h is powers under t h is
                                                                  t
                                                                     A ct                                       in such manner

        and t o such e x te n t as                     appears t o him to be b e s t                             c a lc u la t e d t o

        prom ote t h e e f f i c i e n c y o f th e                       p o lic e " .          By s e c tio n 31:                   "The

        S e c r e ta r y o f          S ta te may make                 g ra n ts           in    re s p e c t     of          expenses

         in p u r r e d f o r p o lic e purposes . . .                        (a )         by    any      P o lic e A u th o r ity

                 and        ...        “g ra n ts       under t h is                 s e c tio n        s h a ll be           of      such

        am ounts,           ...        and       s u b je c t        to      such          c o n d itio n s        ...         as          th e

         S e c r e ta r y o f S ta te            may w ith th e ap p ro val                        o f th e T re a s u ry                  by
                                                 II        The            c o u rt      has        been t o ld           th a t,            in
         o r d e r d e te rm in e

         s u b s ta n c e , u n d er th e r e g u la tio n s 51 p er c e n t o f th e e x p e n d itu re

         of a      P o lic e          A u th o r ity      is         p ro vid ed            from        c e n tra l      fun ds             as

         d ir e c t e d by           th e S e c re ta ry            o f S ta te            and     49 p e r       c e n t by               th e

         County c o u n c il o u t o f r a t e s .


         The Home O f f i c e C ir c u la r


                 Home O f f i c e C ir c u la r                 No. 7 7 /8 7 , dated                    4 th December 1 9 8 7 ,

         is   th e fo u n d a tio n o f th e                case f o r th e a p p lic a n ts .                           S e c tio n 4

                                                                4
      w : 21     H W     -NW-Fm M W »                               ™                  901132459412         P.R
                             0171 5935099

o f th e 1964 Act#                c it e d above, d e fin e s                th e d uty o f th e            P o lic e

A u th o r ity and th e            purposes f o r which                      th e A u th o r ity may          spend

th e money         p ro v id e d , namely              to secure             .th e    m aintenance o f            an

adeq uate and e f f i c i e n t            p o lic e fo r c e .                The c i r c u l a r     p ro v id e s

guid an ce t o p o lic e            a u t h o r it ie s w ith re fe re n c e              t o one form            of

e x p e n d itu r e .       The       f i r s t two paragraphs                       must be     s et out         in

fu ll:
         "I.     There is statutory authority in section 48 of the
         Police Act 1964 for payments to be made from the police fund
         to M e t expenditure incurred by police officers in defending
         proceedings in tort.       Also, acting in pursuance of its
         general statutory duty to maintain an adequate and efficient
         police force for its area, the police authority has discretion
         to Beet expenditure incurred by officers in all kinds of legal
         proceedings where the officers have acted in good faith in
         pursuance of their duties, or the interests of the force as a
         whole are involved.    The purpose of this circular is to give
         guidance to police authorities to help then in considering
         requests on behalf of officers for financial assistance.
         This guidance has been discussed and agreed with local
         authority and with the police staff associations.

         2.     The esntral principle which should guide consideration
         of individual cases is that, where a         police authority
         considers that an officer has acted in good faith in pursuance
         of his duties or that the interests of a foree as a whole are
         involved, the officer should have the support of the police
         authority to ensure that he hat the services of a lawyer and
    •    that he should not be out of pocket.            The following
         paragraphs provide general guidance to the different classes
         of proceedings.   Payments made to officers in accordance with
         this guidance will be elegible for police grant” .


         The re m a in in g f i v e pages o f th e c i r c u l a r ,                     to some passages

i n w hich        d e t a ile d      a tt e n t io n        w ill       be     g iven     la te r      in      th is

judgm ent, c o n ta in             passages            under        th e       headings:              ’’C r im in a l

P ro c e e d in g s , P ro s e c u tio n by            the Crown P ro secu tio n S e rv ic e                    and

P r iv a t e    P ro c e c u tio n s ;         C iv il        Proceedings:                  C iv il      A c tio n s

a g a in s t th e       C h ie f     O f f ic e r f o r       w ro n g fu l          Acts o f     C o n s tab le s ,

C i v i l A c tio n s a g a in s t in d iv id u a l P o lic e o f f i c e r s , C i v i l A c tio n s

u n d er th e D a ta -P r o te c tio n Act                   1984, P o lic e O f fic e r s             b r in g in g

C i v i l A c tio n s f o r D efam ation;                    In q u e s ts , P u b lic          In q u ir ie s and

                                             - 5        ~
                                                                                                                    ii
                             RECEIVED TIME 2. FEB, I7:2l
                                                 _                            1UI                     0 ^ * 0 3 4 Id     P .08

                                       0171 5935095

T r ib u n a ls :        Legal      R e p re s e n ta tio n f o r             C h ie f O f f ic e r s , and               fo r

In d iv id u a l O ffic e r s ;           A p p lic a tio n s            fo r        F in a n c ia l A s s is ta n c e ;

and A s s is ta n c e from P o lic e F e d e ra tio n Funds".


         No is s u e has been r a is e d as to th e la w f u l a u t h o r it y o f th e

S e c r e ta ry o f S t a t e t o . is s u e guidance to p o lic e                              a u t h o r it i e s i n

th e form and i n                 th e term s o f th e              c ir c u la r .          The      c ir c u la r is

n o t a r e g u l a t i o n and does n o t                 have th e fo r c e o f s t a t u t o r y la w .

The c i r c u l a r c l e a r l y assures a u t h o r it ie s t h a t use                           o f th e money

s u p p lie d       in     th e     p o lic e        g ra n t     fo r          purposes           w it h in           th o se

e n v is a g e d by        th e     c ir c u la r       w ill       not         be      q u e s tio n e d      by        th e

S e c r e ta r y o f       S ta te .             It       i s a ls o          common         ground t h a t              th e

c i r c u l a r c o n ta in s guidance                 w ith re fe re n c e to               a power t o                make

payments and d id n o t c r e a te a s p e c if ic duty t o make paym ents.


         The c o u r t was r e f e r r e d to B r i s t o l                     C o u n c il v . C l a r k [1 9 7 5 ]

1 W .L .R . 1443 (L o rd Denning MR, Lawton and                                         Seam an L J J .) where

th e a p p e a l concerned th e v a l i d i t y o f a n o tic e                              to q u it g iv e n by

th e C o u n c il t o             a te n a n t o f a            c o u n c il house.                R e fe re n c e was

th e r e made t o tw o j o i n t c ir c u la r s emanating from th e D epartm ent

o f th e        E n viro n m en t and           th e      Departm ent o f                 H e a lth and          S o c ia l

S e c u r it y :     c ir c u la r s     7 4 /7 2 and            1 8 /7 4 .           Scarman L J . a t                 page

1450H s a id t h i s :

         "It is clear from ... two circulars 74/72 and 18/74 that local
         authorities exercising functions under the Housing Act are now
         invited by the central goverosent to have regard to the
         probleas of baselessness, the alternatives to eviction and the
         various statutory weapons available to their relief such as
         the soeial services legislation and the Attachment of Earnings
         Act 1971.      X do not think it possible to rely on those
         circulars as iniposing any direct statutory duty upon a housing
         authority; but I think they are a good indication as to the
         purposes to be served by the Housing Acts and as to what are
         relevant natters within the language of Lord Greene MR in
         vedneebvuey case 1194B) 1 X.B. 223, 233, to betaken into
                                                                                                                               I •   KJJ
                                       017! 5935099

        account by a local authority serving a notice to quit                                                  upon a
        council tenant in arrears of rent."


It    was, as 2 understood i t ,                         common ground in                       t h i s c a s e , and i n

my v ie w i t         is    c o r r e c t , t h a t th e c o u rt can p ro p e rly approach th e

Home O f f i c e C ir c u la r No. 7 7 / 8 7 upon th e same b a s is .                                                  That is

not     to           say       th a t,        in         c o n s id e rin g              an     a p p lic a t io n             fo r

reim b u rsem en t o f               c o s ts by an              o ffic e r ,       a     P o lic e A u th o r ity               is

n e c e s s a r ily l i m i t e d t o . f a c t o r s l i s t e d                   i n th e          C ir c u la r .            In

t h i s c a s e , how ever, i t has n o t been suggested t h a t any r e le v a n t

m a tte r s a ro s e          fo r     c o n s id e ra tio n            o u ts id e           th e        a m b it      of     th e

C ir c u la r .


The P o lic e F e d e r a tio n .


         It     is     n ecessary             to r e t u r n           to      th e Act              of        1964 f o r        an

u n d e rs ta n d in g        of      th e      r o le           and        fu n c tio n s           of         th e      P o lic e

F e d e r a tio n .         P a rt     I I I o f th e             A c t by s e c tio n 44                      p ro v id e s f o r

th e c o n tin u a n c e o f           a P o lic e F e d e ra tio n                     f o r England and                    Wales

...    " fo r        th e purpose             o f re p re s e n tin g               members               o f th e        p o lic e

fo r c e s i n England and Wales —                                in a l l          m a tte rs a f f e c t i n g t h e i r

w e lf a r e and           e ffic ie n c y ,        o th e r        th an q uestio ns                     of      d is c i p l i n e

a f f e c t i n g in d iv id u a ls , e x e e p t as p ro vid ed by s u b -s e c tio n ( 1 ) ( a )

b elo w ,       and        q u e s tio n s . o f         prom otion                a f f e c t in g        i n d iv i d u a l s ” .

S u b -S e c tio n         (1)(A),           in s e r te d        by        th e         P o lic e         and         C r im in a l

E vid en ce A c t 1984,                p e rm its r e p re s e n ta tio n o f                        a member o f              th e

p o lic e fo r c e a t             any d is c i p lin a r y proceedings                              o r on          an a p p e a l

from any such p ro ceed in g s.


         The S e c r e ta ry o f S ta te by s e c tio n 4 4( 3) may by r e g u la t io n s

p r e s c r ib e      th e      c o n s tit u t io n         and        proceedings                   of        th e      P o lic e

F e d e r a tio n a n d , i n p a r t i c u l a r , may make                            p ro v is io n w ith re s p e c t

                                                   - 7       -
                                                                                                                                     l i {j if

                            : RECEIVED TIME 2. FEB. 17:21                                                                            - —
        74
        Lord   Lowry
                                                                     o
                       Reg. v. Richmond L.B .C ., Ex p. McCarthy & Stone (II.L.(K.))   11992)                2 A.C.
                                                                                                                        C    )
                                                                                                                            Reg. v. Richmond L.B .C ., Ex p. M cCarthy & Stone (H .L.(E.))
                                                                                                                                                                                                      75
                                                                                                                                                                                              Lord Lowry
               permission being granted. Applicants can then consider the scope                 /\       A   law), because it is calculated to facilitate, or is conducive or incidental to,
               for adjusting the schcmc prior to formal submission of a planning                             the discharge o f o n e o f the council’s functions. T o charge for the exercise
               application so as to render the conditions unnecessary if the local                           of that power is, at best, incidental to the incidental and not incidental to
               planning authority are minded to grant planning permission:                                   the discharge o f the functions.
               (v) planning departments to (a) co-ordinate the requirements of                                   A further point which comm ended itself to the Court o f A pp eal, ante,
               statutory consultees; (b) make particular efforts to resolve any                              p. 58c-<;, was the argument that, since the council was not obliged to
               conflicting requirements; and (c) where necessary, invite those                               provide the service in question, it could state on a “take it or leave it” basis
               organisations and departments with an interest in applications to be             **           that it was willing to provide it for a reasonable fee, as if entering into a
               represented at any meetings with applicants or their agents. 9. The                           contract. I consider this to be an untenable proposition w hich, if correct,
               attention of applicants is drawn to the need for early discussions to                         would justify a local authority in charging for any discretionary service,
               be held with local planning authorities so that: . . . 16. There will                         but which in reality is in conflict with the second principle enunciated by
               be som e financial and manpower costs associated with the                                     Atkin L.J. in Attorney-General v. Wilts United Dairies Ltd., 37 T .L .R .
               im plementation o f this code. These costs will vary between local                            884, 887 (already cited).
               authorities according to the extent to which information is already              q        q       My Lords, for th ese reasons I would allow the appeal and would order
               collected by them for their own use. How ever, there may be some                              the council to pay the developers’ costs in this H ou se and in the courts
               offsetting benefits to be obtained by local authorities from the use                          below.
               o f the information required by the code in the management of their
               developm ent control duties.”                                                                                                        Appeal allowed with costs. Orders o f
                                                                                                                                                      Court o f Appeal and Popplewell J.
        T h e developers placed som e reliance on paragraph 16 as showing that                                                                        set aside.
        local authorities were expected to incur expense by providing a mutually                D        D                                          Decision o f council o f 27 October 1987
        helpful service, but, as your Lordships have seen in the present case,                                                                        quashed.
        even if fees were charged, the recommended service was unlikely to pay                                                                      Declaration that council has no power
        for itself out o f direct revenue. I do not consider that it is cither                                                                        to charge fee fo r answering inquiries
        justifiable or necessary for the developers to look to such a slender                                                                         or requests fo r information before
        argument in order to support their case.                                                                                                      making o f application fo r planning
             My Lords, I com e back to section 111(1), the relevant provision.                   ^       g                                           permission.
        T h e council admits that it cannot without express authority charge for a
        “duty function,” but it still has to say that the ability to charge for pre­                            Solicitors: Metson Cross & Co.; Assistant Head o f Legal Services,
        application advice is based on the “power to do any thing” which is                                  Richmond upon Thames London Borough Council.
        “incidental” (I deliberately choose the most neutral qualification) “to,
        the discharge      o f any o f [the council’s] functions.” T o charge for                                                                                                            M. G .
        performing a      function (subject always to Wednesbury considerations
        (Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd. v. Wednesbury Corporation                        K
        [1948] 1 K .B . 223), which do not arise here) must always be incidental
        to the provision o f the service provided. Therefore the council’s
        interpretation o f section 111(1) would allow it to charge for the
        performance o f every function, both obligatory and discretionary, which
        provided a service. (A n d , even without section 87(1), there would be
        nothing unreasonable or irrational in charging a proper fee                   for           q
        determining a planning application.) Such a construction o f the
        subsection cannot possibly be justified, and I say this before even
        considering the point that, in the absence o f express statutory authority,
        the pow er to charge can only be implied, in the words o f Atkin L.J. in
        Attorney-General v. Wilts United Dairies Ltd., 37 T .L .R . 884, 886, “as
        necessarily arising from the words o f a statute.”
0




            T here is yet a further point, to which I have already adverted. A s the                **   H
        Court o f A ppeal have said, ante, p. 57g, the power to give pre-application
£1100




         advice is neither a duty nor a discretionary express power, but is a subsidiary
         pow er arising by virtue o f section 111(1) (which has codified the co m m o n
        374
        Neill L.J.          Credit Suisse v. Waltham Forest L .B .C \\ fA.)        119971
                                                                                                Q B,          '       Cr« i t Suisse v. Waltham Forest L.B.C. (C.A.)   Peter Gibson U X
        implied powers of a local authority under section 111 o f the Act o f 1972,     ;\
        to identify the relevant statutory functions. It is also necessary to examine
        the context in which the implied powers are to be exercised.
            Section 101 of the Act of 1972 contains provisions relating to what
        arrangements can be made for the discharge of functions by local
        authorities. These powers are very limited. They do not entitle a local
        housing authority to discharge any o f its functions by means o f a partly-
        owned company. Can this power, or the power to give such a company
        assistance in the form of a guarantee or an indemnity, be implied by
        reason of section 111?
            I     am afraid that I have come to the conclusion, as I did in the Allerdale
        case, that where Parliament has made detailed provisions as to how certain
        statutory functions are to be carried out there is no scope for implying the          { &          r™     t „r     r    or ,her      ”»                                m
        existence o f additional powers which lie wholly outside the statutory code.    C
        Section 111(3) makes it clear that the power to enter into financial
        obligations is subject to any statutory controls which may be imposed.
            The scheme had no doubt a very laudable object. It may be that later
        similar schemes have or will become within the powers o f local authorities.
        But we have to look at the position in October 1988.
            In these circumstances I feel bound to allow the appeal.                    ^

            P e t e r G i b s o n L.J. As in the Allerdale case, the council in this case
        seeks to escape from liability under its contractual obligations to the bank
        by asserting the invalidity o f its own conduct. Again in this case it is not
        disputed by the bank that, if the council lacked the power to enter into
        the guarantee and indemnity which it gave the bank, then the council                      1. too, would allow this appeal.
        cannot be held to its promises.
            The judge said, no doubt correctly, that the council's guarantee was an
        indispensable condition o f the loan to North East London Property Co.
                                                                                              c J / u T n 9 9 7 ] L Q b '" 306 ^ h e                  SubseA V' Allerdale Borough
        Ltd. and that without it the scheme would not have got off the ground. In
        accepting the bank’s argument that the power conferred on the council by
        section 111 o f the Local Government Act 1972 extended to the giving of
        the guarantee (as calculated to facilitate or as conducive or incidental to          28 October 1988 T h ! i ,,                      , o f guarantee probably dated
        the discharge o f the council’s function under section 65 of the Housing             No“ h S ;                                                              ta n k by
        Act 1985 to secure that accommodation was available lor the homeless
        for whom it was responsible), the judge followed that part of the judgment
        in Credit Suisse v. Allerdale Borough Council [1995] 1 Lloyd’s Rep. 315,
        328-329 in which Colman J. had said:
                  “In my judgment, the guarantee by a local authority o f the
              obligation of a company set up by the local authority to enable it to
              provide recreational facilities under section 19 is not necessarily
              impermissible any more than is the setting up of the company itself.
              Moreover, inasmuch as the giving of a guarantee involves incurring
              an obligation to the party guaranteed I see no reason why, if that is
o:
              calculated to facilitate the provision by the local authority of               OnpTwC/ T llty °alIed lor the Provision o f various “security documents ”
o             recreational facilities, that should not fall within the ancillary powers
cs            given to the local authority by section 111 of the Local Government
)«r*k
              Act 1972.”
ro
29 H.»-R-      SUTTON L.B.C. v. MORGAN OR UN FEU. & CO. l-TD                        617

    properties would be sold and ihc sale proceeds used to discharge the debt
    raised."

These ingredients relate not to motives but 10 specific steps to be taken. Again
Hobhousc L.J, (at page 186) referred to the schcme arising from the wish of the
council to avoid the statutory restrictions on borrowing and spending. He did not say
that the motive was part of the scheme.
   Mr Mann further submitted that the decision in the WaIlham Fores! ease was
based on delegation whereas it) the present case the schcme docs not involve a
delegation. In my judgm ent delegation was only one o f the grounds of the decision
in Waltham Forest. Another ground was that which found favour with Neill L.J. and
myself based on the statutory scheme of the housing legislation. When this point
was put to him by the court, Mr Mann complaincd that he was at a disadvantage. He
pointed out that there w a s no respondent’s notice seeking to affirm the decision of
the judge on this ground. However be: accepted that if it had been in the skeleton
argument for Sutton, he would not have complained. In the skeleton'argument o f
Miss Appleby Q.C. for the Council it is contended:
    "Where Parliament has expressly enacted provisions which define the means
    by which local authorities are to c a n y out their functions, section 111(1) cannot
    be relied upon in support of performance o f those functions by other means not
    expressly empowered by the relevant provisions."1

That seems to me to put the point in a nutshell. When Parliament intended to confer
a power on a local authority (or a statutory body with housing functions like the
Housing Corporation) to give a guarantee or an indemnity, it did so expressly. It is
simply inconceivable that Parliament ever intended by section ) 11 (which does no
more than put in statutory form what would be implicit at common law) to confer
on a local authority power to incur a financial obligation to an unlimited extent by
grunting a guarantee o r indemnity when it has so clearly and in such detail regulated
the local authority’s powers of expenditure anil borrowing and the granting of
financial assistance. It is only in casus covered by specific provisions expressly
allowing guarantees and indemnities that the local authority can do so. If the local
authority cannot bring the case within such a provision, to grant a guarantee or
indemnity is beyond its powers.
   flic present case seems to me again to be a fo rtio ri the Waltham Forest case,
which, I repeat, involved a person other than a housing association to which express
provisions apply. In the present case, it is plain from section 60(1) that Sutton cannot
avail itself of section 58(2)(c). How could it give a guarantee to an unregistered
housing association in the light o f section 60(1)? It cannot point to any express
power o f indemnity. The indemnity was therefore ultra vires. Indeed Mr M ann
accepted that if the guarantee were beyond Sutton’s powers, so would be the
indemnity. For good measure the indemnity was also a form of assistance not
authorised by section 73 to a voluntary organisation concerned with homeless-
ness.
   Mr Mann drew attention to the surprising fact that Sutton had at the. start o f this
appeal not challenged the finding o f the judge that the guarantee and the Indemnity
were incidental to Stilton’s duly to house the homeless and so prima facie were
within section 111, and taken out of it only by sections 58 and 60 and s.73. With
prompting from the court Miss Appleby belatedly applied to serve a respondent’s
notice challenging lhal finding and wc gave leave. On this point I cannot agree with
U»e judge. First, it is inconsistent with the statutory scheme, as already explained.
Secondly, to adopt what Hobhousc I,..), pointed out in the Waltham Forest case al

                                    ?.9 H.L.R. Jiu.v/Auoust 1997 €> Swi:iu &. Maxwkix
r       CHAPTER 7



       Sum m ary


       1.     In this ch ap ter I summarise the findings which I have made.


      2. Before doing so I m ust make it clear th at anyone who is familiar with the terrible
      events of 15 A pril 19S9 at Hillsborough is bound to have great sympathy with the
      relatives of those w ho died and the spectators who were injured. I have now spent many
      weeks studying the evidence of what happened and considering the representations and
      submissions m ade by the families and their legal representatives. I find it difficult to
      imagine anything m ore horrific than that experienced by those who endured it and
      those who lost th eir children, relatives and friends.


.     3. T h a t 96 p e o p l e , t h e m a jo r ity o f t h e m y o u n g , s h o u l d set o u t in high h o p e s a n d spirits
      o n a fine S p r in g d a y . a n d ye t within a s p a c e o f less t h a n h a lf - a n - h o u r s u f f e r c r u s h i n g
      i n ju r ie s f r o m w h i c h t h e y d ied , is n o t h i n g less t h a n a p p a llin g . I h a v e the m o s t p r o f o u n d
      s y m p a t h y w ith all t h e fam ilies a n d f r i e n d s o f t h o s e w h o s u f f e r e d in this w a y . m a n y o f
      w h o m I h a v e m e t . I a ls o u n d e r s t a n d t h e d i s m a y t h a t t h e y h a v e t h a t no i n d i v i d u a f h a s
      p e r s o n a l l y b e e n h e l d t o a c c o u n t, e i t h e r in a c rim in a l c o u r t , d isc ip lin a ry p r o c e e d i n g s , o r
      e v e n t o t h e e x t e n t o f losing his o r h e r j o b .


     4. I r e a lis e t h a t m y r e p o r t a n d a d v ic e will c o m e as a d i s a p p o i n t m e n t to t h e m , e s p e c ia lly
     s in c e t h e y h a d h a d t h e i r h o p e s raised t h a t s o m e t h i n g m o r e c o u ld be d o n e . B u t I c a n n o t "
     a l l o w c o m p a s s i o n t o c lo u d m y j u d g e m e n t . I h a v e h a d to lo o k d i s p a s s io n a t e ly a n d
     o b j e c t i v e l y a t w h a t is s a id to be fresh e v i d e n c e , in th e light o f th e e v id e n c e w h i c h h a d
     p rev io u sly b e e n co n sid ered .


      5. Having done so. for the reasons I have set out. I have come to the clear conclusion
;f   th at there is no basis upon which there should be a further Judicial Inquiry o r a
^    reopening of Lord T aylor’s Inquiry. T h ere is no basis for a renewed application to the
     Divisional C ourt o r for the Attorney G eneral to exercise his powers under the Coroners
     A ct 1988.1 do not consider that there is any m aterial which should be put b efo re the
     D irecto r of Public Prosecutions or the Police Complaints Authority which m ight cause
     th em to reconsider the decisions they have already taken. Nor do I consider th at there is
     any justification fo r setting up any further inquiry into the performance o f the
     em ergency and hospital services. I have carefully considered the circumstances in which
     alterations w ere m ad e to some of the self-w ritten statem ents o f South Y orkshire Police
     officers, but I do n o t consider that there is any occasion for any further investigation.


     6. N one of the evidence I was asked to consider added anything significant to th e
     evidence which was available to Lord T ay lo r’s Inquiry o r to the Inquests.


                                                                         103



                                                                                                                                          000084
  Video evidence

 7. C hap ter 2 o f this report deals with video evidence of the disaster. My conclusions
 about that are th at there is no new video evidence of it or video evidence which was not
 available to L o rd Taylor, the C oroner, or the other authorities who examined the
 disaster at the time.


 8. T w o video tapes which were stolen on the day of the disaster remain missing. They
 were tapes of pictures from C CTV cam eras operated by Sheffield W ednesday Football
 Club. T hey were not police tapes and would not have shown anything significant. Their
 theft is unsolved. T he suggestion th at the police tried to blame their failure to spot
 overcrow ding on the terraces onto faulty CCTV equipment is wrong. They did not
 blam e the C C T V equipment. The police controllers had a good view over the terraces
 from their control box and did not pretend otherwise.


 9. T he allegation that police hid videotape evidence of the terraces is unfounded, and
 the allegation th a t the Coroner failed properly to pursue the question of this ‘missing’
 police footage is equally unfounded. Police officers did not give false evidence a b o u rth e
 state of the police CCTV system at the ground, and I do not accept the evidence of
 R oger H ouldsw orth. video technician at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, that he
 realised from looking at police CC TV pictures of pens 3 and 4 at about the time G ate C
 was opened at 14.52 that these pens were dangerously overcrowded.


 The aftermath o f the disaster


10. I deal in C hapter 3 of the report with suggestions that the inquest into the deaths of
those who died in the disaster was seriously flawed, and that there should now be a
public inquiry into what was done, o r not done, to help them and others who were
crushed.


11. I do not consider that the Inquest was flawed. Most of the criticisms relate to the
so-called “3.15 cut-off point”. I do not agree with these criticisms. T he Coroner
considered the questions of who the deceased were and when and where they died at the
mini-inquests, and this involved consideration of matters long after 3.15. It was only in
relation to the question of how, i.e. by what means, the deceased came to their deaths
th a t the C oroner imposed a cut-off point of 3.15 pm. H e had good reasons for deciding
to limit the inquiry in this way and th e cut-off did not limit inquiry into that question.


12. Q uestions of w hether the response of the emergency services was adequate were
n o t relevant to the task the C oroner had to perform. It was suggested to me th at the fact
th a t D r W alker, M r Houldsworth, and others were not called as witnesses at the inquest
am o u n ted to fraudulent concealm ent o f their evidence. That suggestion is false and I
re g a rd it as w h o l l y irresponsible.
   13. L ord T aylor inquired into the rescue operation and his findings are published in his
   report. H e m ade criticisms of the slow response o f the police and recommendations for
   the future. I can n o t see that any useful purpose would be served by having any further
   inquiry into the rescue operation. In m y opinion there is no evidence of want of care by
   the em ergency o r m edical services. A n y wide-ranging inquiry into this aspect of the
   disaster would place huge burdens upon them, but to no purpose.


  Interference with witnesses


 14. C hapter 4 of this report deals with suggestions that the evidence of witnesses to the
 disaster was tam p ered with, so that the truth did not em erge either at Lord Taylor’s
 Inquiry or the Inquests. These allegations are of two types - that the West Midlands
 Police put pressure on D erek B ruder, D ebra Martin, and Paul Taylor which affected the
 evidence they wished to give, and that the way in which the South Yorkshire Police went
 ab o u t collecting evidence from their own officers who were at Hillsborough and
 w itnessed the disaster was unacceptable. I have interviewed M r Bruder, Miss Martin,
 and M r Taylor and have come to the conclusion in each case that there was no im proper
 attem p t to affect their evidence.


 Mr Bntder


  15.       S o far as M r B r u d e r is c o n c e r n e d . I a m q u i te s a tis fie d t h a t t h e W e s t M id l a n d s
 P o l ic e , in s e e k i n g t o c o n f i r m d e ta ils o f his s t a t e m e n t r e l a t i n g to K e v in W illia m s, d id n o t
 s u b j e c t h im to i m p r o p e r p r e s s u r e . H e t o l d m e h i m s e lf t h a t t h e y did n o t. H is s t a t e m e n t s
 w e r e a c c u r a t e l y s u m m a r i s e d at t h e i n q u e s t o n K e v in W illia m s a n d t h e r e w as n o a t t e m p t
 t o d is c r e d it him .


Miss Martin


16. I did not find Miss M artin a reliable witness. H er statem ent about events at
H illsborough, w here she was on duty as a Special Constable, was seriously at variance
w ith the account o f everybody else w ho was there. She remains plainly - and
understandably - deeply upset by the disaster, and her memories of the day and of
subsequent events relating to it are vague and confused. I think that she gave her
account of Kevin W illiams sitting up in h er arms and saying “M om ” in good faith. But it
can n o t be relied upon. It contradicts M r B ruder’s evidence and is also contrary to the
pathological findings.


17. I interviewed the W est M idlands police officer who Miss M artin claims bullied her.
I found this officer to be an impressive witness. I cannot see that she had any reason to
discredit Miss M artin, and she told m e th a t she did not bully or browbeat her. I accept
h e r account and p refer it to Miss M a rtin ’s.




                                                                  105



                                                                                                                                   0 0o 86
  18. A s far as P aul T aylor is concerned, I do not accept his evidence that he was bullied
  o r intim idated by a W est Midlands officer. His account of what he saw at Hillsborough
  has changed in v arious ways over the years, and he does not appear to have raised any
  com plaint ab o u t the conduct of this officer until 1997.1 prefer the evidence o f the
  officer, which is su p po rted to some extent by the contem porary documents. In any event
  he had no reason to p u t pressure on M r Taylor.


  South Yorkshire Police statements


  19. I h a v e l o o k e d w i t h g r e a t c a r e a t t h e w a y in w h i c h t h e S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e P o lic e
 o b t a i n e d w r i t t e n e v i d e n c e from t h e i r o f f i c e r s w h o w itn e s s e d t h e d i s a s t e r t o p u t b e f o r e
 t h e W e s t M i d l a n d s P o l ic e in v e s tig a to rs a n d L o r d T a y l o r 's I n q u ir y . S o o n a f t e r t h e
 d i s a s t e r o f f i c e r s w e r e a s k e d to w rite o u t in t h e i r o w n w o r d s t h e i r r e c o l le c t io n s o f th e d a y
 a n d o f t h e p a r t w h i c h t h e y t h e m s e lv e s h a d p l a y e d . M a n y o f t h e s e s t a t e m e n t s w e r e
 s u b m i t t e d t o H a m m o n d S u d d a r d s , s o li c it o r s t o t h e force, to a d v is e w h e t h e r t h e y w e r e in
 a s u it a b le f o r m f o r s u b m i s s io n to L o r d T a y l o r 's I n q u iry .


 20. T h e s o l i c i t o r s m a d e n o c o m m e n t o n t h e g r e a t m a jo r ity o f t h e s e s t a t e m e n t s , a n d in
 o t h e r s t h e i r a d v i c e w a s c o n fin e d to c l e a r i n g u p a m b ig u itie s a n d r e m o v i n g h e a r s a v .
 c o m m e n t o r i n a p p r o p r i a t e lan g u a g e . I n a v e r y few cases, w hic h I h a v e r e f e r r e d to in
 A p p e n d i x 7. w h a t h a s b e e n e x c lu d e d is e i t h e r f a c tu a l o r c o m m e n t in w h ic h f a c tu a l
 m a t t e r s a r e i m p l ic i t. I n t h e s e cases I t h i n k it w o u l d h a v e b e e n p r e f e r a b l e f o r t h e factual
 m a t t e r s n o t t o h a v e b e e n e x c lu d e d , o r t h e c o m m e n t e lu c id a te d .


21. It w a s w e l l k n o w n to L o r d T a y l o r 's I n q u i r y T e a m th a t th e s t a t e m e n t s w e r e b e in g
v e t t e d in th is w a y . T h e p ro c e s s did n o t m a t e r i a l l y d iffe r fro m t h e w a y in w h i c h
s t a t e m e n t s were t a k e n fro m w itn e s s e s w h o w e r e e m p l o y e d by S h e ffie ld W e d n e s d a y F C
o r th e A m b u l a n c e S e rv ic e .


22. Tow ards the en d of May 1989 the South Yorkshire Police team responsible for
collating the evidence of officers in the Force began to suggest am endm ents to
statem ents w ithout referring them to the solicitors. The suggestions they m ade were on
th e sam e basis as those made by the solicitors. I have looked at all the statem ents that
w ere altered in this way. In most cases the alteration is trivial. W here com m ent or
opinion is excluded the amendments cannot in my opinion be criticised. In no case is the
statem ent re n d e re d misleading.


23. I am quite satisfied that Lord T aylor’s Inquiry was not in any way inhibited or
im peded by w hat happened. Lord T aylor was well aware o f the criticisms m ade by some
ju n io r officers. H is Inquiry examined these issues and he made findings ab o u t them
w hich were adverse to the police.
 24. I am also satisfied that the exclusion of these com m ents did not affect the outcom e
 o f the Inquests, o r th e decision by the D irector o f Public Prosecutions n ot to bring
 criminal charges as a result of the disaster. I do not consider that there is any question o f
 m isconduct eith e r by the solicitor who gave the police advice upon the statem ents or by
 the police officers w ho suggested alterations to the statem ents without referring the
 statem ent to the solicitors.


 Other issues

 Inconsistent evidence


 25. It is clear th a t there is inconsistent evidence about precisely what happened to
 some of the p eople w ho died at Hillsborough. Such conflicts of evidence are inevitable
 given the scale o f th e disaster. The C o ro n er did his best to resolve these questions at the
 Inquest, and I have tried to get to the bottom of some of those which rem ain and which
 the families of those who died have asked me to look into. I have not been completely
 successful in this. W h at is clear how ever is that no further inquiry involving examination
 of the witnesses could help after this lapse of time.


 The Inquests


26. T he Divisional Court found that the C oroner was not biased and had no conflict of
interest. I see no reason to disagree with that. I can find no evidence to support the
suggestion that Liverpool supporters who gave evidence at the Inquest were given a
difficult time in the witness box.


27. I do not agree with the criticisms which have been made of the C oroner and the
wav in which he ran the Inquests. But I endorse the recommendation of the Home
Office W orking G ro u p on Disasters and Inquests that the role of the C oroner should be
lim ited in circum stances such as these. I have reached the firm conclusion that is not
satisfactory to have an inquest into the deaths caused by a major disaster when an
Inquiry chaired by a High Court Judge has already covered the same ground.


The police

28. Som e of the families of those w ho died have told me that they have been unable to
o b tain copies o f docum ents to which they were entitled from the South Yorkshire Police
archive on the disaster. Two families supplied me with material to enable m e to check
o n this. In n eith er case did I think the com plaint was justified.


29. T h e investigation of the disaster b y the W est Midlands Police was n o t biased in
fav o u r o f the S o u th Yorkshire force.



                                               107



                                                                                          t i UOUSb
 30. The C hief Constable of South Yorkshire has on many occasions apologised  *1.
 disaster on behalf of his force.                                       «»ea&>rthe


 Examination b y doctors confirming death


31. Criticism th a t doctors who exam ined bodies at the ground did so in a cursorv
inadequate m a n n e r is wholly unsubstantiated.                                   °r


The state o f the ground


32. T here a re tw o questions to do with the state o f the Hillsborough football ground
which seem to m e to have aspects which were not considered by L ord T aylor’s
otherwise v ery full Inquiry. These questions are to do with the height o f the crush
barriers on th e Leppings Lane terrace where the disaster happened and the overall
capacity of th a t terrace. I do not consider that they give grounds for reopening the
Judicial Inquiry o r any other proceedings.                                      0




                                                                                  j
                                         108
