    gh18aug.5




    From:       N M Johnson                 cc Miss Hellmuth
                D Division                     Mr Head
                                               Mr Moorey
    Ext:         2835                          Mrs Keswick

    Ref:         CRN/91   67/4/1

    Date:        18 August 1992

j




    Mr Barnes
    HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER INQUEST: APPLICATION TO QUASH VERDICT

    The purpose of this submission is to inform Ministers that the
    Attorney-General has decided to refuse applications for authority
    to apply to the High Court for an order directing a fresh inquest
    to be held in relation to six of the victims of the Hillsborough
    Stadium Disaster.

    Background

    2.  On 15 April 1989 ninety-five people died at the Hillsborough
    football stadium in Sheffield.  The then Home Secretary ordered a
    public inquiry.  This was undertaken by Lord Justice Taylor whose
    report, which was published in January 1990, reached various
    conclusions on the clause of the event and made various
    recommendations to avoid similar incidents in the future.

    3.  Subsequently, the then Sheffield coroner, Dr Popper resumed the
    inquest into the deaths.  This had been adjourned pending the
    conclusion of the public inquiry and the consideration of possible
    criminal charges by the DPP.   The inquest lasted over one hundred
    days and returned verdicts of accidental death.   It involved over
    520 appearances by witnesses and 540 exhibits were examined.   The
    cost of the inquest was borne by Sheffield City Council which
    finances the coroners service.   The coroner, Dr Popper, has now
    retired.

    Review of inquest

    4.  Under section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 a person may apply,
    with the consent of the Attorney-General to the High Court for the
    inquest to be quashed and a fresh inquest to be held either by the
    same coroner or by another coroner from the same administrative
    area. The High Court may take such action if it is satisfied that,
    whether by reason of fraud, rejection of evidence, irregularity of
    proceedings, insufficient of inquiry, the discovery of new facts or
evidence or otherwise, it is necessary or desirable in the
interests of justice that another inquest should be held.

Attorney-General's Decision

5.  In May, Mr Storr informed Ministers that the Attorney-General
had received and was considering a formal application under section
13 of the Coroners Act 1988 for his consent to the making of an
application to the High Court for an order quashing the finding of
the inquest in respect of six of the victims.  The Attorney-General
has considered the applications very carefully but has concluded
that there is nothing which would justify him authorising an
application to the High Court for a new inquest in any of the six
cases.  He has reached his decision on the ground that the
application would have no reasonable prospects of establishing that
it is necessary or desirable in the interests of justice for a
fresh inquest to be held.

6.  The applicants and those Members of Parliament who have made
representations on behalf of the families are being informed of the
decision by letter.  The application was reported by the press and
the decision is likely to stimulate further media interest.  The
decision is entirely a matter for the Attorney-General and the Home
Secretary has no locus in the matter.

Conclusion

7.   Ministers are invited to note the Attorney-General's decision.




                                                          N M JOHNSON
