    HER M A J E S T Y ’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                        (WEST D I S T R I C T )



           INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE
      VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL
                     STADIUM DISASTER




               PRELIMINARY PROCEEDINGS




                          Before

DR. S.L.   POPPER,    LL.B,   B.MED.Sci,    B M . BS, M R C G P .


               (Her Majesty's C o r o n e r )




                              At

                 The Memorial Hall,
                     City Hall,
                     Sheffield.

                              On

            Wednesday,    18th April,      1990.




              TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS

                     (MORNING SESSION)



      From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
           Official Shorthand Writers,
       55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                                                                  THE CORONER


                               THi- CORONER;   Yes.

                               MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, my name is Stuart Catclipole of
                          Counsel.  I appear on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday
                          Football Club, along with my friend Hr. Jackson.    It is
                          my intention to remain for the duration of the inquest
                          with your leave and to be of such assistance as we can.
                      B        THE CORONER:   Thank you.   Well, I have no problems
                          at all in agreeing and I am very happy for you to be
                          represented at these inquests.   I confirm that whilst, of
                          course, I am delighted if you are able to stay here, those
                          of you who feel that some of the evidence does not require
                          your attendance, that is a matter entirely for you.   It
                          would be helpful if you told us, as indeed you have done,
                          if you are not intending to be here, just so that we know
                          whether to expect you, that is all.

                               Now the next thing I want*to do and it is a little
                          bit unusual.  We are going to have the case summaries
                          presented by eight Officers of the West Midlands Police.
                          I want to arrange for them all to be sworn now in respect
                          of all the inquests, partly because a lot of the families
                      D   are here so they can hear them, and partly because it is
                          convenient.   If the Officers would come down now please.

                               Ladies and gentlemen, I propose to swear the Officers
                          in the same way that I swore the Jury.   In other words,
                          collectively, but each one, of course, repeating the oath
                          in persona.   Are you content with that, or do you wish to
                          hear them sworn individually?   (Y e s )
                      E
                               Right, if you would then, ladies and gentlemen either
                          put your hands on the Bible or New Testament in the
                          conventional way.

                               (The Presenting Officers were sworn swearing the oath
                               collectively as follows, taking the New Testament in
                               their right h a n d s :

                               "I swear by Almighty God that the evidence I shall
                               give shall be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
                               but the truth, in relation to each of the ninety-five
                               persons whose names have been read out by Her
                               Majesty's Coroner, in my presence and hearing,
                               touching whom I am called upon to give evidence."

                               THE CORONER:   Thank you.   You will introduce
                          yourselves as opportunity presents itself.

                               Finally, while we are still on formalities, as and
                          when the pathologists come I intend to get them to swear
                          in respect of each of their inquests as well so we don't
                          have to ask them to repeat the words however many times it
                      H                               -7-

J. L. H arph am Ltd                                                                    10
                                                                 THE CORONER


                              However, there are also Coroner's Rules.   These were
                         formulated in llJ84, the Rules we are working to.   I want
                         to read you Rule 36.    Rule 36(l)(b) reads:

                              "The proceedings and evidence at an inquest shall be
                              directed solely to ascertaining the following
                              matters, namely, (a) who the deceased was     b) how,
                              when and where the deceased came by his death;   (c).
                     B        the particulars for the time being required by the
                              Registration Acts to be registered concerning the
                              death.

                              2. Neither the Coroner, nor the Jury,   shall express
                              any opinion on any other matter."

                              Now I did tell you at the beginning that inquests
                         were limited in nature and this Rule is the Rule which, if
                         you like, sets out the parameters more or less.    The
                         registration particulars - these on the whole are not
                         usually either controversial...   Well, they are certainly
                         not controversial, they are sometimes a little bit
                         difficult to ascertain.  They are the sort of things like
                         what is a person's job, where was he born, what is his
                     D   date of birth, things of that nature.   Although we have
                         to deal with it I don't anticipate any particular
                         difficulty.   In fact I am not saying I anticipate any
                         difficulty with anything, but usually registration
                         particulars are very straightforward.

                               There are then other things:  who the deceased was.
                         That usually is not a problem, and it is not a problem, I
                     E   believe, in this case.    When he died.   Where he died and
                         how he died.    In most inquests the who, when and where
                         are very straightforward.   The time that is spent is spent
                         on the question of discussing how.    In these particular
                         inquests - and by the way you will notice that I try to
                         refer to the inquests in plural because although we are
                         all sitting here, each one of the deceased is a separate
                         person and therefore we are actually doing ninety-five
                         separate inquests, as you will discover in a little while.
                         Some parts of it, of course, we are doing together, like
                         the opening address, for example.    It would be pointless
                         iny repeating this ninety-five times to you.

                              As I say, in most inquests the time is spent on the
                         word "how", say a road traffic accident or something of
                         that sort.   In these particular inquests, the proceedings
                         which are taking place today and over the next few days
                         are even more limited than normal because I will not be
                         dealing with the quest ion of how.  I will tell you why in
                         a moment.  What we are going to concentrate on is who the
                         deceased was, when he died, as far as it can be
                         established, and where he died, as far as it can be
                         established, so we are dealing with those three things and
                     H                           - 10 -



J. L. H arpham Ltd
                                                                                       13
                                                                  THIS CORONER


                          tne registration particulars.   At the end of each inquest
                          we will adjourn it and I will tell you what the plans are
                          with respect to that in a little while.

                               Why is it I am not intending to deal with the
                          question of how?   The reason for it is that at the
                          present time there is an ongoing inquiry by the Director
                          of Public Prosecutions into questions as to whether or not
                      B   the incident at Hillsborough discloses any criminal
                          proceedings which warrant prosecution by the DPP.

                               The DPP has not yet made any announcement as to what
                          his conclusions are and as far as I know, he is not in a
                          position to do so yet because all the material that he
                          needs has not yet been presented to him.   That is nobody's
                          fault.   You might think if there has been a Public
                          Inquiry everything is done, but an awful lot of work has
                          been done since then and, indeed, is still going on.    So
                          the DPP is in the middle, if you like, of an inquiry.
                          When I heard this was going to happen my initial reaction
                          was that I would have to adjourn these inquests and there
                          are various reasons for it which I will not bother you
                          with for the moment.    Indeed I did, I said I wasn't
                      D   starting because quite apart from any other
                          considerations, it is in the interests of justice that
                          nothing I should do at an inquest should impede or imperil
                          the DPP's inquiries.  This is in the interests of justice
                          for everybody concerned.

                               However, as a result of various matters which
                          happened in correspondence which took place I felt it
                      E   might be possible to resume these inquests on this limited
                          basis, which I have already described to you, and, indeed,
                          after consultation with the DPP the DPP agreed that that
                          was a satisfactory way of proceeding.    It has the
                          advantage that it will answer quite a lot of questions
                          which are in people's minds, even though it will not
                          necessarily answer them all.   It does mean there are
                          certain limitations on the way the evidence has got to be
                          presented, because the overall consideration is that we
                          will not adduce or allow evidence to be adduced which is
                          critical of, or which could be treated as an attack on
                          anybody, or on any corporation, for that matter, because
                          we do not know where that might lead to.

                               Now in some respect I am fortunate because the word
                          "how", you know., what on earth does it mean, and how far
                          should I go anyway in an inquest of this sort, luckily for
                          me at this stage I don't have to address you on that point
                          because we are not going to deal with it.    If and when
                          the time comes for us to deal with the question of how,
                          then will be the time for me to say what I intend to do.


                      H                           - 11 -



J. L. H arph am Ltd                                                                     14
                                        THE CORONER


     In order to avoid any misunderstanding I want to
repeat this because it is important for you to understand
it and, of course, for the legal representatives also to
appreciate, if you like, the ground rules on which we are
proceeding.   One, all inquests are limited in scope;
two, these particular hearings are even more limited than
normal because we are excluding a whole section of
evidence at this stage.   No criticism or attack on any .
person or corporations will be permitted and if a question
is asked then I will not allow it.  We will do nothing
which is detrimental to the DPP's inquiry.

     Now as a small interlude, I want just to tell you
because having mentioned the DPP you might say, "What will
happen when the DPP makes up his mind?"    I will just very
briefly outline two possible scenarios which I can think
of.   One is that the DPP will decide not to prosecute
anybody.   They will decide there is not sufficient
evidence to warrant a criminal ’prosecution of the nature
which would affect an inquest.    If that happens then as
soon as it is conveniently possible we will resume.    I
think it is only fair to say I anticipate that assuming
the DPP takes that view, we will not be resuming the next
day, because a lot of further work will have to be done by
me to (a) re-absorb it all and (b) to decide which
witnesses to call and so on.    However, as soon as
reasonably possible we will resume and conclude the
inquests.

     That is scenario 1.   If the DPP decides to prosecute
for an offence which falls within Section 16 of the
Coroner's Act, and for all practical purposes the only
real one which I think is relevant in that section is
manslaughter.   The other ones are murder, infanticide,
reckless driving and aiding and abetting a suicide, so I
don't think any of the others can be within contemplation.
However, assume for a minute that he were to decide he
wanted to prosecute somebody for manslaughter, or some
corporation or more than one - it has nothing to do with
me, that is a matter entirely for the DPP - then as soon
as a person is charged with such an offence, Section 16(1)
of the Coroner's Act provides that I am informed by the
Clerk of the Magistrates' Court and there are also
provisions for the DPP to let me know in certain
circumstances and the Section then goes on:

     "The Coroner shall, in the absence of reason to the
     contrary, adjourn the inquest until after the
     conclusion of the relevant criminal proceedings..."

It goes on to say:

     "...and if a Jury has been summoned may,   if he thinks
     fit, discharge them."

                        - 12 -
                                                                    THE CORONER


                          Now what happens in practice is when a person - after all,
                          we have sufficient cases of people who do get charged
                          under this Section - I, and I think nearly all Coroners,
                          adjourn as we have to.    Then because of various other
                          sub-sections in that section, we wait for the outcome, and
                          it is normal practice not to resume the inquest after the
                          c onclusion of the criminal proceedings.   Now I am not
                          going to announce at this stage what I will do in these .
                      B   particular inquests, apart from saying that it is normal
                          practice not to resume and to hear the rest of the
                          evidence.   The reason for this is because of course the
                          evidence will have been fully explored in the Crown Court.
                          It does not actually say that in the Act but I am sure
                          that is what was behind the thinking when these provisions
                          were being drafted.

                               As I say, it is the normal practice not to resume,
                          but I am not announcing at this stage what I intend to do.
                          We will let people know if and •when the time arrives.
                          This does not mean to say there will be a prosecution.
                          It does not mean to say there will not.    I am just
                          explaining to you what may happen.   There are two
                          possibilities.    One, that you might be back to hear a lot
                      D   more evidence.  Two, just for a formal morning while we
                          adjourn under Section 16 and then for practical purposes
                          nothing more, or you might even be back at the end of the
                          criminal proceedings, but I will let you know when the
                          time arises.   I don't want to anticipate either decisions
                          or actions by me.

                               That was a little interlude, nothing to do with
                          today, just so you know how things worked.

                                  Now to return to today.  Because of the limitations
                          which I have already described to you, I have decided I
                          will not be calling any South Yorkshire Police Officers.
                          In fact we will be calling very few witnesses to give viva
                          voce evidence.      In other words, orally, apart from these
                          Presenting Officers.     What we have done is we have
                          prepared summaries of the evidence for each individual
                          d e c eased and the Officers will present those summaries.
                          The summaries have been prepared in such a way that they
                          comply with, the rule, if you like, which I have laid down
                          as to the scope of these inquests, so you are going to
                          hear summaries from Police Officers.      They have already
                          taken the oath so they are going to tell the truth as they
                          know it.      However, you must remember, and it is a
                          terribly important point to grasp, that they were not
                          there and they are recounting to you what other people are
                          saying.      All right?   They have done it to the best of
                          their ability and I have gone through every single file.
                          They are about as big as t his.     They look like that.
                          There are ninety-five of those.      Some summaries- 1 Felt
                          needed possible re-thinking in places.     I have drawn it to
                      H                            - 13 -



J. L. H arph am Ltd                                                                       16
                                                                  THE CORONER


                          the Officers' attention.  We have done our best in order
                          to get these summaries as accurate and as fair as we can.
                          That is not to say there may not be errors in them.    I
                          expect if there are, my colleagues down here will draw
                          those to my attention, in particular you, Mr. Fraser, and
                          any other solicitors who represent the bereaved.

                               We have allowed the solicitors for the bereaved and
                      B   Mr. Fraser to see the summaries.  We have not circulated
                          them to other firms.   You may feel that is unfair, but I
                          did spend quite a bit of time thinking about this and on
                          reflection I don't think it is because the summaries, as I
                          have already explained, are drafted within the limits of
                          the proceedings and their only objective is to disclose
                          the who, when and where of the deceased.    It was they who
                          needed to see them.  I think you will have plenty of
                      C   opportunity, because of the way they are read, if there is
                          anything you need to pick up I am sure you will be able to
                          do it without any prejudice to your clients' rights.

                               In addition to the summaries, we will hear post
                          mortem evidence.   Certainly in the beginning we.are going
                          to have the pathologists here to give the evidence
                      D   themselves.   There may be a few cases where we don't need
                          a pathologist and we will just deal with it on paper.
                          However, at the present time the arrangements are that if
                          need be the pathologists will be here for every single
                          inquest because we want the families to be able to hear
                          what the pathologist has to say for themselves, from him
                          or her as the case may be.

                      E        Then there are one or two other little bits of
                          evidence, mainly dealing with the registration
                          particulars.   I have had various forms signed and there
                          is the opening of the inquest which I did two or three
                          days after the event in order to ‘enable.people to have the
                          bodies of their loved ones back and in order to enable
                          them to arrange for the funerals, because as you can
                          appreciate, I am sure, one of the things that everybody
                      F   wants when a tragedy like this strikes them is they want
                          to be near their loved one and they want to be able to
                          arrange the funeral.    If we have got all the bodies in
                          Sheffield and all the families are in Liverpool or London
                          or wherever then that creates a great deal of problems.
                          I opened the inquests very, very quickly, in fact, after
                          the event in order to try to satisfy people's legitimate
                          needs in that r.espect.
                      G
                               At the time I realised we were likely to make some
                          mistakes in the opening evidence because we were doing it
                          so fast we did not really have time to double check
                          everything, but I decided in the interests of speed it was
                          better to do that than to wait until I could cross every
                          "t" and dot every "i", and I felt if we did need to make
                      H                           - 14 -



J. L. H arph am Ltd                                                                     17
                                                                  THE CORONER


                          much smaller, more intimate court, and it will be a lot
                          easier for everybody.  We will all be closer together and
                          we will all be able to see that much better.   I think
                          that is going to be the easiest way for all of us to know
                          what we are talking about in any particular case.

                               We will probably bind a copy of the plan into the
                          transcripts, which I will mention in a moment.  That does
                          not really affect you, but if we have referred to a plan
                          the record, if you like, will have a copy of it bound in,
                          at least the master copy will certainly have that.

                               I have already said we will not be calling many
                          witnesses, definitely no South Yorkshire Police Officers
                          and we are not calling any stewards or, for that matter,
                          club officials either.

                               Now I very briefly want to turn to the rules.    I am
                          not going to take you through all these rules and I am
                          going to be selective, but I ought just to say this:   that
                          under Rule 20(1)(b ) I am entitled to disallow any question
                          which is not relevant or which I consider to be improper.
                          That does not mean rude, but not proper for the purposes
                      D   of an inquest.   I do not think that is going to happen
                          but it may be that occasionally a question will be asked
                          which I consider to be outside the scope.    If that is so
                          then I will just have to say that I am not allowing that,
                          but we will see as we go along.

                                There is an important rule, Rule 22, which I will
                          read because although it is not relevant at this stage, it
                      E   is a rule which has to be borne in mind at all inquests
                          and I think it is worth knowing it at this stage.   Rule 22
                          says:

                               "No witness at an inquest shall be obliged to answer
                               any question tending to incriminate himself."

                          In other words, you cannot make somebody answer a question
                      F   which might make them liable to some criminal prosecution,
                          what ever that might be.

                               Sub-paragraph (2):

                               "Where it appears to the Coroner that the witness has
                               been asked such a question the Coroner shall inform
                               the witness that he may refuse to answer."
                      G
                          Now you will appreciate because of the limits which we
                          have got on the inquest nobody is likely to be asked any
                          questions which fall within this rule at this stage.

                               Rule 24 provides   that:

                      H                             - 15 -



J. L. H arph am Ltd                                                                     19
                                         THE CORONER


     "Anybody whose conduct is likely to be called in
     question is entitled to be present."

That is one of the reasons why we have got representatives
here, but again because of the way the evidence is going
to be presented, if a person's conduct is likely to be
called in question it is not likely to happen at these
hearings, but it is still wise and proper, and I am
greatly obliged to all of you for coming because I think
at the opening at least you ought to be here so that you
know what is happening and how we are dealing with it.

     Rules 26 and 27 deal with the question of
adjournments in certain circumstances and I am not going
to deal with these now but they are the rules, if you
like, which support adjournments when the DPP gets
involved.

     I have already drawn Rule '36 to your attention.   I
want to remind you of it.    It says specifically that
apart from those matters that are mentioned in that rule
we don't deal with other things.    In particular it is
clear from that rule we don't add riders to the verdicts.
At one time juries used to say, "So-and-so died as a
result of this and what is more we make the following
twenty recommendations", or whatever it might be.     That
is no longer permitted.   Some people do not like that, of
course, but that is how it is.

     We now turn to Rule 37 and this is more a matter for
the lawyers than for you, but Rule 37 makes provision for
evidence to be produced by way of documents.    In other
words, it is permissible in certain circutnstances not to
call the witness at all but just to read his evidence, or
such part of it as is appropriate and relevant.    That is,
if you like, the reason why it would be possible to take,
say, pathological evidence without the pathologist being
here because we could just use the PM report as
documentary evidence.   In many cases the evidence is not
actually controversial which is one of the criteria.     You
do not use this rule for evidence which is contentious,
shall we say.

     The problem with the rule is that strictly speaking I
ought to tell you at this stage every single item of
documentary evidence we are going to call, together with
the names and the addresses of the deponents and together
with a summary of the content of the document.  Well, I
have to tell you in these particular inquests that is an
impossible task and there is a further sub-clause which
says you are entitled to see the document.   Now we have
got a lot of problems with this where we want, for
example, to refer to parts of the evidence of people who
are within the folders, or, if you like, on which the
                                                                   THE CORONER


                        summary is based.  What I propose to do is not to give you
                        this information at this stage, mainly because I am not in
                        a position to do so.   That is partly due to the fact that
                        it depends to a certain extent upon what questions arise
                        after the summaries are presented.    However, if it were
                        to be that we needed to amplify, or for some reason I felt
                        it would be helpful to read .an extract from a statement
                        which I have in respect of any particular deceased person,
                    B   I would propose and I hope you will agree, to read the
                        relevant bit that is relevant to the proceedings within
                        the limits that I have set.    I will be prepared to give
                        you a copy, if you like, of that little bit, with
                        everything else blanked out in the statement because we
                        cannot disclose at this stage the statements because of
                        the DPP's involvement.

                             However, on the other hand it will all be transcribed
                        so you may find if we do read anything out of statements
                        you will actually have, if you ’request it that is, in
                        black and white what has been said.

                             I think if     we do read extracts -I have   gone through
                        these files, as I have explained to you already and I have
                    D   marked the bits that I consider would be either relevant
                        or readable, or     perhaps the other way round,  if necessity
                        demands.   I hope that will be acceptable to you.    I
                        think it is the best I can do at the present time in the
                        circumstances in which I and all of us find ourselves.

                             One other point, just in order to make it absolutely
                        crystal clear, if I were to read an extract out of the
                    E   folders, so- there is no misunderstanding on this point,
                        what I read is an edition.    It is not the complete
                        statement and it may on occasions be bits pieced together
                        from the statement which I have picked out.   For example,
                        let us imagine there is a particular statement which deals
                        with where a person has been found and for some reason I
                        want to read that.   That may be in three sections on three
                        different pages.    I may join that all out as I read it.
                        I will deliberately leave out any criticism of any person
                        for the reasons which I have already explained to you.
                        Conversely, I have marked it in such a way as to leave out
                        any praise of any person, because otherwise, if I were to
                        read, if you like, all the goods bits about people, you
                        may get the wrong impression of the import of the
                        document.    In other words, if I do read something - and
                        it is unlikely I will do it often, the chances are I may
                        not do it at all - but if I do do it I want you to
                        understand that it is an edited portion of the transcript,
                        but that I am reading as fairly as I can the evidence
                        relating to what we are dealing with at the moment.

                             Have I made that clear?     I want   to be sure you have
                        understood this point.
                    H                           - 18 -



J. L.JHarpham Ltd                                                                        21
