                                                                                    '<Cy    —    *
SUppo^                                                                                     SU ppQ^

                    Hillsborough Family Support Group




Ref: CO/582/99

9 March 1999

The Crown Office
Royal Court o f Justice
Strand
London WC2A 2LL

Dear Sirs

R y SYPA ex parte Chief Constable o f South Yorkshire

1 am advised by leading Counsel that the Clerk to South Sefton M agistrates’ Court has an
interest in the above matter. Whilst concluding that it would not be appropriate to be
represented at the hearing, the Clerk has accepted that it is appropriate that he submit affidavit
evidence about the matter to ensure that the Divisional Court is in full possession o f all the
facts. Please find enclosed his affidavit.


Yours faithfully




Ann Adlington
Solicitor




         Phone 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151 236 1936. E Mail info@hfsg.org
       1st Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR
In the High Court of Justice
Queens Bench Division
                                                             v    £
                                             ^        c9Q-'£ o " .

        IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATIO&FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW



                    Regina -v- South Yorkshire Police Authority


                                    and Ann Adlington


                 Ex parte Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police




I, Dennis Luty, make oath and say as follows:-

1.     I am a Solicitor of the Supreme Court currently employed as the Clerk to the Justices
       at the South Sefton Magistrates’ Court, Merseyside.

2.     On the 24th June, 1998 Informations were laid before this Court by Ann Adlington
       alleging that David Duckenfield and Bernard Murray had committed offences of
       manslaughter, wilful neglect to perform a public duty and (in relation to Duckenfield
       alone) doing an act tending / intending to pervert justice.

3.     Summonses were issued against the defendants which were returnable on the 17th
       July, 1998 at 10.00 a.m.

4.     Following the issue of the summonses, Winckworth and Pemberton (Solicitors) and
       Walker, Morris (Solicitors) who represented the defendants, contacted me both by
       letter and by telephone asserting that the Court had no jurisdiction to deal with these
       matters. I was also contacted by the Informant, Ann Adlington by letter and telephone
       in relation to this issue.

5.     I took the view that the South Sefton Court had jurisdiction to deal with these offences
        but there was an argument that the summonses were ineffective unless the defendants
        submitted to the jurisdiction of this Court. Accordingly, after further correspondence
        and telephone discussion with all parties, it was agreed that the proceedings should
        be brought forward to the 10thJuly and that the Informant would apply for them to be
        withdrawn.

6.     On the 10th July in the absence of all parties, proceedings were withdrawn and the
       Court made an order for the defendants’ costs to be taxed and paid from central funds
       in accordance with Section 16 of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985.
 7.       1was aware that proceedings were re-commenced in the Leeds Magistrates’ Court
          later that month.

8.        The defendants’ solicitors each submitted their claims for costs in Septemberl 998. I
          was extremely surprised at the level of costs which were being claimed, particularly
          in view of the fact that neither of the defendants or their solicitors had actually
          appeared before the Court in relation to this matter. In accordance with my normal
          practice I requested that the solicitors should supply to me their full files of papers
          applying the provisions of Regulation 6(5) of the Costs in Criminal Cases (General)
          Regulations 1986.

9.       Both solicitors submitted their full files of papers to me and when I perused those
          documents I discovered a clear indication within them that the South Yorkshire Police
         Authority had agreed to pay the defendants’ costs in relation to this matter. I therefore
          communicated with both solicitors suggesting that as the defendants themselves had
          not incurred costs, they were not entitled to be reimbursed. I drew attention to the
         case of R. v. Miller (Raymond) and another 1983 3 All E R 186.

10.      Once again, there was further correspondence in relation to this matter, the solicitors
         arguing that their clients had in fact incurred costs in accordance with the ratio of Miller
         and that I should therefore undertake an appropriate taxation.

11.      Early last month, I became aware that an issue had arisen between the Chief Constable
         of the South Yorkshire Police and the South Yorkshire Police Authority in relation to
         funding in this matter. I also became aware that my decision in relation to taxation
         may be subject to judicial review if I declined to pay the defendants’ costs.

12.      On the 11th February I wrote to both solicitors advising them of my provisional
         conclusion that the defendants had not themselves incurred costs. I drew attention to
         the fact that I was aware of the pending judicial review in relation to the Police
         Authority decision and advised that 1would await the outcome of that hearing before
         I made a final decision.




Sworn by Dennis Luty

         d L & y . . ....

at Bootle

this
 lis ^    day of March, 1999


Before me


Solicitor / Commissioner for Oaths
