p a rlia m e n ta ry u n d e r
se c re ta ry of sta te

  Our Ref:               CRN/91 66/21/1   (S)




   Thank you for your letter of 9 April to the Home Secretary on behalf
   of your constituents, Mr & Mrs Aspinall of                   ~
          about the Hillsborough inquest.  I am sorry for the delay in
   ieapunuing.
   I should first explain that although the Home Secretary has a general
   responsibility for the law under which coroners work, he has no
   authority to intervene in or comment upon the way in which a coroner,
   who is an independent judicial officer, carries out his duties in any
   particular case.

   It is a matter for the coroner to determine the conduct of the
   inquest and to decide what evidence to admit.  Therefore, I am afraid
   that I am unable to comment on points 1, 3 and 4 of your letter.

   The coroner, Dr Popper, has been consulted about the matters raised
   and in relation to your second point about the inquest being heard in
   separate stages, he states that in April and May last year he agreed
   to take evidence in respect of each individual deceased.  But because
   the Director of Public Prosecutions had not yet completed his
   inquiries, and it was important not to prejudice any decision he
   might take, the evidence which was taken was limited to questions of
   who the deceased were, when and where the death occurred and matters
   of a non-controversial nature.  The coroner's recollection is that
   the solicitors representing the vast majority of the bereaved were
   satisfied about his decision to take evidence at that stage. As soon
   as the Director of Public Prosecutions announced his decision, the
   coroner made arrangements to resume the inquest which recommenced on
   19 November 1990.




                                                  /On the question




   Eddie O'Hara Esq MP
On the question of negligence (your fifth point), it is not the
function of an inquest to determine liability.  The Coroners Rules
specifically prohibit the framing of an inquest verdict in such a way
as to appear to determine any question of criminal liability on the
part of a named person or civil liability.  Any issue of civil or
criminal liability is a matter for the civil or criminal courts.

Finally, you asked why the families of the deceased had to
bear the costs of legal representation.  Legal aid is not available
for coroners inquests and I understand from the Lord Chancellor, who
has responsibility for legal aid, that the reason for this is that
the proceedings are generally informal and are concerned with the
facts surrounding a death rather than issues such as civil or
  yiminal liability. Legal representation is, therefore, generally
considered unnecessary.  However, legal aid and assistance may be
sought before the hearing from a solicitor under the Green Form
Scheme.

I hope that you find these observations helpful and I would be
grateful if you can convey to Mr & Mrs Aspinall my deep sympathy for
the loss of their son in such tragic circumstances.




                                                      PETER LLOYD
