From:      ROBERT CLIFFORD     (RCLIFFORD)
To:        QAGEOGD1:WPO TE S T:w p 4 0 0 :P 1 D M .P1 A P I :"Peter EDMUNDSON"
Date:      Tuesday 5 May, 1998         5:42pm
Subject:    FW: HILLSBOROUGH DEBATE -Reply

I have added a couple of questions and answers on the point
about the range of verdicts and the families' wish to present
their own medical evidence (attached).

On the question of the 3.15pm cut off time, perhaps your
existing Q&A (No.18) could be strengthened by reference to the
Divisional Court judgement which said that the coroner's
decision was reasonable, sustainable, and compassionate, and
was based on the coroner being satisfied that there was
overwhelming pathological evidence that permanent irrecoverable t
damage had by then been suffered by all the deceased.

I am not sure what lies behind the reference to "medical
consideration at inquest", and I would have thought that the
point was probably already covered.

It might be helpful for me to attend, but I have a meeting
tomorrow afternoon. Perhaps I could let you know more
definitely tomorrow morning whether I can make it.
From:      Peter EDMUNDSON ("Peter EDMUNDSON")
To:        P0ISE1.QAGEOGD1(RCLIFFORD)
Date:      Tuesday 5 May, 1998   3:05pm
Subject:    FW: HILLSBOROUGH DEBATE


Can you offer anything on the inquest related matters? We are
due to brief
the Home Secretary tomorrow in the House at 1630. Do you want
to c o m e .

From: RUSHTON Linda
T o : SUMNER Clare
Cc: GRANATT Mike [QAG]; OWEN Ed; GAFOOR Tracey; EDMUNDSON
Peter; PUGH Paul
Subject: HILLSBOROUGH DEBATE
Date: 05 May 1998 15:00
Priority: High

Clare

During our telephone conversation this morning, I said that I
would let you
have the information that Mr Howarth obtained when he recently
met with
fellow Merseyside MPs and Colin Pickthall to discuss the
upcoming
Hillsborough debate.

According to his information there will be approximately 14
speakers, of
whom only two will call for a new inquiry (namely Joe Benton MP
and Eddie
O'Hara M P ) . The main subject areas that they are likely to
raise are:

Range of verdict available to the Coroner and the 3:15 cut off
'Narrowness' of terms of reference of Stuart-Smith Report
Medical consideration at Inquest and the complaints that the
families were
not allowed to present their own medical evidence

Hope this h e l p s .


Linda


CC:          P1D M. P1API("Matthew PYNE","Michael WARD","Paul PUG
HILLSBOROUGH: SUPPLEMENTARY Q&A BRIEFING FOR THE
STATEMENT

Q.   Is the range of verdicts available to the coroner’s court too narrow to enable
     the inquest to reach proper conclusions?

A.   The Coroners Rules suggest a number of standard wordings to be used when
     completing the coroner’s inquisition. The object is to standardise conclusions as
     to the death across the country and to make statistics on inquests more consistent
     and reliable. The wordings are not mandatory and coroners and their juries are
     free to use alternatives if they wish to do so.

     Alternative descriptions of how the deceased came by his or her death must,
     however, be factual and not appear to attribute civil blame or criminal liability to
     a named person. That would be beyond the remit of the coroner’s enquiry.

Q.   Why were the families not allowed to present their own medical evidence at
     the inquest?

A.   An inquest is an enquiry conducted by the coroner. Only the coroner, not the
     families of the deceased, nor any other interested person, has any right to call
     witnesses. This is consistent with the inquisitorial nature of the inquest system. It
     is not a trial, and there are no issues to be determined between ’parties’.

     It is, of course, open to anyone who believes that they have relevant evidence
     about a death to contact the coroner, but that is not to say that the coroner needs
     to call them at the inquest - the evidence may be irrelevant to the function of the
     inquest, or merely repeat evidence given by others.

     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith found that written statements by prospective witnesses
     were available to the coroner, but the witnesses were not called because the
     issues were fully dealt with by others. Their evidence had nothing material to
     add.
