                                                              W A L K E R
                                                              M O R R I S
                                                                      S o li c it o rs


               Kings Court, 12 King Street, Leeds, LSI 2HL. Telephone 0113 283 2500.
          Facsimile 0113 245 9412. Document Exchange 12051 Leeds 24. E-mail info@walkermorris.co.uk
                                      Web: http//www.walkermorris.co.uk



FAO Mr Nigel Cadbury                                                                Our ref           RBM/BQW/MURRAY
Stipendary Magistrates
Leeds Magistrates' Court
DX 706961
LEEDS PARK SQUARE

                                                                                    10 September 1999


Dear Mr Cadbury

R -v- Duckenfleld and M urray

You may know that Mr Justice Hooper is to be the Trial Judge in this case and he held an
initial plea and directions hearing at Leeds on 3 September. In relation to video evidence, the
following Order was made “that any video material which is now in the possession of the
Court may be released to the Defendants and or the Prosecution on the undertaking that the
Partner of the Solicitors representing the Defendants, or in the case of the Prosecution, Miss
Adlington, that the video material so released will be held to the Order of the Court and
returned when called upon to do so”.

I enclose a copy of the letter that I sent to the Court consequent upon that Order. I have now
received advices from the that the only video that is in their possession at this moment in time
is the “compilation video”. I have further been told that the rest of the videos which were
produced to the Court under the disclosure made by witness summons to assistant Chief
Constable Daines are locked in a safe in the Leeds Magistrates’ Court.

It seems to me that the Order of Mr Justice Hooper would require those videos still with the
Magistrates to be transmitted to the Crown Court for the purposes of this particular Order and
any other action that the Judge may decide.

Obviously it is open to you to speak to Mr Justice Hooper if you feel that is necessary. I shall
look forward to hearing from your Clerk as to the action that has been taken. I have notified
the Crown Court that I have written to you in this regard.

Yours sincerely

                                                          - ^ 1




R B M anning
PARTNER
Enc




  A list o f the partners' names is open to inspection at the above address. Regulated by the Law Society in the conduct o f investment business.
                                              H:\WP\CRIM-MAT\RBM\REVffiW2\murray48.doc
