                                                                             (1) C.W.P. Newell
                                                                              (2) First Affidavit
                                                              (3) Sworn on behalf of Respondent t ^
                                                                             (4) Sworn 22.3.99.

                                                                                    CO/856/99

IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE

QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION


BETWEEN:


                                         REGINA

                                            -v-

                         DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
                                                                                  Respondent
                                      Ex parte
                            DAVID GODFREY DUCKENFIELI)
                                        and
                              BERNARD DEAN MURRAY
                                                                                    Applicants




                                    AFFIDAVIT




I, CHRISTOPHER WILLIAM PAUL NEWELL, of 50 Ludgate Hill, London EC4M 7EX,
MAKE OATH and say as follows:


1.    I am Director of Casework of the Crown Prosecution Service at the above address and

      it was I who took the decision in this case on behalf of the CPS and the DPP not to

      intervene in the private prosecution against Messrs Duckenfield and Murray. I refer

      to my letters of 1 February 1999 to the solicitors for Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray,

      in which I sought to set out the reasons which led me to that decision. I am now asked

      to elaborate on my conclusion that any public interest factors tending against
     prosecution did not clearly outweigh those in favour and on my conclusion in relation

     to the specific charge against Mr Duckenfield alone of attempting to pervert the course

     of justice.



PUBLIC INTEREST FACTORS

2.   As I now recall, the public interest factors tending against prosecution which I

     considered were as follows.

     (1)     Previous reviews of the case, in particular those carried out by the DPP when

             considering the question whether criminal proceedings should be taken against

             Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray and the more recent report of Lord Justice

             Stuart-Smith.

     (2)     The fact that the Applicants had been told on previous occasions that the DPP

             did not intend to prosecute.

     (3)     The delay which had occurred between the commission of the alleged offences

             and the commencement of this prosecution and its likely effect on the

             Applicants, although I took the view that delay may be offset by the seriousness

             of the alleged offences (as is reflected in paragraph 6.5(d) of the Code for

             Crown Prosecutors) (“the Code”).

     (4)     The effect of the delay on the evidence, for example in terms of the potential

             im p airm ent   of the recollections of witnesses.

     (5)     The assertion made on behalf of Mr Murray of ill-health, although I noted that

             no medical evidence had been put forward in support of this assertion and that,

             as again reflected in the Code (at paragraph 6.5(e)), ill-health may be offset by
            the seriousness of the offence.



3.   As against these factors tending against prosecution, there was in my view one

     extremely important factor in favour of prosecution, namely the very serious nature of

     the alleged offences, in particular, the alleged offences of manslaughter.         In my

     opinion, the allegation that two senior police officers were responsible for the deaths

     of a number of people as a result of criminal negligence was a very grave allegation.



4.   Paragraph 6.2 of the Code reflects the considerable weight attached by the CPS to the

     seriousness of the alleged offence when seeking to strike the right balance as to the

     factors for and against prosecution. (I refer also to the opening words of paragraph

     6.4). Having carefully considered the factors tending against prosecution and this

     extremely important factor in favour of it, I came to the firm conclusion that the factors

     tending against prosecution did not clearly outweigh what I considered to be the very

     strong public interest factor in favour of prosecution.



THE ADDITIONAL CHARGE AS AGAINST MR DUCKENFIELD ALONE

5.   I was fully aware of the seriousness of this additional charge. I also tentatively

     concluded that partial intervention (i.e. intervening in order to take over one charge but

     not intervening in relation to the other charges) was in law open to the CPS and I

     proceeded on that assumption. However, the existing policy did not cover the situation

     which arose in this case, namely where the conclusion was reached that there was

     clearly a case to answer in relation to some of the charges but not in relation to others.
      (I can say that with some confidence, since I had overall responsibility for formulating

      the policy). I had therefore to consider the question which arose in relation to this

      additional charge without the benefit of any specific or settled policy. Having carefully

      considered the question, I concluded that it was in fact inappropriate to intervene only

      to take over (with a view to discontinuing) this additional charge.



6.    First, partial intervention was not, in my view, either appropriate or desirable. It

      seemed to me that the DPP should either intervene so as to take over the proceedings

      in their entirety or not at all. To have intervened partially would still have left criminal

      proceedings in place in relation to the other charges which included the even more

      serious charge of manslaughter.       Secondly, I took into account the fact that Mr

      Duckenfield would not be left without any remedy in relation to this additional charge.

      On the contrary, he would be entitled to invite the Magistrates’ Court to dismiss it on

      the basis that there was no case to answer. Thirdly, the charge arose out of essentially

      the same events as the events which gave rise to the other charges and thus those events

      would be scrutinised in any event.



SWORN at SM ^
                         £ CHAA T&lV
this Z'l— day of March 1999



Before me,
             OfiSCU roATA-1-7VH c o ^
                             Solicitor/Gemmissioner for Oaths
                                   £   0 / 856/0
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE

OUEEN’S BENCH DTVTSTON


BETWEEN:


                REGINA

                   -v-

 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
                         Respondent
              Ex parte
    DAVID GODFREY DUCKENFIELD
                and
      BERNARD DEAN MURRAY
                          Applicants




            AFFIDAVIT




           Treastffy Solicitor
         Queen Anne’s Chambers
             28 Broadway
           London SW1H 9JS

         Ref. L98/8265K/SJR/D 1

          Counsel’s ref. C.64241
