jf24oct. 1




BACKGROUND NOTE


1. On 15 April 1989 ninety-five people died at the Hillsborough football stadium in Sheffield.
The then Home Secretary ordered a public inquiry. This was undertaken by Lord Justice
Taylor, whose report, published in January 1990, reached various conclusions on the case
of the disaster and made various recommendations to avoid similar incidents in the future.


2. Subsequently, the then Sheffield coroner resumed the inquest into the deaths. This had
been adjourned pending the conclusion of the public inquiry and the consideration of possible
charges by the DPP. In the event, the DPP decided not to prosecute anyone in respect of
the disaster). The inquest, which was held with a jury, lasted over one hundred days and
returned verdicts of accidental death on all the victims. It involved 520 appearances by
witnesses and 540 exhibits.


3.      Six sets of relatives, all from Liverpool, were dissatisfied with the outcome of the
inquests and applied for judicial review of the verdicts. They included the mother of Kevin
Williams, who is a constituent of Sir Malcolm Thornton MP.


4. One of the main grounds on which judicial review was sought was the coroner’s decision
to impose a cut-off time for the evidence which he would hear of 3 .15pm on the day of the
disaster. (This was the time of arrival of the first ambulance and the coroner took the view
that on the overwhelming pathological evidence available to him, permanent irrecoverable
damage had by then been suffered by all the deceased). The result of imposing this cut-off
point was that there was no inquiry into whether, or how far, the deaths were caused in part
by delay in calling the emergency services and any shortcomings in the response of the police
and emergency services after 3.15pm. It also meant that the evidence of two doctors, much
of which fell after the cut-off point, was not considered.


5. The Divisional Court looked at the evidence heard by the inquest in the case of Kevin
Williams. They noted that where a specific piece or pieces of evidence had arisen which
might have suggested that one of the deceased had been alive after 3.15pm, the coroner had
shown flexibility by going into it. The Court was told that the evidence given by a special
constable, Deborah Martin, consisted of two statements, one indicating that she had seen
Kevin Williams alive in the mortuary at 3.50pm and the second which failed to support the
first statement. It was alleged that Miss Martin had been put under pressure by the West
Yorkshire police to make the second statement. It was also alleged that PC Burder, (an off-
duty constable from Merseyside Police) had seen Kevin alive after 3 .15pm and had also been
pressurised by the police into changing his story. The Court took the view that there had
been overwhelming evidence that Kevin was in fact dead by 3.15pm and that it would not
be right to quash the verdicts and order a new inquest on the strength of these allegations
against the investigating police officers. The Court also took into account the fact that a
Home Office pathologist, D r Ian West, having been asked to consider the post-mortem
reports and photographs some 4Vi years after the deaths, considered it a realistic possibility
that Kevin had still been alive after 3.15pm.      The Court took the view that this fresh
evidence, even supposing, which they are doubted, that they had the power to consider it,
was of far too tenuous a nature to justify ordering a new inquest.


6.   There has been no appeal against the judicial review decision and the time limit for
appealing has long since lapsed.


Cook report


7. The Cook Report, which was published in June 1994 repeated the allegation that Kevin
Williams had been still alive some time after 3.15pm.


8. The Cook report suggested to Sir Malcolm Thornton during the programme that Deborah
M artin’s evidence was grounds for re-opening the inquest, and the MP agreed.


Purpose of inquests


9. The purpose of an inquest is limited in law to ascertaining the identity of the deceased;
how, when and where he cam by his death; and the particulars required for death
registration. The Coroners Rules 1984 provide that neither the coroner nor the jury shall
express an opinion on any other matters.      In addition, the rules specifically prohibit the
framing of an inquest verdict in such a way as to appear to determine any question of
criminal liability on the part of a named person, or civil liability. These are more properly
matters for determination by the civil or criminal courts.


The coroner


10. Coroners are appointed by local authorities for the purpose of investigating any sudden
or unexplained death. They must be either doctors or lawyers of at least 5 years’ standing.
Although appointed and paid by local authorities, coroners are not local authority employees,
but independent judicial officers who carry out their duties in accordance with procedures
laid down in the Coroners Act 1988 and the Coroners Rules 1984.


11.   The Home Secretary has a general responsibility for coroners law, but he has no
authority to comment upon, or intervene in, the way in which coroners carry out their duties
in individual cases.   Coroners decisions and actions are judicially reviewable, and, in
particular, sl3 of the Coroners Act 1988 enables application to be made to the High Court,
with the authority of the Attorney General for a fresh inquest to be held in cases where the
applicant considers that it is necessary or desirable, in the interests of justice, for this to
happen because of insufficiency of inquiry, irregularity of proceedings or the discovery of
new facts or evidence. In the Hillsborough case, the Attorney General’s fiat was sought by
the relatives in April 1992 to apply to the High Court for the inquest verdicts to be quashed
and a fresh series of inquests held, by the Attorney General refused his fiat in August 1992,
having concluded that there was nothing to justify authorising an application to the High
Court for a new inquest, as the application would have no reasonable prospect of establishing
that it was necessary or desirable for a fresh inquest to be heard.
