E.R                                                                           ©
          From:        P R C Storr                 cc:   Miss Hellmuth
                       E Division                        Mr Fries
                                                         Mr Moorey
          Ext          3777                              Mrs Keswick

          Ref          CRN/91 67/4/1

          Date         1 May 1992




          Mr Barnes


          HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER INQUEST


          The purpose of this submission is to inform Ministers that the
          Attorney-General has received and is considering a formal
          application under section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 for his
          consent to the making of an application to the High Court for
          an Order quashing the inquisitions i.e. the finding of the
          inquest in respect of six of the victims of the Hillsborough
          disaster. The application has been reported by the press and the
          decision of the Attorney-General, when it is reached, is likely
          to stimulate further media interest.

          Background

          2.   On 15 April 1989 95 people died at the Hillsborough football
          stadium in Sheffield. The then Home Secretary ordered a public
          inquiry. This was undertaken by Lord Justice Taylor whose report
          which was published in January 1990, reached various conclusions
          on the cause of the event and made various recommendations to
          avoid similar incidents in future.

          3.   Subsequently, the then Sheffield coroner, Dr Popper, resumed
          the inquest into the deaths. This had been adjourned pending the
          conclusion of the public inquiry and the consideration of
          possible criminal charges by the DPP.    The inquest lasted over
          100 days and returned verdicts of accidental death. It involved
          over 520 appearances by witnesses and 540 exhibits were examined.
          The costs of the inquest were borne by Sheffield City Council
          which finances the coroners service. The coroner, Dr Popper, has
          now retired.

          Review of inquest

               Under section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 a person may
          apply, with the consent of the Attorney-General, to the High
          Court for the inquest to be quashed and a fresh inquest to be
          held either by the same coroner or by another coroner from the
          same administrative area.  The High Court may take such action
          if it is satisfied that, whether by reason of fraud, rejection
          of evidence, irregularity of proceedings,     insufficiency of


      V
    inquiry, the discovery of new facts or evidence or otherwise,
    it is necessary or desirable in the interest of justice that
    another inquest should be held.

    Conclusion

    6.   The Attorney-General is now considering whether to give his
    consent for the application to go to the High Court.    We shall
    let Ministers know the outcome.




                                            P R C   STORR




V
