                                  Witness; Ann Marie Adlington
                                          Age; Over 21
                                      Occupation; Solicitor
                          Address; 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR

This statement, consisting of 13 pages, each signed by me, is true to the best of my knowledge
and belief, and I make it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to be
prosecuted if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know to be false or do not believe to
be true.

Signed;

Dated 30 June 1999

1          I am a Solicitor employed by Liverpool City Council, working at the above address. I
          have been seconded to work as solicitor to the Hillsborough Family Support Group by
          the Council under section 137 of the Local Government Act 1972.

2         I laid the informations which instituted these criminal proceedings before the Leeds
          District Magistrates Court in July 1998 pursuant to a decision of the Group as a whole
          to bring a prosecution.

3         I make this statement to respond to factual assertions advanced in the written
          argument dated 7th June presented on behalf of David Duckenfield. This statement is
          intended to supplement the submissions made on behalf of the prosecution in the
          course of the review by the Crown Prosecution Service in 1998, when the defendants
          asked the CPS to take over and discontinue the prosecution. I attach as annexes the
          following documents, and adopt their contents;

                  Annex A;    Representations of 24* August 1998 and attachments;
                  Annex B,    Representations of 24* September 1998 and attachments ;
                  Annex C;    Representations of 2nd October 1998;
                  Annex D;    Representations of 9th October 1998.

4         I have waited until now to make this statement because I was expecting a skeleton
          argument and evidential material on behalf of Bernard Murray, and evidential material
          by way of press statements, which Mr Clegg QC told the court on 26* April would be
          supplied to me in advance of committal, and a week before the material went to the
          magistrate.

5         I have been told on 29 June 1999 that Mr Clegg’s argument is to be adopted on behalf
          of Bernard Murray. I have still not received the press material, but consider that I
          should lodge this statement in advance of committal nonetheless.

Signed;      (\ ./V I -                                       Witnessed;



                                                  1
The previous inquiries

         It is alleged, among other things, that the prosecution refuses to accept the conclusions
         of the Taylor Inquiiy, the “Scrutiny” of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, the verdict of the
         coroner’s court, the judgement of the Divisional Court and the decision of the DPP;
         and that a prosecution could have been brought a long time ago.

1        In order to deal with these arguments, it is necessary to consider the histoiy of the
         investigations into this case. The prosecution has always accepted the central findings
         of the Taylor Inquiry, which were endorsed in full by the Stuart-Smith “Scrutiny” of
         1997-8. I can speak about much of the histoiy with detailed personal knowledge.

8        I have worked for public authorities in Liverpool since 1974, except for five years
         when I studied to obtain a law degree, and then to qualify as a solicitor, between 1979
         and 1984. When the disaster occurred in 19891 was employed as senior solicitor for
         Merseyside Residuary Body, but on 19* November 19891 began work for Liverpool
         City Council as a special projects assistant. I had no involvement in the Taylor Inquiiy
         at all.

9        I was aware that in the immediate aftermath of the disaster Liverpool City Council had
         set up the Hillsborough Disaster Working Party. Part of its terms of reference was to
         establish the truth of the circumstances surrounding the disaster. Initially, I had no
         involvement with the Working Party.

10       In May 1990 I moved offices within the City Council. Shortly afterwards I became
         aware that some Hillsborough families made regular visits to a research officer in the
         next office. I was introduced to one of the families, who were having problems with
         their lawyer.

11       I was struck by the families’ anguish because I had the impression that the Inquiiy
         conducted by Lord Justice Taylor had got to the truth and had delivered findings which
         had satisfied the families. During the following months I was introduced to more
         families, who were deeply troubled at the progress of the investigations into their
         relatives’ deaths. The commonest complaint concerned the lack of disclosure by the
         various authorities of information relating to the deaths.

         The “mini-inquests” had been held in April and May 1990.1 learned that information
         supplied at the mini-inquest had been restricted to who the deceased were, when and
         where they died and the medical cause of death. The impression I got was that, rather
         than putting families’ minds at rest, these inquests had raised more questions than
         answers. Pathological evidence had been adduced in each case. The remaining
         “evidence” had consisted of a written summary of the evidence specific to each case
         which had been compiled by the West Midlands Police. The summaries had been read
         out by a West Midlands Police officer. The families had had no access to the witness
         statements supporting the summary. Thus, cross-examination had not been possible.
Signed                                                         w toesse d;



                                                 2
c




           The Coroner had ruled that he would not allow any controversial questions to be asked
           for fear of prejudicing the criminal investigation then being conducted by West
           Midlands Police on behalf of the DPP. Furthermore, I knew that some families were
           expressing doubts about the accuracy of the summaries by reason of the limited
           information they had obtained themselves from various sources, including survivors of
           the disaster.

    14     Another concern was that the pathological evidence that had indicated in eveiy case
           that death had been sudden and pain-free had been used by South Yorkshire Police in
           the High Court before Mr Justice Hidden, sitting in Liverpool in June and July 1990, to
           defeat claims for pre-death suffering.

    15     The families were represented by various solicitors acting as the “Steering Group of
           Solicitors”, who formed the “Hillsborough Steering Committee”. The most prominent
           of these were Douglas Fraser and Elizabeth Steele, who have had no involvement in
           the case since the Inquest. The solicitors do indeed seem to have agreed to the mini­
           inquest procedure, but I have subsequently learned that a number of families did not
           know that such agreement to the procedure had been given.

    16     My initial role in relation to the Hillsborough disaster was an informal one. I gave
           advice where I could and drafted letters for families who were in completely unknown
           territoiy. Apart from trying to obtain information as to the circumstances in which
           their relatives died, they were also having to tackle the complexities of the law relating
           to compensation. They were veiy clearly still grief-stricken, and many were unable to
           articulate their concerns and priorities.

    17     The Director of Public Prosecutions announced his decision not to prosecute on 30*
           August 1990.1 know that there was discussion with outside lawyers in the autumn of
           1990, which I heard about from families at the time, of the possibility of private
           prosecutions. I believe that there had also been discussion between some a number of
           families and lawyers at the end of the Taylor Inquiiy about the question of private
           prosecutions. Many people could not understand, in the light of the veiy clear findings
           in the Interim Report of Lord Taylor, how the Director could have come to a decision
           not to prosecute. There were suspicions of a cover-up.

            The prevailing view, however, in both years was that the authorities should proceed
           with their statutoiy investigations; the DPP in 1989; and the Coroner in 1990. This
            feeling was particularly strong in the autumn of 1990. Nearly a year and a half after the
            disaster, people wanted with deep yearning to discover more about the circumstances
            of the deaths, a desire which was stronger than a wish to see those identified as
           responsible by Lord Taylor punished. Nevertheless, it was considered by many of those
            desperate for the inquest to take place that fresh evidence might emerge in the course
            of the inquest which would justify a prosecution, as had happened in the Zeebrugge
            tragedy. In that case, after a coroner’s jury had returned verdicts of unlawful killing,
            the DPP had instituted a prosecution. The trial was heard at the Central Criminal Court
            in September and October 1990, and was followed in Liverpool with close interest.
    Signed;                                                        Witnessed;
                                                                                 kJ^v/UKOn^
                                                    3
     In the weeks preceding the resumed inquest in November 1990, it was proposed that
     the Steering Committee would instruct counsel to represent any bereaved families who
     were prepared to contribute towards the costs. It was initially suggested that families
     each make a contribution of £3,000. Some families were concerned that such a large
     number of divergent interests could not possibly be represented by a single legal
     representative at the resumed inquests.

20   Accordingly, I contacted a solicitor in private practice and arranged for him to meet
     some of the families who had expressed concern. The purpose of the meeting was to
     discuss the possibility that he might instruct junior counsel to act on behalf of
     approximately half a dozen families. From memoiy the families of the following
     deceased attended:- Ian Glover, Philip Hammond, Adam Spearritt, Peter Tootle and
     Gary Church.

21   It was apparent that the interests of even this small number of families were veiy
     different, and that, if they were represented together by one lawyer, a false impression
     might be created that they, as a group, had a single interest separate from the single
     interest of the remaining families. In the end, most of these families chose to stay with
     the Hillsborough Steering Committee. Certainly, as far as the family of Philip
     Hammond was concerned, they were faced with the huge dilemma of either remaining
     with the Steering Committee who had been involved through the Taylor Inquiiy and
     the mini-inquests, or changing to somebody who did not have this background
     knowledge. Of course, if these families had withdrawn from the Steering Committee
     group, the costs to be borne by the other families would have increased.

22   In the end the Steering Committee was instructed by a group of forty-three families
     who each eventually contributed £3,500, because the inquest went on longer than
     expected. I know that this cost was an enormous burden to manv families.

23   The resumed inguests began on 19* November 1990 and closed
     During this period i'was aware of families’ increasing concerns i
     were being conducted. These concerns are still strongly held by the group as a whole.
     Some are as follows:-

     the imposition of the 3.15 cut-off time;

     the disparity of legal representation - the families’ sole representative was
     outnumbered by about eight lawyers representing the various South Yorkshire
     authorities;

     the hostile treatment of supporter witnesses in comparison to the protective attitude of
     the Coroner towards police officers giving evidence. Families felt that effective cross-
     examination of police officers was veiy difficult on account of the number of
     interventions by the Coroner, purportedly under Rule 22;


                                                           Witnessed;

                                                4
the undue emphasis placed on blood-alcohol levels of the deceased and repetitive cross
examination of the supporter witnesses by counsel and solicitors for various South
Yorkshire police officers as to the amount of alcohol they had consumed;

the inference from Mr Hale representing Supt Greenwood that some of the victims
possibly caused the deaths of others by arriving at “the veiy last minute with a great
deal of alcohol inside him and had made his way right down to the front, pushing and
crushing, and had caused some deaths ”;

the reading to the jury of a long statement of “recollections” compiled by Supt
Marshall which consisted mainly of Marshall’s personal opinion of events on the day.
His theoiy of drunk, ticketless and hooligan supporters, deliberately conspiring to
delay entiy to the ground was recounted in great detail to the Juiy. His statement then
went on to criticise the findings of Lord Justice Taylor. Finally, his statement (read out
by West Midlands police), purported to respond to complaints made by families to the
Police Complaints Authority which were still being formally investigated by the PCA;

the lack of disclosure to the bereaved of witness statements relating to the deaths of
their loved ones. (Annex B, paragraphs 83-89; Letter of 28* March to Sandra Stringer,
and to Trevor Hicks of November 1990);

the Coroner’s summing-up which, as far as families were concerned, undermined the
findings of Lord Justice Taylor in many respects.

The verdicts of accidental death in 1991 were demoralising for the families in the light
of the above features and the findings of the Taylor Inquiiy. The Steering Committee
considered that further action would not succeed. The views of a junior barrister
contacted in June 1991 by Trevor Hicks, Chairman of the HFSG, were sought upon
the prospects of a judicial review of the verdicts, but nothing came of it at that stage,
having regard to the need for a new lawyer to study volume of evidence given at the
inquest, and the probable expense.

The families were not, of course, in possession of the financial means to bring a
prosecution, and had very few statements of witnesses. Money was short. Between
eight and ten families had attended the inquest eveiy day, travelling daily from
Liverpool between November 1990 and the end of March 1991, and many more had
attended the inquest on numerous occasions. Unlike the South Yorkshire police
officers, they did not have the benefit of public funds to finance their legal
representation, and of course they had had to pay their own travelling costs.

Furthermore, the principal complaints that I heard were still that families did not know
the full circumstances of the deaths, because of the 3.15 cut-off. Some families
continued to search for information from the South Yorkshire police, and I drafted
some of the letters.

Signed;      ,   j/Y\                                         Witnessed;
       A typical response is attached from Chief Superintendent Mole of December 1991
       (attached as Annex E). Information was withheld by reason of the pending disciplinary
       proceedings.

The Police Complaints Authority charges

27    It had been publicly announced veiy soon after publication of the Interim Taylor report
       in August 1989 that Mr Duckenfield had been suspended from duty. On 11* July
       1991 it was announced that the Police Complaints Authority had directed the bringing
       of charges against the two defendants for neglect of duty. (Relevant documents are
       Annex F)

28    I believe that on 26* July, Chief Superintendent Duckenfield went on “sick leave”.
       On 29* October 1991 it was announced that he was to be retired from the force by the
       Chief Constable on “health grounds” on 10* November. The discipline proceedings
       against him therefore lapsed. Thereafter, South Yorkshire police asked the PCA to
       withdraw the remaining charge against Mr Murray, and on 13* Januaiy 1992 the PCA
       agreed. Murray then retired from the force, again on health grounds, in August 1992.
       Mr Duckenfield’s retirement on “health grounds”, after two years suspension, was
       regarded in the Group as a device to avoid his responsibility, and to leave the force
       with his pension intact.

29     However, this abandonment of the disciplinary charges did not cause a significant
       change in the matter of disclosure. Annex G is an example of a letter written by Chief
       Superintendent Mole on 4* March 1992 claiming that the authority of the makers of
       statements was necessary before statements could be released. This policy resulted in
       the disclosure of some statements, but the withholding of others, because in a number
       of cases the witnesses did concerned did not consent. In any event the policy only
       operated in the case of statements of witnesses whose identity was known to the
       families.

30    Subsequent requests to the Coroner have been met by responses such as those set out
       in the letters of the Coroner, Mr Dorries, to Mr Hammond of 8* and 20* May 1992, to
      Mr Spearitt of 10* August 1992 and to Donna Carlile of 28* February 1995 (Annex
      H); only documents used or read out in the Inquest could, by virtue of Rule 57 of the
       Coroners Rules, be disclosed; and the statements sought by the families had not been
       read out at the mini-inquests, because a police summary only had been given in
       evidence, as described in paragraph 12, above.

The application to seek to quash the verdicts of the Coroner’s Court

31    In spite of the lack of access to documents and statements, a number of families did
       discover though their own research and persistent enquiries further information as to
       the deaths of their relatives, and of the treatment, or lack of treatment, administered to
       them after 3.15 pm.

                                                              Witnessed;

                                               6
32   In October 1991, junior counsel, Mr Edward Fitzgerald, was instructed by six families
      to advise on the question of challenge to the inquest verdicts. Four of these families
      had discovered material indicating that their relatives had been alive after 3.15 pm. In
      the other two cases, no or virtually no information had been given as to the
      circumstances of death. In April 1992, a “Memorial” was submitted to the Attorney-
      General, disclosing what was known in April 1992.

33   On August 1992, the Attorney-General declined to grant leave under section 13 (1) (b)
     of the Coroners’ Act 1988 to apply to the High Court for the verdicts to be quashed
     and fresh inquests held.

34   An application for leave to move for judicial review of the coroner’s verdicts by these
     six families was prepared, also by Mr Fitzgerald, and was granted in April 1993 by Mr
     Justice Macpherson. I was actively concerned in these applications, but they were not
     lodged on behalf of the HFSG. Mr Fitzgerald had worked veiy hard on the case pro
     bono publico for many months, but his work was often delayed because of the hope
     that fresh information might be obtained, and there was a complete embargo until the
      13* January 1992, when the disciplinary proceedings were dropped against Mr
     Murray.

35   A telephone call I had with Mrs Taylor, the coroner’s secretary, on 20* January 1992
     illustrates the problems. I telephoned her in order to obtain statements on behalf of
     Anne Williams. She stated I would have to contact West Midlands Police, as they had
     taken all the statements and had them all back in their possession. I pointed out that I
     had tried to obtain them from South Yorkshire Police. She insisted that West
     Midlands Police was the correct agency. I asked her why the Coroner could not
     supply copies. She said he did not have them. I reminded her of the fifteen year rule in
     Rule 56 of the Coroners’ Rules, whereupon she asked me to write in and said she
     would pass the letter to Dr Popper. I asked why Dr Popper was the person to contact
      She replied that the statements belonged to him, and he would say whether the
     statements could be released.

36   Anne Williams’ solicitor was told by South Yorkshire police at the same time that, on
     the advice of their lawyers, they would not supply statements until discipline matters           /
     had been finalised. On 17* February 1992, however, Mr Dorries, the new Coroner,                 s©V
     wrote to Mrs Williams, allowing her, as a matter of grace, to see statements (Annex         ^
     I). From this letter, it can be seen that Chief Superintendent Mole was asked to agree
     to the release of statements which had been taken by West Midlands Police for the
     purposes of the inquest. I believe that a Member of Parliament, Malcolm Thornton,
     had asked the Coroner through the Attorney-General to release these statements. I
     know that statements sought by Mr Hammond were also obtained after the
     intervention of his member of Parliament. Mr Spearritt received some, but not all of
     the statements, he was seeking. Sandra Stringer was denied some of the statements
     she was seeking until; the body files were disclosed during the “Scrutiny” in 1997.

Signed; ^ ^      /)o (lw                                   Witnessed;
                       J
                                              7
37    I produce as Annex J copies of letters that were submitted to the Attorney-General in
       1992 from four of the six families who applied to the High Court, Mrs Doreen Jones,
       Mr and Mrs Peter Tootle, Mrs Anne Williams (and her doctor), Sandra Stringer and
       her daughter Donna Carlile. (A separate letter was sent, I am told, by the Glover
       family, but I have not seen a copy. The family of Michael Kelly had suffered a
                               ind I do not believe they sent a letter.) These letters reflect the
       frustrations of the families and their anguished search for information, which I
       witnessed at first hand. Annex K isa. copy of an affidavit of Sandra Stringer, prepared
       for those proceedings. None of the contents of this has ever been disputed in court,
       on affidavit, nor, so far as I am aware, in the “Scrutiny” of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.

38    The Coroner produced an affidavit for the judicial review proceedings, which for the
      first time exhibited “Continuity Charts”, containing names of witnesses, which had
      been referred to at the mini-inquests, but which had never been disclosed to the
      families. Similarly, he produced minutes of “Business Meetings” attended by the
      Coroner and lawyers for various interested parties in 1990. The significance of some
      of these minutes is dealt with in Annex B.

39    I produce as Annex L a copy of the skeleton argument submitted by counsel for the six
      families in November 1993, and a copy of the judgement of the Divisional Court as
      Annex M. In the course of the judicial review, Alun Jones QC was given an index of
      statements said to be held by the South Yorkshire police, not the investigating West
      Midlands police. I recall that this index was disclosed only because there was some
      doubt as to whether a second statement of a witness relevant to the case of Michael
      Kelly had been provided. This index consists of 116 pages, and it lists 3,907
      statements.

Conclusion of the Judicial Review

40    Although the outcome of the application for Judicial Review was adverse to the six
      families, the evidence of the Coroner, the copy of the index, and the statements
      discovered or relied on by each of the six families, had the effect of persuading me and
      the families that there was a large body of evidence, undisclosed, of direct relevance to
      the tragedy, which remained in the possession of the South Yorkshire police, who had
      been blamed for negligence by Lord Taylor, and in the possession of the Coroner.

1994 to 1996.

41    I do not believe that anyone considered a prosecution in the aftermath of the judicial
       review hearing. The reality is that the HFSG appeared to have reached the end of the
       legal road. The families were demoralised, and had no faith that the truth would
       emerge from further legal process. There was no money available, nor any prospect of
       raising it. The Group had access only to a fraction of the evidence, a factor which
       would inevitably had weighed against it in any attempt to terminate a prosecution.
Signed;             ^        j                               Witnessed; \< J^U A > V A ^n
42    I myself was away from work for a few weeks
       of the judicial review proceedings, which, however, was much more bearable for me
      than the families affected. When I returned to work, I was working on ordinary legal
      business in the Liverpool City Council, but was still liason officer on the Hillsborough
      Working Party, which met infrequently.

43    Some of the families started to put their hopes of discovering the true facts of the
      disaster in the hands of the media, rather than the courts. An example was the Roger
      Cook programme on Central Television, “The Cook Report”, which concerned
      principally the case of Kevin Williams, and which included material discovered during
      and after the Judicial Review proceedings.

44    In October 1994, some of the families attended a preview of a series of fictional
      television programmes by the television writer Jimmy McGovern called “Cracker”,
      about the effects of the disaster on a particular man. The families who saw it asked Mr
      McGovern to investigate and present the true story of the disaster. I met with Katy
      Jones, the producer of Granada Television’s World in Action in January 1995 and gave
      her information.

45    I believe that Granada decided to commission the programme in about June 1995. A
      series of meetings took place between McGovern and some of the families, and the
      HFSG formally approved co-operation with the making of the programme, which
      became the drama-documentary “Hillsborough” in December 1996.

December 1996 to June 1997

46    The programme was well received by the public. The matters raised were discussed in
       Parliament, and the Home Secretary, Mr Michael Howard, took a close and
       sympathetic interest, and met many of the families. The matters that were of concern to
       the Group are apparent from the report of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. The HFSG made
       submissions in 1997 to the Home Secretary and DPP asking for a criminal
       investigation into the allegations of suppression of evidence.

47    Annexes A-D, and the material submitted with the informations in July 1998, set out
      the reasons why this prosecution was instituted, and describe the relevant sequence of
       events. I should add that the Master Witness List was disclosed to me in April 1997 by
      Mr George Croston of the CPS, in response to our allegations that the evidence of
      Roger Houldsworth had been withheld.




Signed;    . If'A .                                         Witnessed;
48    In May 1997 a concert was held at Airfield which raised substantial funds for the
       Group. Annex B sets out the way in which statements of witnesses became available in
        1997 to 1998. By the Spring of 1998, the Group had substantial witness statements,
       and also had the funds to conduct a prosecution. Furthermore, the Stuart-Smith report
       had unambiguously reaffirmed the findings of the Taylor Inquiry, and confirmed that
       the West Midlands police had not provided the CPS with any material that undermined
       those findings.

49    For these reasons, it is wrong to suggest, as the defence do, that the prosecution
      refuses to accept the Taylor Inquiry, and the Stuart-Smith acceptance of that Inquiry.
      The Group has many and serious criticisms of other aspects of the Stuart-Smith report,
      but does not by virtue of these prosecutions offer a legal challenge to it. The
      prosecution case has been prepared to present the findings of the Taylor Inquiry as to
      the immediate cause of death to a criminal court for the first time in ten years.

Oppression

50    Argument will be presented about the defendants’ submissions. However, I wish to
      present evidence on the issue of oppression from my knowledge of events in the last
      six months.

51    If appropriate I can give detailed evidence as to the funding by the South Yorkshire
      Police Authority of the defence costs and the defendants’ other expenses incurred in
      these proceedings. Suffice it to say here that the defendants have accepted funding
      from that authority when the Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire force has always
      accepted the findings of the Taylor Inquiry, which found a “blunder of the first
      magnitude” as the immediate and direct cause of death; and when the Chief Constable
      has repeatedly accepted civil liability for the actions of the defendants.

52    The defendants have nevertheless been able to retire, presumably on pensions
      appropriate to their high rank, in spite of the negligence attributed to them by their
      own force, which presently supports them, and whose support they have asked for and
      accepted.

53    It has became clear for the first time in March 1999 that the defendants’ costs of
      representation at the five months’ Inquest had been met by the South Yorkshire Police
      Authority. They, like the families, were interested parties within the meaning of Rule
      21 of the Coroners’ Rules, entitled to be present and represented. Some interested
      parties, the families, had to pay the costs themselves: others, like the police officers
      and other public bodies, were buttressed by the public purse.




Signed; ft.                                                Witnessed;


                                             10
54      Also relevant to the question of oppression is the defendants’ attitude to disclosure of
        information. The court knows of the difficulties the prosecution have experienced in
        obtaining access to documents held by the South Yorkshire police. The defence has
        failed for over nine months to offer any support to the prosecution in its request for
        that information to be handed over to a third party.

55      The revealing briefing notes of meetings held within the South Yorkshire police force
        on 16th, 17* and 19th April 1989, on which reliance is placed under section 24 of the
        Criminal Justice Act 1988, were obtained only by virtue of a witness summons, the
        issue of which was strenuously opposed by the Chief Constable. After receipt of this
        material, the prosecution wrote again to Mr Croston of the CPS, enclosing a copy to
        Dr Popper. I enclose a copy of that file, as Annex N. Our arguments about that
        material has led to the disclosure by the CPS of further evidence about the closure of
        the gates in 1988, and the defendant Murray’s knowledge of it. I attach as Annex O a
        copy of correspondence from the CPS of June 1999 relating to this matter, which will
        be developed in argument at the hearing.

56      The defence argument suggests that Mr Duckenfield has had to undergo the stress of
        the “Scrutiny”. His solicitors have told us that Mr Duckenfield was not interviewed by
        Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, and there is no indication that he was asked to contribute to
        the “Scrutiny” by letter.

57      I have seen no evidence that the defendants have been oppressed. By contrast, I have
        myself seen, over the years, the deeply oppressive and destructive effect upon the
        families of the concealment of information; the suppression of documents; and the
        failure of even any one individual to be held accountable for any of the events of the
        worst disaster in English sporting history. The families’ members of Parliament have
        made comments about this deprivation of information in the House of Commons in
         1998, and on occasions in earlier years Above all, I have witnessed the almost
        complete disintegration of the families’ previous respect for the police, the legal
        profession, and the institutions of English law.

Delay

58      Nearly a year has elapsed since the service of the summonses. This delay has been
        occasioned by the defendants’ unsuccessful application to the CPS to take over and
        discontinue the proceedings, and by the attempt to review that decision in the High
        Court. I produce a copy of the judgment of the Divisional Court as Annex P.




Signed;                                                       Witnessed;


                                                11
Selection o f Material

59     A serious allegation is made against the prosecution at the end of paragraph 4.10, page
       12, of Mr Clegg’s submissions. I do not understand the complaint. Our representations
       to the CPS have presented a reasoned and still unanswered argument showing that
       improper selection was made of documents submitted to the DPP and Coroner in
       1990. Mr Clegg does not explain the allegation, of a similar kind, which he makes
       against us, but the prosecution has allowed the solicitors for both defendants to inspect
       all the witness statements, and the edited and unedited statements of the South
       Yorkshire police. That inspection took place on 23rd June. Mr Clegg’s submissions are
       dated 7* June 1999, on which date the final committal bundle was delivered to his
       instructing solicitors. I presume Mr Clegg is referring to the selection of witnesses
       supplied last year, upon which comment was made by the prosecution in the course of
       our Representations of September 1998 (Annex B)

60     I know that Mr Eastwood, of Mr Duckenfield’s solicitors, visited the House of
        Commons library in August 1998, and that his firm represented the South Yorkshire
       police during the “Scrutiny”. He has had a far better opportunity to become familiar
       with the edited and unedited South Yorkshire statements, and the evidence in the case
        as a whole, than the prosecution. Although the Home Secretary asked for all non­
        sensitive material considered in the “Scrutiny” by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to be
       placed in the House of Commons library, the submissions made by Winkworth
        Sherwood on behalf of South Yorkshire police have not been placed there. Perhaps it
        is on the basis of Mr Eastwood’s knowledge of the papers that this unexplained
        allegation against the prosecution is made.

61     The witnesses selected by the prosecution have been chosen because their evidence
       justifies and underlies the findings of Lord Taylor. A limited number have now been
       chosen because their evidence tends to be repetitive. I used to prosecute for many
       years for the Liverpool City Council. I know that my obligation in presenting material
       to a court is to be fair. I invite the defence to withdraw the allegation.

Publicity

62     At the end of the defence argument a comment appears that the prosecution have
       generated much of the media coverage of this case themselves. Of course it is correct
       that public comment has been made many times over the years by members of the
       Group, but I dispute that this has “thereby contributed to the prejudice”. Had the
       Group not taken its case to the media after the failure of the six families’ judicial
       review, for the reasons apparent from this statement and the 1998 Representations to
       the CPS, the Group would not be in possession of the material which has encouraged
       it to bring tMs prosecution, and would not have had the fluids to do so.

                                                             w te ss e d .   k jW     k O ^
Signed;            . ^cU v^ata)-,
63       Further comment will be made when the prosecution has seen the defence material.

64       I am prepared to give evidence orally about the contents of this statement.

Signed


/f/t*      flhosvL f\dLA jfcy\        .

Ann Marie Adlington                                    Witnessed.    Ic £M aaJ/IA'/,'v ^




                                                13
