V fT    —      ,
       SUP?^                                                                                     sup?<fr
                            Hillsborough Family Support Group




            15 February 1999
                                                                                          FEB
            Crown Office
            Royal Courts o f Justice
            Strand
            London WC2

            Ref: CO/582/99



            Dear Sirs

            In the m atter o f an A pplication for Judicial R eview hv the C h ie f C onstable o f the South
            Yorkshire Police and in the M atter o f the South Yorkshire Police A uthority

             Please find enclosed Outline o f Argument for the Prosecution in the above matter. I should
            be grateful if you would place this before the single judge.



            Yours faithfully




                                                                 U
            Ann Adlington
            Solicitor
                                                            6    Uo




                     Phone 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151 236 1936. E Mail info@hfsg.org
                   1st Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR
In the H igh C ourt o f Justice                                                 CO /582/99
Q u e en ’s Bench Division



In the M atter o f an Application for Judicial R eview by the C h ief C onstable o f the South
Yorkshire Police
And in the M atter o f the South Yorkshire Police Authority




                            Outline o f Argument for the Prosecution

Introduction

1      Application for leave to appeal was lodged on Thursday 11th February 1999 at the
       Crown Office by the Chief Constable o f the South Yorkshire Police (“the Applicant”)
       in respect o f a decision o f the South Yorkshire Police Authority (“the Authority”) to
       refuse applications made by David Duckenfield and Bernard Murray (“the defendants”)
       for money to conduct legal proceedings.

2      Criminal proceedings were instituted by Ann Adlington, solicitor to the Hillsborough
       Family Support Group, on 10th July 1998 in the Leeds District Magistrates Court,
       when summonses were issued directed to the defendants in respect o f allegations o f
       manslaughter, misfeasance, and (in Duckenfield’s case) attempting to pervert the
       course o f justice, allegedly committed in the Hillsborough stadium disaster in April
       1989.

3      It appears that the Applicant has requested that the question o f leave be determined on
        the papers, and that the Authority supports his application. Although the grounds for
        granting leave appear therefore to be strong, the prosecution, as an interested party,
        invites the single judge to take the following matters into account. The prosecution
        contends that the Divisional Court is being confronted by an essentially theoretical or
        academic question, the resolution o f which should be deferred until other factors have
        been considered by the Authority. On that basis leave should be refused.



Ihe interest o f the prosecutor in the application fo r judicial review


4      The prosecution does not wish in any way to seek deny the defendants access to legal
       representation in respect o f the prosecution. It is, however, concerned that the
       defendants appear to have had, and to have expected, virtually unlimited access to
       public funds, irrespective o f any o f the constraints that would apply in the case o f other
       defendants, in respect o f matters arising from the prosecution.



5      After the summonses were issued, the defendants asked the Crown Prosecution


                                                 1
      Service to take over the conduct o f the prosecution under section 6 (2) o f the
      Prosecution o f Offences Act 1984, and discontinue it under section 23 (3) o f that Act.

6    The review was conducted at a high level in CPS Headquarters in York and London,
     and the prosecution and the defendants made detailed written submissions in relation
     to the strength o f the evidence, the public interest, and the interests o f justice.

7    On 7"’ December 1998 at the Leeds District Magistrates Court, before the decision o f
     the CPS was announced, committal proceedings were fixed for 19th April. The
     prosecution asked that the committal be held in February, but the defendants told the
     court through solicitors that each was to be represented separately by leading counsel
     (and, it is believed, junior counsel); that the proceedings would take at least four
     weeks; and that neither leading counsel was available before 19th April. (Since there
     was a police investigation in 1989-90, the case falls to be committed under the pre-
      1996 procedures.)

8    On 18lh December 1998, the CPS announced, after a review o f more than six months,
     that it would not take over the prosecution.

9    On 2 1st December 1998, at a remand hearing, leading counsel for Murray, and junior
     counsel for Duckenfield, told the court that an application for judicial review o f the
     CPS decision would definitely be made, and that it was intended to lodge it in the first
     two weeks o f January. Leading counsel for M r Murray told the court that he was not
     applying for the date o f 19th April to be adjourned. Counsel for Duckenfield said
     nothing about the date. However, the court was also told that the CPS would provide
     a decision letter, probably before Christmas, explaining its approach to its decision.

10   The prosecution, which is not publicly-funded, was concerned that no lawyer subject
     to the limitations o f the legal aid scheme could possibly advise that an application for
     judicial review should be made before he had seen the decision letter. It had been
     decided, apparently, that an application would be made on the basis that, whatever
     criteria had been applied, or whatever reasons might be given, the decision was
     demonstrably perverse. Accordingly, the prosecution thereafter objected to the
     funding by the Authority o f the costs o f the defence, citing the history o f the funding as
     it understood it, and very extensive factual reasons why it should not be granted, even
     if there was power to do so.

11   The approach o f the prosecution to this issue has been to argue that there is no
      statutory power to grant the funding, but the primary and detailed objection has been
     that the decisions to grant it in 1998 had been taken on unlawful, irrational and
     procedurally improper bases.

12   In summary, the prosecutor has made the following allegations, in writing to the CPS
      and the Authority, and has supported its case by documents (many o f which were
      made available for the first time in 1998 through the good offices o f the Home
      Secretary);



                                              2
             The case against the defendants is strong;

             The Police Complaints Authority wished to try both these defendants for
             neglect o f duty, but was thwarted because Duckenfield retired on health
             grounds, after which the case against Murray was also dropped;

             The South Yorkshire Police has never contested that the conduct alleged
             against the defendants was negligent, and that it caused the deaths o f 96
             people;

             The South Yorkshire Police have publicly accepted the findings o f the Taylor
             and Stuart-Smith enquiries, which both included the finding that Duckenfield
             lied about the circumstances in which the gates were opened;

             The senior officers o f the South Yorkshire police procured the excision from
             over a hundred statements o f South Yorkshire police officers o f factual
             criticisms and assertions o f crucial matters relevant to the question o f gross
             negligence;

            Hammond Suddards, solicitors to the Chief Constable o f South Yorkshire
            Police, played a leading part in that editing process;

            The only South Yorkshire police statements sent to the DPP when a decision
            was being taken as to whether to prosecute in 1990 were the edited ones;

            The West Midlands police have never been independent throughout the
            enquiries in the case, because many important decisions as to disclosure o f
            material to the CPS, Coroner, Police Complaints Authority and Lord Taylor,
            were taken by them only if South Yorkshire police, acting in their own interests
            with the support o f Hammond Suddards, decided whether documents should
            be disclosed.

     -      The alleged independence o f the West Midlands police has been a sham. The
            West Midlands police has worked throughout with the South Yorkshire police
            to disguise critical facts relating to the disaster in order to protect the interests
            o f that force.

13   On 1st February 1999, the prosecutor received a letter from Garretts, solicitors to the
     Authority, indicating that the Authority proposed that its meeting o f 5th February
     would consider only the legal issue whether there was power to grant funding at all.
     Interested parties, including a member of the Hillsborough Family Support Group, the
     Applicant and the defendants, had been invited to address the meeting briefly and had
     submitted arguments in writing beforehand. The letter indicated that the question
     whether in fact funding ought to be made available would be considered at a later
     meeting, but only if the Authority had decided it had the power to grant it.


                                              3
14     It is believed that the Chief Constable, and Hammond Suddards, advocated this
       approach. The Chief Constable appears to have submitted a factual reply to the
       allegations the prosecution had made, but neither that reply, nor the defendants’ replies
       on this aspect, have been disclosed to the prosecution. The prosecution was not asked
       whether it consented to the subject-matter o f the letter o f 1st February.

15    After it was held on 5th February that the Authority had no powers to pay the
      defendants’ costs, the prosecutor argued to the Chief Constable and Authority that the
      question whether funding should be granted on the merits should be determined before
      any application for judicial review was made. Otherwise the issue was a theoretical
      one. A letter to this effect was sent to both solicitors by fax the day before the
      application was made. Confirmation was later asked, and received, that Hammond
      Suddards had received this letter on that day. Hammond Suddards were also asked to
      ensure that the single judge was made aware o f the prosecution’s submissions on the
      merits, but to no avail.

The importance o f the facts

16    The application for judicial review seeks artificially to divorce the legal issue from its
      underlying facts. By seeking to concentrate on a point o f principle, the Applicant
      wishes the Divisional Court to hear only some o f the facts, and to draw inferences
      from such assertions as “the way that David Duckenfield and Bernard Murray have
      been treated” (affidavit o f Ian Daines), which a study o f the facts would not support.

17    This matter should have been resolved before the Authority first. Should leave to move
      be granted, the prosecution will seek on the hearing o f the motion to make brief
      submissions on the law, and to present substantial submissions to the effect that,
      whether or not there is power to make funds available, no reasonable Police Authority
      could in fact decide in favour o f the Applicants in the circumstances o f this case.

18    If leave is granted, the prosecution can file affidavit evidence in seven days, and would
       suggest that any evidence in reply be filed within seven days o f receipt.

3 Raymond Buildings,
Gray’s Inn
London W C 1

15 February 1999                                                      Alun Jones QC
