                                NOTE FOR THE COURT

R.v. D.P.P. ex parte DUCKENFIELD                                         CO/856/99

R.v. D.P.P. ex parte MURRAY                                              CO/934/99

Applications for leave to apply for judicial review

                                        (not to take over prosecution)

Application of Duckenfield lodged 1/3/99

Application of Murray lodged 5/3/99

Adjourned to Divisional Court by Latham J. on 15/3/99 on oral application to be heard

with the application of R.v.South Yorkshire Police Authority ex parte Chief Constable

of South Yorkshire (CO/582/99) on 22/3/99. The single Judge also directed that all

parties be ready to proceed with the substantive application if leave is granted     -

skeleton argument from interested party Hillsborough Action Group by 10.00 a.m.

18/3/99; Bundles of evidence by 12.00 p.m. 18/3 - any further evidence by 19/3/ at

latest.

The Head of the Crown Office has directed that the applications for leave to apply for

judicial review of Duckenfield and Murray against the decision of the South Yorkshire

Police Authority also be listed at the same time.



The applicants seek to challenge the decision of the D.P.P. and/or the Crown

Prosecution Service communicated by letter dated 18/12/98 and Press release No

156/98, not to take over the criminal proceedings commenced by Ann Adlington on

behalf of the Hillsborough Family Support Group against the applicant.

The applicants seeks a stay o f the criminal proceedings by way of interim relief.




                                             l
Note: Counsel will also be appearing on behalf of the private prosecutor (see below)

and will be seeking to be heard as an interested party and be vigorously resisting the

application for a stay of the committal proceedings.

All four parties will be represented by Queen’s Counsel.

Duckenfield has provided a large blue folder, and Murray two red folders (one a core

bundle from the larger).

Ann Adlington for the interested party has filed an afffidavit in respect of each matter

and skeleton arguments have been filed by all the other parties and one is expected

from her this afternoon) and a second affidavit with five folders of exhibits which

appear to apply to both the proceedings against the Police Authority and the

proceedings against the DPP.



FACTS

The applicant Duckenfield was Chief Superintendent of Police for South Yorkshire and

the officer in charge on 15/4/89 when 96 people died at Hillsborough football ground in

Sheffield. He was assisted inter alia by Police Superintendent Murray, his second in

command who is also a defendant and applicant.

Duckenfield retired from the police force on the grounds of ill-health on 10/11/91;

Murray in August, 1992, both as a result of the events.

A report by Lord Justice Taylor finally published in January, 1990 stated that the police

handling of the overcrowding was a contributory factor to the deaths. There was an

investigation by the West Midlands Police in 1989, a Coroner’s Inquest from

November, 1990 to March, 1991, an judicial review of the verdict of accidental death

in November, 1993, a further investigation by the Crown Prosecution Service in



                                           2
March-May, 1997, and a report by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in February, 1998

reviewing the previous enquiries.

On 26/6/98, Ann Adlington, solicitor for Hillsborough Family Support Group issued

summons in South Sefton Magistrates Court against the applicants for two unlawful

killings, wilful neglect to perform a public duty, and (Duckenfield only) perverting the

course of justice (by lying about how Gate C became open).             These were not

proceeded with as a result of successful objections, but laid again in Leeds

Magistrates Court on 13/7/98, and 4 week committal proceedings have now been set

for 19/4/99. (The magistrates Court have already indicated that they are not prepared

to adjourn the committal without an order from the single Judge.)

The applicant immediately wrote to the DPP asking for them to take over the

prosecution with a view to discontinuance (S.6(2), S.23(3) Prosecution of Offences

Act, 1985). In a number of letters the CPS set out its policy and found that it would not

intervene as they could not say there was clearly no case to answer (except for the

last charge).



Note: The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has also made an application for

judicial review of the decision of the Police Authority to stop funding the

applicants’ defence in these proceedings on which leave was granted by

Latham J. on 12/2/99 on the papers on the day after issue, and which is listed

now listed on 22nd March, before Lord Justice Laws, Latham, J. and Creswell J..

Murray seeks an order that if leave is granted in this case, it is not heard until

the issue of funding has been determined.

                                                 Simon Slidders



                                           3
    ext 7317

    19/3/99




4
