                                                                                   l- ^ c f      O - 'X l^ h q
                                                                                                     t3 > l

                                                                              DEPONENT: W J WILKINSON
                                                                              SWORN ON BEHALF OF:
                                                      ^0§Q                    RESPONDENT
                                                                              NO. OF AFFIDAVIT: FIRST
                                                                              NO. OF EXHIBITS: WJW1
                                                                              DATE SWORN: 4-6.2. ^

                                                                      CROWN OFFICE REF NO. CO.582 -1999

 IN THE HIGH COURT OF fU S n n E

 QUEENS BENCH DIVISION

 CROWN OFFICE LIST

 IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW BY THE CHIEF
 CONSTABLE OF SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

 BETWEEN:

                                                                R

                                                               -v -

                                              SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
                                                                                              First Respondent
                                                                and -

                                                       ANN ADLINGTON
                                                                                        Second Respondent
                                                             ex parte

                            THE CHIEF CONSTABLE OF SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                                                    Applicant



                                                         AFFIDAVIT OF
                                                   WILLIAM JAMES WILKINSON




I, WILLIAM JAMES WILKINSON of 39 Woodland Rise, Silkstone Common, Barnsley,

South Yorkshire, S75 4RP MAKE OATH and say as follows:


1.             I am the Clerk and Treasurer to South Yorkshire Police Authority ("the Authority")

               and have been since 1 July 1995. Between 1 April 1986 and 30 June 1995 I served




J/SO U T H Y O R K SH IR E P O L IC E \pp-00017a
                                                               1
              the Police Authority initially as Assistant Treasurer and subsequently as Deputy

              Clerk and Treasurer.


2.           The Authority is established under Section 3 of The Police Act 1996. Its general

              functions are stated in Section 6(1) of that Act which provides that:-


                            "Every Police Authority established under section 3 shall secure the

                            maintenance of an efficient and effective Police Force for its area".


3.           In discharging its functions the Authority must set annual objectives for the

              policing of the its area and approve a local policing plan (sections 6 (2) (b), 7 and 8

              of the Police Act 1996). The police force is, however, uiider the operational

              direction and control of the Chief Constable, who is to have regard to the local

              policing plan in exercising these powers (section 10 of the Police Act 1996).


4.          The facts and matters set out in this affidavit are true, to the best of my knowledge,

              information and belief and, except where otherwise appears, they are within my

              own knowledge, and derived from my role in considering, and advising the

              Authority on, the matters referred to in this Affidavit.


5.          I havg read copies of the documents which have been served in these proceedings

              on behalf of the Applicant. In particular, I have read a copy of the Notice of

              Application for Leave to Apply for Judicial Review with the Statement of Grounds

              ("Form 86A"), a copy of the First Affidavit of Ian Daines ("Mr Dairies' Affidavit")

             and the exhibits thereto marked, ID1 to ID4.


6.          There is now produced to me, marked WJW1, a bundle containing true copies of

             the documents or excerpts from documents ("the Bundle"), to which I refer below.




J/SC)U TH Y O R K SH IR EPO LIC E\pp-00017a
                                                           2
7.          As explained in Mr Dairies' Affidavit, this matter arises from the tragic events at

            Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989. Ninety-five people died and over 400

            required hospital treatment. A ninety-sixth victim, Anthony Bland, died in 1993.

            Ex Chief Superintendent Duckenfield was in overall charge of the police operation

            that day and ex Superintendent Murray was in charge of the police control room ..


8.         Immediately following the disaster, on the 17 April 1989, Lord Justice Taylor was

            appointed by the Home Secretary to carry out an inquiry into the events at

            Hillsborough on 15 April 1989 and to make recommendations about the needs of

            crowd control and safety at sports events. His interim report, published on 4

            August 1989, found that there were a number of causes for the disaster,

            summarised in chapter 16 of that report (pages 14 and 15 of the Bundle). The

            conduct of senior officers, including Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray was,

            however, specifically criticised (in particular in chapter 18 - pages 16 and 17 of the

            Bundle). Paragraph 278 of the interim report concludes that "although there were

            other causes, the main reason for the disaster was the failure of police control".


9.         On 30 August 1990 the Director of Public Prosecutions, following a report by the

            Chief Constable of the West Midlands Police and advice from two experienced

            Queen's Counsel, concluded that there was insufficient evidence upon which to

            bring a prosecution for manslaughter, or any other criminal offence, against any

            officer in the South Yorkshire Police.


10.        Legal representation to Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray, amongst other officers,

            was initially provided under a legal protection insurance policy arranged through

            the Police Superintendents Association. Between August and October 1989,

            however, the Authority received applications from a number of officers, including




J/SOUTHYC )R KSH IR EPO LIC E\pp-00017a
                                                     3
              Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray, for financial support in relation to the Coroner's

              Inquest and with any criminal or disciplinary proceedings which might follow on

              from it.


11.           After initially refusing such applications, the Authority (having considered the

              terms of Home Office circular 77/87) (pages 8 -13 of the Bundle), resolved on 7

              December 1990 to provide financial assistance, to a limited extent, to six named

              officers (including Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray) for representation at the

             Coroner's Inquest (pages 18 and 19 of the Bundle). The Coroner's Inquest returned

             verdicts of accidental death in March 1991. A verdict of accidental death was also

              returned in 1993 in respect of the ninety-sixth victim.


12.         Disciplinary charges were subsequently directed by the Police Complaints

              Authority, against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, who faced four charges of

             neglect of duty and one of discreditable conduct and Superintendent Murray, who

             faced one charge of neglect of duty. The charge against Chief Superintendent

             Duckenfield lapsed when he retired on medical grounds in November 1991. In

             January 1992 the Police Complaints Authority discontinued the charge against

             Superintendent Murray, on the grounds that it would be inappropriate and unjust

             to pursue the charge against him, when the charges againist Mr Duckenfield had

             lapsed.


13.         Following a request in April 1992 for the Attorney General to exercise the powers

             under Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 to apply for fresh inquests, in August

             1992 the Attorney General announced that he declined to apply to the High Court

             for fresh inquests. In November 1993, relatives of the deceased unsuccessfully

             sought judicial review of the Coroner's Inquest verdicts. The families of the



J/SC)U TH Y O R K SH IR EPO LIC E\pp-00017a
                                                    4
               victims of the disaster continued to be concerned that the full facts had not

               emerged and representations continued for a further investigation. A number of

               the bereaved formed the Hillsborough Family Support Group ("HFSG") to

               represent their interests.


14.          In December 1996 Granada Television dramatised the disaster on television and

               raised a number of issues which, in the view of the programme makers,

               represented new evidence. Following this programme further material was

               submitted to the Home Secretary, on behalf of the HFSG. This further information,

               which related in particular to video evidence of the events and medical evidence

               about the time of death of the victims, was considered by the Home Secretary's

               Department, the office of the Attorney General and the Crown Prosecution Service.


15.          On 30 June 1997 the Home Secretary announced to the House of Commons (pages

               20 - 26 of the Bundle) that the additional material submitted to the Director of

               Public Prosecutions by the HFSG did not, in her view, warrant fresh criminal

               investigations. He further announced, however, that he had agreed with the

               Attorney General and the Director of Public Prosecutions that there should be an

              independent scrutiny ("the Scrutiny") to ascertain whether any new evidence

              existed which was not previously available, which either was of such significance

              as to justify a further public inquiry, or which should be brought to the attention of

              the Director of Public Prosecutions, Attorney General or the Chief Officer of South

              Yorkshire Police as relevant to their duties, or which would justify any other action

              being taken in the public interest. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was appointed to

              conduct the Scrutiny.




J/S O U T H Y O R K SH IR EP O LIC E\pp-00017a
                                                     5
16.         On 1 August 1997, the Chief Constable and I submitted a joint written report to the

              Authority informing members of the Scrutiny (pages 27 - 30 of the Bundle).

              Following consideration of this report, the Authority resolved (page 31 of the

              Bundle) to set aside up to £500,000 from reserves for expenditure likely to be

             incurred in respect of the Scrutiny and that a commitment be given to provide

             financial assistance towards legal representation for officers (serving and retired) in

             connection with the Scrutiny. I was authorised by the meeting to determine             ‘

             individual applications for financial assistance from officers, in consultation with

              the Chief Constable.


17.         In the event, no applications for financial assistance were received from individual

             officers (serving or retired) in connection with the Scrutiny.


18.         On 18 February 1998, Lord Justice Stuart Smith's Scrutiny Report ("the Scrutiny

             Report") was presented to the House of Commons. His basic conclusions, set out

             on page 103 of the Scrutiny Report, were as follows:



                           " I have come to the clear conclusion that there is no basis upon which there

                           should be a further Judicial Inquiry or a re-opening of Lord Taylor's

                           Inquiry. There is no basis for a renewed application to the Divisional

                           Court or the Attorney General to exercise his powers under the Coroners

                           Act 1988. I do not consider that there is any material which should be put

                           before the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Police Complaints

                           Authority which might cause them to reconsider the decisions they have

                           already taken."




J/SC)U TH Y O R K SH IR EPO LIC E\pp-00017a
                                                         6
             I exhibit Chapter 7 of his Scrutiny Report in its entirety at pages 35 - 40 of the

             Bundle.


19.         Following the publication of the Scrutiny Report, the HFSG made it known that

             they were contemplating bringing private prosecution proceedings against, a

             number of officers. It was believed that the officers concerned included Mr

             Duckenfield and Mr Murray.


20.         At the meeting of the Authority on 27 February 1998, the Chairman and members

             of the Authority agreed, at the request of the Assistant Chief Constable of the

             Authority, to consider an urgent item relating to the Hillsborough Stadium

             disaster. The Assistant Chief Constable gave an oral report to the Authority on the

             findings of the Scrutiny Report and advised members of the Authority that private

             prosecution proceedings had been threatened against certain officers. He stated his

             opinion that it was important that the question of the provision of financial

             assistance towards legal representation in any criminal proceedings be addressed

             by the Authority urgently, as he was concerned about both the welfare of the

             individual officers and the potential damage to morale of the Force if the Authority

             was not seen to stand fully behind the officers.


21.          The Authority resolved that in the light of the findings of the Scrutiny there was

             nothing to cause them to alter their views of officers' good faith and accordingly

             passed a resolution (pages 41 and 42 of the Bundle) which authorised me to

             consider applications for the provision of financial assistance to officers (serving

             and retired) in accordance with Home Office Circular No 77/87 (pages 8 -13 of the

             Bundle).




J/SO U T H Y O RK SH IREPO LICE\pp*00017a
                                                    7
22.           A new Home Office Circular 4/1998 relating to financial assistance to police

              officers in legal proceedings (pages 32 - 34 of the Bundle) had, by the date when the

              resolution of 27 February 1998 was passed, been issued by the Home Office, but

              due to a delay in circulation within the Authority, had not been reviewed by the

              Solicitor to the Authority.


23.         On 5 March 1998,1 approved the grant of financial assistance to Mr Duckenfield

              having regard, amongst other things, to Home Office Circular 4/98.


24.         At a subsequent meeting of the Authority on 24 April 1998,1 confirmed to the

              Authority that financial assistance had been granted in two cases - first to a serving

              officer and secondly to a retired officer (Mr Duckenfield). The Authority resolved

             to note this (pages 43 - 45 of the Bundle).


25.         On 29 June 1998,1 approved the grant of financial assistance to Mr Murray.


26.         On 10 July 1998, new informations were layed before Leeds Magistrates Court by

              Ann Adlington, the solicitor acting on behalf of the HFSG, against both Mr

             Duckenfield and Mr Murray (see "ID3" to Mr Dairies' Affidavit). Both

             informations alleged manslaughter of two of the Hillsborough deceased and wilful

             neglect to perform a public duty, whilst Mr Duckenfield was also accused of intent

             to pervert the course of justice.


27.         The officers' legal representatives then applied to the Crown Prosecution Service

             requesting that they take over the criminal prosecutions in order to discontinue

              them, in accordance with Section 6(2) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985. This

             application was rejected by the Crown Prosecution Service on 18 December 1998

              (pages 49 - 50 of the Bundle).




J/SO U T H Y O R K SH IR EPO LIC E\pp-00017a
                                                    8
 28.         In November 1998, members of the HFSG lobbied the Home Secretary and the

              Chairman of the Authority, at a conference of the Association of Police Authorities,

              criticising the decision to make financial assistance available to the officers for the

              criminal proceedings.


29.          On 22 December 1998,1was sent a letter by the HFSG, challenging both the

              existence of a statutory power to provide financial assistance to police officers in

              these circumstances and the manner in which the Authority has purported to

              exercise that power (pages 51 - 57 of the Bundle - enclosures not exhibited). This

              was supplemented by a letter of 5 January 1999 from HFSG to. all the members of

              the Authority (pages 60 - 66 of the Bundle - enclosures not exhibited).


30.           In the meantime I had received (further) applications from the solicitors acting for

              Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray (pages 46 - 48 and 58 - 59 of the Bundle

              respectively), seeking financial support for judicial review proceedings which they

              were contemplating, first to challenge the decision of the Crown Prosecution

              Service not to take over and discontinue the criminal prosecutions and secondly to

              challenge a decision, which it was believed that the Clerk to South Sefton

              Magistrates Court was minded to make, refusing the officers the costs of the

              abortive proceedings awarded to them by the Justices, due to the apparent

              obligation of the Authority to meet these costs.


31.          In the light of the issues raised by the HFSG, the Authority's solicitor sought advice

             from counsel, Bernard Phillips and subsequently from leading counsel, Richard

             Mawrey QC. They both advised that in the circumstances it was appropriate that

             the issue of funding should now be put before the full Authority.




J/SC)U TH Y O R K SH IR EPO LIC E\pp-00017a
                                                     9
32.        In the light of this advice the Authority instructed Garretts solicitors to advise the

             Authority in reconsidering its decision to make financial assistance for the criminal

             proceedings available to Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray and in considering their

             applications for financial support in relation to the potential judicial review (new)

             proceedings against the Crown Prosecution Service and Clerk to South Sefton

             Magistrates Court.


33.        Following their engagement, Garretts expressed additional concerns about whether

             the statutory power for police authorities to provide financial assistance to police

             officers in criminal proceedings existed at all, and sought further advice from

             Presiley Baxendale QC and Mark Shaw, who re-enforced their concern about the

             non-existence of such a power.


34.        Throughout this matter, the Authority has relied on Home Office Circulars as

             indicative that police authorities not only could, but should, support the legal costs

             of police officers in defending private prosecutions, where the prosecutions result

             from acts committed in good faith and in the execution of their duties. On 4

             February 1999, in response to a request from Garretts for their legal views on which

             Circular 4/1998 rested, Garretts received a fax from the Home Office (page 71 of

             the Bundle) which stated:



                          "Home Office Circular 4/1998 states clearly that sections 88(4) and (5) of the

                          Police Act 1996 apply to civil proceedings only. The circular goes on to say

                          that Section 88(4) does not apply to criminal proceedings. There is no

                          provision in the Police Act 1996 enabling police authorities to provide

                          financial assistance to officers involved in criminal proceedings. The

                          circular does not purport to suggest otherwise. Nor does the Circular


J/SO U TH Y O RK SH IREPC)LIC E\pp-00017a
                                                        10
                              proffer advice to police authorities on whether section 111 of the Local

                              Government Act 1972 provides authority for the payment of such financial

                              assistance."



               There have also been a number of Parliamentary Questions asked, and answers

               given by the Secretary of State for the Home Department, in relation to this issue

               which are set out at pages 67 - 70 of the Bundle.


 35.         The Authority convened a meeting for 5 February 1999 to consider matters raised

               in the letters of 22 December 1998 and 5 January 1999 from HFSG and the further

               applications for assistance received from Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray.

               However, on 1 February 1999 the Authority decided to limit the issue for

               consideration at the meeting to the question of whether it had legal power to

               provide financial assistance for the criminal and judicial review proceedings.


36.          At the meeting the Authority received written and oral submissions from Counsel

               representing the Chief Constable, HFSG and solicitors representing the retired

               officers, on the issue of whether they had vires to provide financial support to the

              former officers for the criminal prosecutions and the contemplated judicial review

               proceedings. In reliance on the legal advice they had received from their own

               solicitors, Garretts, the Authority passed the resolutions referred to in paragraph 15

              of the Form 86A and a further resolution to defer consideration of the procedural

              issues raised by the HFSG, until the powers of the Authority had been resolved to

              the satisfaction of the Authority (the resolutions are set out in full at page 72 of the

              Bundle).




J/S O U T H Y O R K SH IR EP O LIC E\pp-00017a
                                                           11
37.          On 10 February 1999, Garretts wrote to the solicitors for the officers, Winckworth

              Sherwood (for Mr Duckenfield) and Walker Morris (for Mr Murray), Artfi

               Adlington, the solicitor for HFSG, and Hammond Suddards, the solicitors for the

              Chief Constable. These letters set out the substance of the advice from Garretts and

               Miss Baxendale QC and Mr Martin Shaw of Counsel upon which the Authority

               acted. The letters were in identical terms. The letter to Walker Morris is at pages

              73 - 75 of the Bundle.


38.          I am advised that prior to the enactment of the Police Act 1996 there was a debate

              by the Standing Committee which, inter alia, related to Clause 47 of the Bill which

              became section 48 of the Police Act 1964, the precursor to section 86 of the Police

              Act 1996. At pages 1 - 7 of the Bundle are the relevant pages from Hansard relating

              to that debate. Mr Brooke was the Government spokesman and the then Home

              Secretary. In particular I refer to column 620.


39.          I refer to the comments in paragraphs 31 and 32 of the Form 86A relating to the

              advice given to the Authority on 5 February 1999. The advice received by the

              Authority is that the following would be among the relevant matters to take into

              account, on the assumption that there is power to provide financial assistance for

              the relevant proceedings:


              a.            whether legal aid would otherwise be available in such proceedings and if

                            so the extent of legal aid support available;


              b.            whether the applicant for financial support has yet been found guilty or

                            acquitted;




J/S O U T H Y O R K SH IR EPO LIC E\pp-00017a
                                                           12
           c.        the extent to which an acquitted applicant's costs are likely to be met from

                      central funds or a costs award against the prosecution; and


           d.        the extent to which financial support from the Authority, during the course

                      of proceedings, might preclude an award of costs in those proceedings in

                      favour of the individual so supported.




SWORN by the above named
William James Wilkinson
this     Ofc>$        day of February 1999
at        ^>Oo~AAljL<y                      in the
County of CsoXttv.


Before m e                            ...            .....
                Solid Lur/ Commissioner for Oaths




Address:

                              iUJY & WALKERS
                             BRITANNIC HOUSE
                             ggOgfTSTREET, BARNSLEY
                             SOUTH YORKSHIRE S70 2EQ




J/SOUTHYO RK SHIREPOLICE\pp-OOO t7a
                                                         13
                                                         DEPONENTi W J WILKINSON
                                                         SWORN ON BEHALF OF: RESPONDENT
                                                         NO. OF AFFIDAVIT: FIRST
                                                         NO. OF EXHIBITS:, WJW1
                                                         DATESWORN: 2 b 1 r C   j°l f

                                                                  CROWN OFFICE REF NO.
                                                                                 CO.582 -1999


                                                         IN THE HIGH COURT OF IUSTICE


                                                         QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION


                                                         CROWN OFFICE LIST




                                                                  AFFIDAVIT OF
                                                            WILLIAM JAMES WILKINSON




                                                                     Garretts
                                                                   1 City Square
                                                                      LEEDS
                                                                     LSI 2AL
                                                                   Ref: NJP.EC



J/S O U T H Y O R K SH IR E P O U C E \ pp-00017a
                                                    14
