PARK CT. CHAMBERS.           Fax:01132421285                      19 Mar ’99        9:24        K. U2



                                                                                      CO/85^/99

 in     m i ’ MTCH CQURT OF J V S ii c E

 O U M W 'S RENCH DIVISION

  BETW KEN:
                                       REGINA
                                          -v-
                           DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS

                                                 Ex parte

                                     BERNARD DEAN MURRAY




                        SKELETON ARGUMENT OF THE APPLICANT




  Out!iik' <>fissues

  [ i       The decision not to take over and discontinue the private prosecutions was unlawful

  because:

            [a]   the Director’s1 policy does not give proper effect to his obligations under the

                   Prosecution o f Offences Act 1985, and fails to take proper account o f relevant

                   considerations;

            [b]   in making the decision, he failed to take relevant considerations into account;

            [c]   the decision was unreasonable, irrational or perverse.



  ] .2      The Applicant does not have an alternative remedy against the decision.




          1          It is recognised that the incumbent Director did not formulate the policy or play any part in the
  decisions. For ease of presentation, however, reference will be made throughout to the Director and his
  policy.
 1.3    Delay. The applications were made promptly, particularly having regard to the detyji’j^

the Director in giving reasons for his decision, and to the condua <>f the Intcrvcnor in actjyBjy

 seeking to undermine the Applicant’s funding for the proceedings.




 Statutory duties and powers o f the Director under the 1985 Act

         SUBMISSION: The Director’s decision whether or not to exercise his

         powers under sections 6(2) and 23(3) of the Prosccudon of Offences Act

         1985, and any policy formulated to achieve consisten rv in such cases, must

         take proper account of Parliament’s will that cases cov er^d by section 3(2)(b)

         should ordinarily be instituted and conducted by him nn(j aot j-,e jeft t0 an

         adm itted hoc prosecutor*



2.1     Section 3(2)(b):

        (2) It shall be the duty o f the Director

        (h) to institute and have the conduct o f criminal proceeding }n any case where it

        appears to him that -

                 (I)   the importance or difficulty o f the case makes it *94\tropriate ihai

                proceedings should be instituted by him; or

                (U) it is otherwise appropriate for proceedings to be ihxtltuted by him



2.2     This is a private prosecution in a case to which section 3(2;(b) would apply but for l|lc

Director’s view that a prosecution is not justified. The gub-secti*,, ]s ^ ^ e q u iv o c al indication

that Parliament considers it to be in the public interest that tlw Director should institute and
     PARK CT. CHAMBERS.            Fax ■■01132421285                19 Mar ’99        9:2b       r\ 05



 conduct such proceedings.



  2.3      Section 6(1) does not preclude an admitted hoc prosecutor from instituting or conducting

  a section 3(2)(b) case2. But it is common ground that the statute empowers the Director to take

  over a private prosecution (section 6(2)) and thereafter discontinue it (section 23(3)), and that he

  may take it over in order to discontinue i t




  2.4      Whenever a section 3(2)(b) prosecution is instituted by a private prosecutor, section 6(2)

  effectively imposes an obligation upon the Director to consider or reconsidcr whether to take it

  over in discharge o f his section 3 duty.




  2.5      It is not (and never has been) the case for either Applicant that the statute imposes a duty

  upon the Director to take over every private prosecution to which section 3(2)(b) might apply,

 or that he should adopt a policy o f taking over every such case. This would conflict with section

 6 ( 1).




 2.6       The Applicant’s point is that the policy and decision process in this case have not

. recognised that the section 3(2)(b) duty is relevant to the exercise o f discretion whether to

 intervene under section 6(2) and apply section 23(3),




        2         R -v- Bow Street Stipendiary Magistrate and another, ex parte South Coast Shipping Co Ltd
 and others [1993] 1 All E.R, 219 [Murray bundle: tab7/pp.l-4],
 PARK CT. CHAMBERS.          Fax:01132421285                   19 Mar ’99        9:2d           U4




 Private prosecution

         SUBM ISSION: T he policy applied here is unlaw ful because:

         [1] it fails to take into account th e fundam ental purpose fo r which private

         prosecution is preserved;

         [2] it has elevated the right to bring a private prosecution to a status

         incom patible w ith the philosophy and term s of the 1985 Act;

         [3] it does not discriminate between cases so as to lean tow ards intervention

         w here there is no suggestion of inertia, partiality o r im p ro p er action by the

         public prosecutor;

         [4] it fails to recognise the extent to which the powers u n d e r sections 6(2) and

         23(3) exist as a control over private prosecutions fo r the protection of

         defendants.




 3.1     Parliament has not expressly circumscribed the scope for private prosecution. But it

 legislated against the background o f judicial dicta in the House o f Lords and the Report of the

 Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure 1981, (the Philips Commission). It may be infen-ed

 that section 6( 1) was not intended to allow private prosecutions as a mere indulgence, and that

- secti°n 6(2) was intended to invest the Director with a measure o f control over private

 prosecutions which aie not in the public interest.




 3.2    In Gouriet -v- Union o f Post Office Workers [1978] A,C. 435 at 477, Lord Wilberforce

had said o f the private prosecution3:




        3 Murray tab7/p.27; report page 477b-c.
PARK CT. CHAMBERS.          Fax: 0116242128:3                   iy var yy          : -zo       r.




          'T/hj historical right... though rarely exercised in relation lo indictable offences, and

         though ultimately liable to be controlled by the Attorney-General (by taking over the

         prosecution and, if he thinks Jit, entering a nolle prosequi) remains a valuable

         constitutional safeguard against inertia or partiality on the part o f authority. "

  And Lord Diplock had said4:

          "... the need for prosecutions to be undertaken ...by private individuals has largely

         disappeared; but it still exists and is a useful constitutional safeguard against

         capricious, corrupt or biased failure or refusal o f those authorities to prosecute

         offenders against the criminal law. "



  3.3    The Royal Commission said5:

          "7.50. Ifthen the private prosecution is to be retained as an effective safeguard against

         improper inaction by the prosecuting authority, thefinancial difficulty must be removed.

         At the same time the risk o f malicious, vexatious and utterly unreasonable prosecutions

         must be guarded against. ... We do not think that private citizens should have an

         unlimited right o f access to the criminal process to remedy wrongs fo r which other

         measures might be more appropriate. "6




 3.4     The Law Commission’s recent recommendation that there should be a ‘consents




         4 Murray tab 7/p.37; report page 498b.

         3 Murray tab6/p.3; paragraph 7.50

          6         The Commission went on to recommend that public funds should be available to support a
 private prosecution which might be commenced only with leave of a magistrates’ court in circumstances
 where the public prosecutor had rejected an application to take over the case. These recommendations
 were not enacted-

                                                    5
PARK CT. CHAMBERS.          hax:Ui:A^j.2ifc>                                    r -ZD




provision’7 for private prosecution refers to the retrospective control over undesirable

proceedings which the powers under section 6(2) and 23(3) afford:

        "as a pre-emptive measure preventing the institution o f undesirable proceedings ...

        preferable to other mechanisms o f control, namely, the power o f the CPS to take over

        a prosecution and terminate it or the power o f the Attorney-General to enter a nolle

        prosequi, both o f which are retrospective, not pre-emptive. "



 3.4    A policy on intervention would be unlawful if it operated to deny the right o f private

 prosecution and undermine an essential safeguard against impropriety by the prosecuting

authority of the State. That is manifestly not the situation in this case.




The Code for Crown Prosecutors

        SUBMISSION: The Director’s policy is unlawful because:

        (1J it falsely reasons that because private prosecutors are not bound to apply

       the Code when deciding whether to institute proceedings, the principles of

       the Code are irrelevant to whether be should intervene and discontinue;

       [2] thus it fails to recognise that the principles enshrined in the provisions of

       the Code are fundamental to an assessment o f whether the private

       prosecution is proper in all the circumstances;

       [3] it fails to take account o f the extent to which a defendant has been

       induced to rely upon the Director’s prior application of the Code.




       7 Murray: tab6/p. 16-17; report paragraph 5.26.

                                                 6
PARK CT. CHAMBERS.         Fax:01132421285                   19 Mar ’99        9:2b      r'.Uf




 4.1     By section 10, Parliament has imposed a statutory duty upon the Director to issue a Code

 for Crown Prosecutors for determining whether proceedings should be instituted or discontinued.




 4.2     The terms of the Code are the principles upon which the prosecuting authority within the

  State will act when deciding whether to institute, continue or discontinue criminal proceedings

 against the subject. Section 10(3) requires that alterations to the Code shall be reported to

 Parliament, It is'a document of constitutional importance whose terms reflect the public interest

 considerations which are relevant to the criminal prosecution o f the citizen by the State.




 4.3     The Director’s opinion is that private prosecutors are not bound to apply the Code when

 deciding whether to institute proceedings8. But it cannot have been Parliament’s intention that

 the principles underlying the provisions o f the Code should be immaterial in the case of a private

 prosecution, or that the Director should disregard the extent to which a private prosecution is

 inconsistent with the terms of the Code when deciding whether to exercise his powers under

 section 6(2) and 23(3).




 The Director ’$ obligation to stand bv a proper decision

        SUBMISSION: the policy is unlawful because it fails to recognise that the

        198S Act implies a primary duty on the Director to stand by and give effect

        to a proper and defensible decision not to prosecute; a fortiori in a section

        3(2)(b) case,



        8 CPS rea$on$ letter 1 February 1999; Murray, tab 4/p.2 paragraph 3.


                                                 7
  PARK CT. CHAMBERS.            Fax:01132421285                        19 Mar ’99       9:27        P. 08



        prosecution is inappropriate, he will only decline to take over their conduct and

        discontinue them if he is satisfied that it is in the public interest that he should not

        intervene, notwithstanding his decision not to institute or continue a prosecution.”




6.3      The ‘reasons letter’ states:

         “The Service's policy is that it will not take over a private prosecution with a view to

        terminating it unless one or more o f the following applies:

        (I) there is clearly no case to answer. A private prosecution started in these circumstances

        would be unfounded, and ought not to be permitted to continue; or

        (ii) the public interest factors tending against prosecution clearly outweigh those in favour

        (examples might be where the prosecution is malicious or vexatious; or the offence is

        onefor which the defendant should clearly have been cautioned; or where, although the

        offence may be serious, the defendant is terminally ill); or

        (Hi) the prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests o f justice. "



This is substantially the same as the terms o f the ‘policy letter’, where the author refers to the two

Code tests: ‘evidential’ and 'public interest’, and states:

        “The policy where proceedings have been commenced by a private prosecutor builds

        on that contained in (he Codefo r Crown Prosecutors. ”



The ‘clearly no case to answ er' test.

7.1     Where the Director has already decided that there is no realistic prospect o f conviction

under the Code this will have led to a decision not to prosecute or to discontinue. When the issue

is whether to take over and discontinue a private prosecution in such circumstances, it is accepted

that a failure to meet the ‘realistic prospect o f conviction’ test cannot by itself be an automatic
 -   k   \   =_    .   u   - - . « . d -!K5 .   r d x .„ ....5 /'i.^ jL z 'y D
                                                                                          r sviar yy   y:^y   jj




                  with tt I'ii'w t<>terminating them, >•                              -

After a paragraph dealing with charges against Mr Duckenfield alone, the ‘reasons letter’ goes

on:

                  "I also considered whether, nevertheless, there were overriding public interestfactors

                  that should h a d to the Service intervening with a view to discontinuance... ".

The letter discloses a fundamental error of approach. This is the consequence o f transposing the

two-stage ev id e n tia l and public interest tests from a context where they work efficiently to a

context where a separate evidential test is inapposite. The test is not only wrong in itself, but it

also leads to a distorted evaluation o f the public interest factors. The effect o f a conclusion that

there is not 'clearly no case to answer’ is that the private prosecution becomes invested with an

evidential legitimacy and justification which other, non evidential, public interest factors must

combine to overcome before the Director will intervene. This is wrong. It replicates the

conventional ap p roa ch under the Code where the public interest factors against prosecution are

set against the decision that prosecution is justified on evidential grounds.




The “public interest factors ’ test

SUBMISSION;

                  [1] the extent to which the private prosecution of a section 3(2)(b) case will

                  be unlikely to result m conviction is an important consideration which the

                  Director must take into account;

                  [2] it should not be treated as a free-standing ‘evidential test’, and then set

                  up against ‘public interest factors’; it is one of the important public interest

                  factors;


                                                                                 11
                             "dX ■^JL..vViszlizlbO              ^   'd"   rr   3-ZO




        [3] it is not in the public interest that a section 3(2)(b) case should be

        privately prosecuted where the evidence is insufficient to convict; the policy

       should lean towards intervention in such a case unless public interest

        considerations clearly require that the prosecution should nevertheless

        continue.




8.1     Apart from being wrong for the reasons just stated, this part o f the policy is also wrong:

because it gets the approach completely wrong.




        SUBMISSION: Where, ex hypothesi, the Director considers that a section

        3(2)(b) case should not be prosecuted, his test for intervention should be to

        consider whether there are public interest factors in favour of the private

        prosecution continuing which clearly outweigh those against.




8.2     Such an approach is consistent with the terms and underlying policy o f the 1985 Act, and

is calculated to serve the broader public interest.




8.3    The policy is also wrong because it does not take account o f relevant considerations, for
►

example the fact that the defendant has repeatedly been assured that he will not be prosecuted.

This is the consequence o f disregarding the provisions o f the Code.




The (dearly likely to damage the interests o f justice te st’

9.1    Wrong. Why ‘clearly’? If the Director concludes that there is a real possibility that a

private prosecution might damage the interests o f justice, that is a sufficient basis for

                                                     12
                                                             ..y Mar   yy     y:^«          :.;z




intervention, particularly in a case of importance and difficulty which he considers ought not to

be being prosecuted.



The reasoning in the present case-

Evidence and prospects o f conviction

 10.1   The submissions by HFSG to the Director in support o f the private prosecution relied

 heavily upon the proposition that material disclosed since the Scrutiny afforded an evidential

 basis for conviction which had not previously been considered by the Director (or any of the

 Inquiries or Inquests). In detailed submissions on behalf of the Applicants, the Director was

 invited to reject that argument.




 10.2   On 18 December 1998, the Director was asked to indicate whether the decision not to

 intervene was based upon a finding of “new” evidence since his last consideration of the case".

 The response in the ‘reasons letter’ was that the question indicated a misunderstanding o f the

 factors the CPS considers.




 10.3   The Director has not said that he found there was new evidence. The inference must be

. either that he agreed there was not, or that he wholly failed to consider whether there was any

 substance in the private prosecutor’s pretext for launching a private prosecution, and disregarded

the Applicants’ submissions that the pretext was spurious. It is certain that the Director did not

consider that HFSG had established that there was a reasonable prospect o f conviction.




        11 Letter: Murray/tab4, p. 18

                                                13
Public interest factors

          SUBMISSION: following the Scrutiny and conclusions of Stuart-Sraith LJ,

          and the public pronouncements of the Home Secretary, the Director and the

          A t t o r n c y - C c n c r a l accepting his recommendations, there remain no public

          interest factors which can possibly justify a private prosecution.



11.1      The reasons letter wholly fails to identify any public interest factor in favour of

prosecution, notwithstanding that the author expresses the conclusion that public interest factors

tending against prosecution "clearly did not outweigh those in fa v o u r".



11.2      The conclusion is perverse and so wholly unreasonable that it should not be allowed to

stand.




11.3     Further, the approach was wrong. The decision should have turned upon finding public

interest reasons in favour of prosecution which outweighed those against.



11.4     Relevant public interest factors against the prosecution include:

•        there is no realistic prospect o f conviction;

•        for over nine years, the Applicant has been assured by various public pronouncements of

         the Director, the Home Secretary and the Attorney General that his prosecution is

         unjustifiable; this has created a legitimate expectation that he will not be prosecuted,

         which it is not open to the Director to disregard;

         committal proceedings and any subsequent trial would be a protracted and expensive use

         o f court time;
defence o f the proceedings would impose a substantial costs burden upon either the South

Yorkshire Police Authority, or the legal aid fund and the Applicant personally, which

would be irrecoverable against HFSG which is (so far as the Applicant is able to

determ ine) an unincorporated body which has made no disclosure as to the extent o f its


funding;

both Stuart-Smith L.J. (in his Scrutiny Report) and McCowan L.J. (in the Divisional

Court) accepted that recollections of witnesses are likely to be, or already have been,

adversely affected by passage o f time;

 Since 1990, the South Yorkshire Police Force has publicly accepted substantial liability

for the disaster and has to date paid over £13 million in compensation to the bereaved and

 injured;

 in August 1992, the Applicant was forced to retire from the police service on grounds of

 ill health occasioned as a consequence o f his involvement in the tragedy; continuation o f

 the present prosecution would be injurious to his health;

 regrettably, HFSG has become a relentless campaigning pressure group driven by an

 obsessive belief that the South Yorkshire Police Force and the West Midlands Police

 Force (appointed by the Police Complaints Authority to investigate the conduct o f the

 South Yorkshire Force) have been involved in a conspiracy to suppress the truth about

 the disaster; their highly publicised campaign to have the Taylor Inquiry and the Inquests

 re-opened continues;

 it is not in the broader interests of justice for such a serious and high profile criminal

prosecution to be mounted and conducted by a highly partisan body lacking a proper

capacity for objectivity, and who claims not to be bound to adhere to the principles o f the

Code for Crown Prosecutors.

                                          15
                                 ' C.A •-~..oz*~z„zoo             ..3 'CL!          z'a:




5.1      The whole balance o f the policy is wrong because it fails to accord any weight to the

principle that where the Director is satisfied that his decision not to prosecute is proper and

defensible, the public interest requires that he should stand by it. A defensible decision not to

prosecute does not become indefensible merely because a private prosecutor claims that it was

wrong.



Specific criticisms o f the nolicv and its anvlication

6.1      For the above reasons, the policy and decision process was wrong in law. The policy is

set out in a CPS ‘policy letter’ 27 July 19989, and repeated in the ‘reasons letter’ o f 1 February

1999'°.




6.2      “The CPS will take over a private prosecution where there is a particular need for it to do so

on       behalf o f the public. " [ ’policy letter p. 178, §3]

Wrong for two reasons.

[1]      “On behalf o f the public” excludes the interests o f potential defendants. Should be:

          “will take over a private prosecution where it is appropriate to do so in the public

          interest, having regard to all the circumstances o f the case, including the

          legitimate interests o f the private prosecutor and the defendant” ,

[2]      Does not discriminate between section 3(2)(b) and other cases. The policy in section

          3(2)(b) cases should be:

          “Where a private prosecutor institutes proceedings in a case where the Director

          has a duty to conduct them, but the Director decides or has decided that a


          9 CPS policy letter 27 July 1998; Murray, tab 4/pp,177-180.

          10 See footnote 8.

                                                        8
Alternative Remedy

12.1   It is wrong to regard abuse of process applications in the magistrates’ court or the Crown

Court as an alternative avenue of challenge or remedy. Such remedy as the Applicant might seek

before the courts is additional to not alternative.




12.2   The Applicant is entitled to challenge the policy and decision of the Director, and the only

forum for that is the High Court by way o f judicial review. The issues are o f general public

importance.




Delay - vre the decision and reasons

13.1   It is understood that the Director will argue that the Applicant had an alternative remedy,

vi2 to challenge the policy by way of judicial review following receipt of the ‘policy letter’ in

July 1998, and before receipt o f the decision letter (18 December 1998) or reasons letter (1

February 1999).




13.2   The Applicant would rightly have been refused leave.




13.3   The Applicant made extensive representations to the Director on policy issues as part of

his detailed submissions12.




Delay - post decision and reasons




           Murray: tabfi/pp.64-66.
                                                            n var      yy     y :6U        '.b
                         irdX ■ ..L£>/Lt--/LL/ 0 3




14.1   The appl ication was made promptly.




14.2   If the Court considers there has been anything amounting to dela'v, j[ has been caused

entirely by,the conduct o f the Respondent and Intervenor. The Director delayed from mid-

December 1998 to early February 1999 before deciding to disclose a rea.wnis [etter. In January

1999, the Intervenor began an active and highly publicised campaign to |t0rsuade the South

Yorkshire Police Authority to rescind its decision to provide funding for the A pplicant in defence

of the criminal charges and in the instant proceedings. The Court is u<Vare o f the Chief

Constable’s application for judicial review o f that decision.




14.3   In the present Application, the Intervenor argues that the AppHcam. is, gujjty o f culpable

delay for not making the present application in December 1998 (before -riu. reasons had been

given). In the Police authority funding case, the Intervenor has argued that Uk; Applicant’s legal

advisers 'were profligate with regard to public funds because it was dxu              that sUch an

application would be made before reasons were given. The position w ii(at ^ was thought

inevitable that the Director’s decision would be susceptible to review, bu t t)mt jt was essential

to consider the reasons before a final decision.



                                                                 Michael Ham m iti Q .c.


                                                                 Simon Myerwnn


Park Court Chambers
LEEDS.
18 March 1999, k



                                                     17
