                                                                                 - I   FEB 1998 |

From:          R J Clifford
               ABCU
               Room 970 QAG
               273 3560

               30 January 1998

Mr Evans

HILLSBOROUGH

Mr Pugh copied to you his note of 29 January to Ms Wheldon regarding Lord Justice Stuart
Smith’s report and sought advice on how the Home Secretary might respond on the points
made relating to inquests.

2.    There are two main issues in the report: further complaints about the inquest and a
more general point about inquests following judicial inquiries.

3.      As regards the former, specific complaints were made to Lord Justice Stuart Smith
about the coroner’s directions to the jury on the findings of fact, on his ruling regarding the
use of transcripts, and about variations between the coroner’s summing up and the findings
of the Taylor enquiry. Lord Justice Stuart Smith found that none of them had anything to
do with fresh evidence or had any substance, and dismissed them accordingly.

4.     As far as handling goes, however, the issues raised are strictly matters for the
Attorney General to consider in assessing whether there is a case for application to be made
to the High Court for a fresh inquest. It would therefore be appropriate for the Home
Secretary to be relatively non-committal.

5.     On the general question of inquests and judicial inquiries, the Home Secretary
should be able to acknowledge the endorsement of the recommendations of the report of
the Home Office Working Group and agree with the points which Lord Justice Stuart Smith
makes. The report’s recommendations have not formally been adopted by Ministers pending
any comments from those to whom the report was made available. But Ministers have
approved the recommendations in principle and the main obstacle to implementation has
been Parliamentary time and lack of a suitable vehicle. The report is not without its critics,
however. We know that some coroners are concerned that a judicial inquiry may not
adequately deal with the medical cause of death, while some civil litigation lawyers see the
report as a missed opportunity to introduce a radical, new, ’one-stop shop’ judicial forum
for resolving all the medico-legal issues arising from fatal disasters. But I do not think that
should prevent the Home Secretary agreeing with the points made in Lord Justice Stuart
Smith’s report.

6.    We should, of course, offer to contribute to the proposed statement by the Home
Secretary and any relevant background briefing, as required.




                                                     R J CLIFFORD
