                  With   Compliments


                          tw      oj   ^             to ^
F8 Division          ^            Ca 9 ^     A       V^ J*~
Home Office                       Cj:T ^ \       J
50 Queen Anne's Gate                    y
LONDON SW1H 9AT                   \ ^ ^ L\ .

T e l : 071 273                   »                  T)       <7
                                 \juoU2_
                        From: T   he   P r iv a t e S e c r e t a r y



                                                                          H o m e O ffice
                                                                         QUEEN ANNE'S GATE

                                                                          LONDON SW1H 9A.T




Our Ref:   QPE/91   52/3/59




Thank you for your letter of 4 April enclosing a copy of one
to the Prime Minister from Mr S Jones,
                       Liverpool          about the Hillsborough
d i s a s t e r . M r Jones, jfhose brother was one of the victims,
alleges that the recently concluded inquest was a 'cover up'
and that those responsible for the disaster have not been
brought to justice.

A draft Prime Ministerial reply to Mr Jones is attached for
your consideration.

I am copying this letter to Mela Watts, Office of the Minister
for Sport, DES.  I understand that they were happy for us to
answer.




                                                              P W PUGH




 William Chapman Esq
!■
 DRAFT REPLY FOR SIGNATURE BY PRIME MINISTER


 S Jones Esq




                                     nf 2 ADril about   the inquest into
     Thank you for your        letter ot IAprix a
     the Hillsborough disaster.
 A

     while X appreciate the distress of those who
     at Hillsborough I am afraid that I cannot agree with you
     suggestion that there has been a 'cover up            on this matte .


     First,     there was the full public inquiry into the tragedy
      conducted by Lord Justice Taylor which reported in January,
      second,    there was     the inquest into the deaths at Hillsboroug
      which took over a        hundred days to examine the material fac                  .
      The Home Secretary has general responsibility for the                    a
      governing inquests but he has no power to comment upon the way
      in which a coroner, who is an independent judicial office ,
      carries out his duties in any particular case.


      I should also explain that it is not the function of an
       inquest to determine liability.        The law states. that the
      purpose of an inquest is to ascertain the identity of the
       deceased and how, when and where he came by his death.                      The
       Coroners Rules specifically provide that neither the corone
       nor the jury shall express any opinion on any other matte                         .
       in addition,      the Rules specifically prohibit the framing of an
       inquest verdict in such a way as to appear to determine any
       question of criminal liability on the part of a named person,
       or civil liability.         Any issue of civil or    c r i m i n a l   liability
       is a matter for the civil or criminal courts and not the

       c o r o n e r ’s inquest.

       If anyone is dissatisfied with an inquest, under section 13 of
        the Coroners Act 1988 it is open to them to apply, wi
        authority of the Attorney General,       for the High Court to quash
the verdict and order a fresh inquest to be held, either by
the same coroner or a different one.    Coroners inquests are
also subject to judicial review by the High Court.


Lord Justice Taylor made 76 recommendations in his Final
Report, many of them concerning crowd safety.    Our information
is that they were largely and quickly implemented by the
responsible authorities.    Indeed many of them had been
originally included in his Interim Report and had been
implemented even prior to the Final Report being published.
The Government have made it clear that the responsibility for
the provision of all seated accommodation at football league
grounds rests with the clubs themselves.    As you will probably
know the Government has made £100 million available to the
Football Trust over a five year period to assist clubs in
carrying out these improvements.    The Football Licensing
Authority has been established and will provide in England and
Wales the national inspectorate and review body recommended in
the Final Report.    In addition the Guide to Safety at Sports
Grounds   (The Green Guide) has been revised incorporating,
where appropriate,   the safety recommendations of
Lord Justice Taylor.


Your letter also refers to an incident at a match between
Notts County and Leicester City on 23 March.     Nottingham
County Council are the local authority responsible for issuing
a safety certificate to the ground under the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975.    They have assured me that no injuries
resulting from crushing occurred at the match and that fans
were easily able to pass through the gates in the perimeter
fence which were open.     They have also assured me that in the
part of the ground where the incident occurred the attendance
was only 77% of the capacity.
