HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

The Hillsborough Inquest

Q.    Do you believe a fresh inquest should be held?

A.    That is a matter for the Attorney General. As I have explained, the Attorney General
      takes the view that, on the material so far presented, any application to the High
      Court for a new inquest would not have any realistic prospect of succeeding.

Q.    What about the recent medical evidence that victims were alive after 3.15?

A.    Whether it was appropriate to regard 3.15 as the point at which all the victims were
      likely to have died was an issue thoroughly examined during the judicial review of
      the inquest. The Divisional Court was satisfied that there were insufficient grounds
      to reopen the inquest.

Q.    Was it right for the coroner to select witnesses, with the help of the police, when
      the police were so closely involved with the disaster?

A.    A coroner is the independent investigator into the circumstances of a death. An
      inquest is his enquiry and it is for him decide what evidence to admit and which
      witnesses to call. He must discharge his responsibilities judicially and at no time show
      bias towards any of those involved with the death.

Inquests and Disasters

Q.    Is the inquest system equipped to deal with deaths arising from disasters?

A.    On the whole the existing arrangements work well. However, where a public enquiry
      has been established by the Government, there can be an overlap between the inquest
      and the enquiry. In these circumstances, the Report of the Working Party on Disasters
      and Inquests, which was published earlier this year, recommended that the inquest
      should normally be adjourned pending the inclusion of the enquiry, and should not
      normally be resumed. This would relieve relatives from the need to give evidence
      twice over.

Q.    What action is being taken to implement these recommendations?

A.    The main change proposed is to relieve coroners of the need to resume their inquest
       after the enquiry has been completed. There is no immediate prospect of a suitable
       legislative opportunity to amend the Coroners Act 1988 but the Government intends
       to pursue the matter when such an opportunity arises.

       It is already open to coroners to adjourn inquests pending an enquiry if they feel it
       appropriate to do so.
Q.    What would have happened if the recommendations had been in place at the time
      of the Hillsborough disaster?

A.    Subject to a certificate from the Lord Chancellor, there would have been no need to
       resume the inquest unless the coroner had decided that there was some exceptional
       reason for doing so.

       The families of those who died would have been spared some additional distress.

Q.    Why not create a new sort of court which could deal with issues of guilt or
      compensation as well as the circumstances of the disaster and the causes of
      death?

A.    We have no plans to devise a new tribunal to encroach on the existing jurisdiction of
      the civil or criminal courts.

Controversial and difficult inquests

Q.     Why are controversial inquests not heard before a judge rather than a coroner?

A.     Judges have a very limited experience of dealing with the issues which arise in an
       inquest and the loss of the coroner’s expertise is unlikely to be helpful. Difficult and
       controversial inquest cases can, however, raise particular problems and we are ready
       to consider whether any changes might be needed.

Q.     Why are controversial inquests held in the local coroner’s court when the jury
       might be unduly influenced?

A.     The coroner’s inquest is a form of local justice but coroners already have the power
       to transfer jurisdiction for a case to another coroner where it is expedient to do so.

Legal aid

Q.     Why is legal aid not available to relatives in inquest cases?

A.     Legal aid is not available to cover representation at an inquest, but legal advice under
       the ’Green Form’ scheme may be obtained by those whose means are within the
       qualifying limits.

       Responsibility for legal aid rests with the Lord Chancellor.

Advance disclosure and conduct of the inquest

Q.     Why are relatives not allowed to have copies of statements or other documents
       in advance of an inquest hearing?

A.     An inquest is not a trial. There are no issues to be litigated between parties in the
       coroners courts so there is no requirement for documents to be released in advance
       of the inquest. The release of any documents to interested persons in advance of an
         inquest is entirely a matter for the coroner.

Q.    Why are relatives not allowed to call their own witnesses to give evidence at an
      inquest?

A.    While it is a matter for the comer to decide which witnesses to call, it is always open
      to interested persons to let the coroner know who might be an appropriate witness.

Delays

Q.    What is being done to ensure that the bodies of the deceased can be returned to
      their families as soon as possible?

A.       Coroners are well aware of the need to complete their enquiries and release the bodies
         at the earliest opportunity - and this is done in the great majority of cases. In some
         cases, however, where criminal proceedings are in process or anticipated, bodies may
         need to be retained for further examination in the interests of justice. We are
         considering what steps can be taken to mitigate the delay and additional distress this
         can cause to relatives.

Inquests: general

Q.       What are the procedures for coroners’ inquests?

A.       An inquest is a judicial enquiry conducted by a coroner in order to establish the
         answers to a limited range of questions surrounding a death which has been reported
         to him. It is normally held in public according to procedures set down in the
         Coroners Act 1988 and the Coroners Rules 1984.

Q.       What is the role of the jury?

A.       The role of the jury at an inquest is todetermine the verdict.In most cases, a jury
         is not required, but in certain circumstances, such as a death in custody, a jury is
         mandatory. A coroner may decide to convene a jury in other cases if he considers it
         appropriate to do so.

Q.       Who meets the costs of inquests?

A.       The cost of an inquest is met by the relevant local authority as the coronersservice
         is locally funded.

Q.       Why do coroners have the power to order post mortem examinations without the
         consent of the next of kin?

A.       It is for the coroner to determine the cause of death of the deceased. It would not be
          right for the scope of his enquiry to be fettered by the next of kin. But the coroner’s
          powers extend only to such examination as is necessary to establish the medical cause
          of death; he has no power to authorise the removal of specimens or other material for
          unrelated purposes.
Inquests: verdicts

Q.     Does an accidental death verdict mean that no one was to blame?

A.     It is not the function of a coroner’s inquest to determine questions of blame. An
        accidental death does not necessarily mean that no one was to blame for it, and the
        inquest verdict does not deprive any person of any civil remedy which otherwise
       might be available.

Q.     Why do inquests not return more verdicts of unlawful killing?

A.     The verdict of unlawful killing is reserved for cases of homicide (except where the
       killing was justified). To return such a verdict, the court must be satisfied to the
       criminal standard of proof.

       The normal standard of proof in the coroner’s court is on the balance of probabilities.

       There were 169 verdicts of unlawful killing returned in 1996.

Q.     What about lack of care?

A.     Lack of care in the coroner’s court has nothing to do with civil negligence and does
       not indicate a breach of duty. To return such a verdict there must be a clear causal
       connection between a failure to provide physical care and the death.
A FRESH INQUEST

In proposing a fresh inquest the following matters to be noted:

              A matter for the courts, either on judicial review or, with the consent of the
              Attorney General. Home Secretary has no power to direct a fresh inquest.

              Application to the Attorney General was refused in 1993

              Judicial review held in 1993 but refused a fresh inquest

              the significance of any new evidence

              whether a fresh inquest would result in a different verdict

              the consequences of a fresh inquest/different verdict

POWER TO ORDER

               A matter for the Attorney General under section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988

JUDICIAL REVIEW [R V HM Coroner for South Yorkshire ex parte Stringer and others]

Found:

               The procedure involving preliminary inquests (to avoid prejudice to possible
               criminal proceedings) was agreed by the families’ legal representative and
               positively supported by them

               Criticism of apparent bias of the coroner as a result of his being appointed
               and paid by Sheffield City Council not justified. The court noted that it was
               not raised before or during the 96 days of the inquest

               Coroner’s directions in respect of the elements of the offence of
               manslaughter were not wrong in law and followed the judgement of R v
               West London Coroner ex parte Gray and others. Even if this was a
               misdirection as a result of subsequent R v Holloway, there was nothing to
               suggest that the jury would have brought in an unlawful killing verdict or
               that the verdict returned was not perfectly rational

               Use of summaries of statements was agreed with the relatives’ legal
               representative

               The ’cut-off point of 3.15 pm adopted was a reasonable and sustainable
               point. Moreover

               Failure to take evidence from Dr Ashton and Dr Phillips, or a Mr Eccleston,
               was not likely to make the slightest difference
                no justification for allegation that the inquest was not given a full picture.
                Where there was evidence that the deceased might have been alive after 3.15
                the Coroner showed flexibility in pursuing the possibility, investigated it and
                sought comments from the relevant pathologist

                Dr West’s opinion casting doubt on a diagnosis was too tenuous to justify
                a fresh inquest

               It would not have been appropriate for the jury to return a ’lack of care’
               verdict and that the coroner had invited the jury to consider a narrative
               verdict. Court satisfied that the inquisition was correctly completed and the
               directions to the jury were impeccable.

               No grounds or value in seeking a fresh inquest

NEW EVIDENCE

ie evidence which was not available at the time of the original inquest, would have been
admissible had it then been available, is credible and relevant to an issue of significance in
the inquisition, and might have made a material difference to the verdict recorded at the
original inquest

A matter for the courts


PROSPECTS OF DIFFERENT VERDICT (on new evidence)

A fresh inquest may be justified if there is a possibility of a different result, but not for the
Government to offer a view


PURPOSE OF A FRESH INQUEST

Already considered by Divisional Court

Police criticism?

Already done by Taylor report

Criticism of emergency services?

No evidence to justify

A further examination of the last moments of the deceased?

A harrowing process serving no obvious process
In addition:

Events then 4 1/2 years ago, 7 1/2 years ago now. Time alone a factor to argue against


PRACTICAL EFFECT OF VERDICT

The findings of an inquest do not bind any person affected by them. The inquest conclusion
must not be framed in such a way as to appear to determine any question of criminal
responsibility on the part of a named person or any question of civil liability. There is no
reason to suppose that a finding of accidental death precludes the institution of further
proceedings.

Why do inquests not apportion blame?

Fairness. A defendant or respondent must be afforded certain safeguards such as a clear
statement of the alleged wrongdoing, ta right to call relevant and admissible evidence and
a right to address factual submissions to the court. None of these provisions apply at an
inquest which is concerned with facts, not faults.


AVAILABLE VERDICTS (as put to jury by Coroner)

Accident

Accident can mean the unexpected result of a deliberate act. Such a verdict does not deprive
any person of any civil remedy he may otherwise have.

Standard of proof: civil/balance of probabilities

Unlawful killing

All cases of homicide (murder, manslaughter etc), except where the killing was justified (eg
self defence). A distinction to be drawn between eg causing death by dangerous driving
(unlawful killing) and causing death by careless driving (accident).

Standard of proof: criminal/beyond all reasonable doubt

Divisional court held that there was nothing to indicate that the jury would have returned
an unlawful killing verdict if the coroner had addressed the jury differently on the point

Open

Insufficient evidence to establish any other verdict

OTHER VERDICT

Lack of care/neglect
Lack o f care/neglect

Has n o thing to do with the concept of civil negligence and cannot be used to indicate a
breach of duty of anyone.

Care means physical attention (eg failure to provide food, medicine etc, not carelessness)
and not a legal duty of care. To return such a verdict there must be a clear causal
connection between the physical lack of care and the death.

Rarely, if ever, appropriate on its own


Lack of care (not put to jury)

One of the grounds of the application for judicial review was that the coroner should have
left the verdict of "lack of care" available to the jury. The Divisional Court held that such
a verdict would not have been appropriate in this case. This prompted the alternative
suggestion that the jury should have been allowed to give a narrative verdict ie one which
sets out in more detail the circumstances and facts surrounding the deaths. The Divisional
Court was satisfied that the coroner in fact had done so.

It has been separately held that it would be wrong to incorporate within the verdict itself
whatever in the way of contributory causes could ultimately found a successful civil
liability claim.
