^fc.ennon, Paula

  From:                pmorgan
  Subject:             Hillsborough Stadium Disaster
  Date:                0 9 June 1997 14:58
  Priority:            High



   * * * Message forwarded by Absentee Manager from LCD1/LCD09/JROWE * * *

  Microsoft Mail v 3 .0 IPM.Microsoft Mail.Note
  From: Morgan, Pauline
  To: Willink, David
  Cc: Clegg, Alastair
      Thompson, Sheila
      Cale, Michelle
      Clarke, Debbie
      Killick, Judith
      Pigott, Maggy
      Richardson, Peter
      Holmes, Robin
      Hawkins, Grainne
      Rowe, Jenny
  Subject: Hillsborough Stadium Disaster
  Date: 1 9 9 7 -0 6 -0 9 14:58
  Priority: 4
  Message ID: FDF17F2C
  Conversation ID: FDF17F2C
  Attachments:
      PJM 552.DOC



   I attach a minute from Ray Sam s< < File Attachment: PJM552.DOC > >




                                                  Page 1
To:   Mr Willink                                  cc      Mr Burns
                                                          Mr Holmes
                                                          Miss Killick
                                                          Mrs Piggott
                                                          Miss Rowe
                                                          Ms Thompson
                                                          Mr Clegg
                                                          Ms Cale
                                                          Miss Clarke
                                                          Mr Richardson

From: Ray Sams
      LR, TP and LSD
      SEL, 6.24
         9   0629

         9 J u n e , 1997




                        THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER




1     I have just seen the Home         Secretary's    letter   of   5 June   to
the Attorney General about this.

2      There are 2 related issues that you might need to know
about.  Firstly, the Law Commission is doing work on liability for
psychiatric illness, which relates to damages claims arising out
of the Hillsborough disaster.   Briefly, a number of relatives of
Hillsborough victims were deemed to be beyond the rules enabling
damages for psychiatric illness, although a number of police
officers who attended victims at the scene were ruled inside the
scope.   This has been a long-running problem, and from time to
time the Law Reform Branch here has to deal with Ministerial
correspondence and PQs about the perceived inadequacies of the
law.    The Law Commission's consultation paper on liability for
psychiatric illness was issued in 1995, and according to its
latest annual report they hope to publish a report in late 1997 or
early 1998.     So it will be some considerable time before that
aspect  is resolved,   but  the  issue could be raised in the
"examination" that the Home Secretary proposes, and you might like




pjm553                                  1
to bear   that   in   mind   in   advising   on   who   should   lead   the
examination.

3    Secondly,   and more pertinently,      is the nature    of   the
"examination" itself.    As those advising the Home Secretary ought
to know perfectly well, the previous administration issued a PQ,
covering advice from the Council on Tribunals on a number of
aspects of the setting up, administration and conduct of public
enquiries, arising from the        Scott report.   (If you need a copy of
that material, I am sure Peter Richardson will be able to supply
you with one.)    Intriguingly, the Home Secretary's letter refers
to an "examination" rather than an enquiry.       There are no real
clues about what is proposed - for example, will the "examiner"
take oral evidence in public or private, and will his or her
findings be published.    I can see why the Home Secretary does not
want to announce an enquiry into whether there should be a further
public enquiry, but on     the     face of it the "examination" has some
features of an enquiry      in     itself.   You might want toestablish
from Home Office colleagues more of the detail of what              is
envisaged,   because   this   will make    a difference   to who    is
recommended to undertake the enquiry, and the extent to which that
person will need secretarial and other support.          The Cabinet
Office developed a checklist of points to be borne in mind in
respect of enquiries, which sits alongside the Council on Tribunal
advice, all of which is relevant.

4    In summary, the reason for this minute is to point out that
there could be considerably more to this exercise than simply
appointing a senior legal figure to carry out an examination.   If
there is anything I can contribute by way of help, I would be very
happy to do so.




                                  RAY SAMS




pjm553                               2
