                                                             Deponent Ann Adlington
                                                             Second Affidavit
                                                             Seven Exhibits
                                                             Sworn 19th March 1999

                                                             CO/856/99
                                                             CO/934/99
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE                                 € 0 /58 27 99 “
QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION
CROWN OFFICE LIST

IN THE MATTER OF APPLICATIONS FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW BY DAVID
DUCKENFIELD AND BERNARD MURRAY OF A DECISION OF THE CROWN
PROSECUTION SERVICE ANNOUNCED ON 18™ DECEMBER 1998

                        Second Affidavit of Ann Marie Adlington

1.   I swear this affidavit pursuant to the Order o f the Court dated 15th M arch 1999 that
      parties be ready to proceed with the substantive application if leave is granted and that
      these matters be heard with matter CO/582/99. In the main the issues raised arise out
      o f matters which have recently come to light.

                                    Submissions to DPP

2.   In my first Affidavit I referred to the fact that the Applicant Duckenfield’s file contains
      some o f the papers relevant to the CPS decision o f 18th December 1998. For ease o f
      reference I produce as Exhibit AMA2, the total submissions made to the CPS on
      behalf o f the Prosecution between 20th July 1998 and 9th October 1998.

3.   The documentation supporting the substantial submissions dated 24th September 1998
     (AMA2 pp 14-49) is produced as Exhibit AMA/3 in 2 files. File 1 contains Annexures
     A-C and E-P. File 2 contains Annex D.

4.   The supporting documents referred to in the prosecution’s letter o f 24th August are
     produced as Exhibit AMA/4.

                            The prosecution's policy o f openness

5.   Upon laying informations before the Leeds District M agistrates’ court in July 1 9 9 8 ,1
     also presented submissions as to the Issue o f Summonses which had been prepared by
     Leading Counsel. The reason for this was to ensure that the Stipendiary M agistrate
     was aware o f the history o f all relevant aspects o f the case. A copy o f the submissions
     is produced as Exhibit AMA/5.

6.   It can be seen that in its submissions the Prosecution has been totally candid in
     referring to every adverse decision made since the disaster. (AMA/5 p87) Whilst both
     Applicants in the present matter, and parties to CO/582/99, all appear anxious to bring


                                         Page 1 of 5
      to the attention o f this honourable Court the summary o f the “Scrutiny” conducted by
      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, the prosecution was likewise concerned to bring it to the
      attention o f the Stipendiary M agistrate before summonses were issued. (AMA/4
      pp88-94)

                          Omissions from various parties ’ evidence

7.    This approach is in stark contrast to the failure by the Applicant Duckenfield in the
      present matter to refer to the investigation by the Police Complaints Authority, and the
      formal charges o f neglect o f duty and other matters preferred against both defendants.

8.    Similarly, in matter CO/582/99, the Applicant and First Respondent have failed to
      disclose details o f Duckenfield’s and M urray’s initial applications to the South
      Yorkshire Police Authority (“ SYPA” ) for financial assistance. Applications were
      made in M arch and June 1998 respectively.

9.    In a separate Application for leave to move against the decision o f the SYPA to stop
      his funding (CO/1071/99) the Applicant M urray exhibits a letter dated Sunday 28th
      June 1998 to M r Wells, the former Chief Constable o f South Yorkshire Police, which
      contains his application for funding. (Exhibit RBM1 p i). No response to this request
      has been produced.

10.   In his affidavit in m atter CO/582/99 William James Wilkinson, the Clerk and Treasurer
       to SYPA, states at para 25 (Reference) that he approved the grant o f financial
       assistance to Mr M urray on 29th June 1998. N o documentary evidence o f this
       approval, or any conditions attached to the approval have been disclosed by any party.

11.   In the grounds o f Duckenfield’s application for leave to move against the decision o f
       SYPA to stop his funding, CO/1070/99, it is stated at paragraph 6 (Part 2 p6) that
      following the delivery o f Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’ report o f February 1998, the
      Applicant sought the advice o f the SYPA in relation to the Authority providing
      financial assistance for the costs and expenses o f defending a possible private
      prosecution brought against the Applicant by the HFSG. There is no indication as to
      whether or not this enquiry was in writing. N o documentary evidence o f this enquiry
      is produced.

12.   Paragraph 6 o f the Grounds then refers to correspondence dated 5th M arch 1998 from
       M r Wilkinson to the Applicant Duckenfield, confirming the following.-
       “I write with reference to Assistant Chief Constable I Daines’ letter to yourself dated
       27th February 1998 and the application which you have made for financial assistance
      tow ards the costs o f legal representation in the event o f a private prosecution being
      brought against you in connection with the Hillsborough disaster. Acting on behalf o f
      the Authority I wish to inform you that the Authority will meet your reasonable
       expenses in connection with this matter. Details o f any expenses incurred may be
       directed to ACC I Daines” .




                                        Page 2 of 5
13.   The letter from ACC Daines, written on the day that the SYPA authorised M r
      Wilkinson to consider applications for financial assistance from serving and former
      police officers, is not produced in Duckenfield’s Application (CO/1070/99), or in the
      Chief Constable’s Application (CO/582/99).

14.   In his affidavit in the Chief Constable’s proceedings, (Court Bundle 1/1 ppl8-22),
       ACC I Daines makes no reference to his letter o f 27th February 1998 to Duckenfield.
       The Grounds contain no reference.

                      The secrecy surrounding the funding arrangements

15.   I set out in greater detail the circumstances in which H FSG became aware o f the
       funding arrangements. The Prosecution, on several occasions, asked the legal
       representatives for both Applicants whether their legal costs were being met by South
       Yorkshire Police (“ SYP” ). I produce the relevant correspondence as AMA 6. It will
       be noted from the prosecution’s letter dated 17 September 1998 (AMA/6 pp2-4) that
       there was concern that the defendants were requesting and undertaking to pay HFSG
       for copies o f documents which were in the possession o f SYP. It seemed absurd that
       if SYP were funding, they should be asked indirectly to pay the costs o f copying and
       transporting documents which were already in the possession o f SYP.

16.   On 18th September 1998 I received a letter from solicitors for Duckenfield. They
      wrote: “The funding or conduct o f the defence case is not a matter for your or your
      client. W e do not propose to enter into any further correspondence about it” (AMA/6
      p i)

17.   In the light o f this response, on 21st September 1998 I telephoned the offices o f SYPA
       and requested copies o f any resolutions relating to the disaster which had been passed
       since the establishment o f the “ Scutiny” conducted by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. An
       officer from the Authority provided me with copies o f relevant resolutions. (Court
       bundle 1 pp 219-221)

18.   From the resolutions 1 gleaned that on l sl August 1997, the SYPA had set aside
       £500,00 for expenditure likely to be incurred in respect o f the “Scrutiny” . Further, the
       authority gave a commitment to provide financial assistance towards legal
       representation for officers (serving and retired) in connection with the “ Scrutiny”, in
       accordance with the principles set out in Home Office circular 77/87. The Clerk and
       Treasurer, in consultation with the Chief Constable, was authorised to determine
       applications .

19.   At that stage I also became aware that on 27th February 1998, SYPA had authorised
       M r Wilkinson to consider applications for financial assistance from officers facing
       private prosecution (Court Bundle 1/3 pp 129-130).

20.   After reading the resolutions I contacted SYPA and requested a copy o f the reports
      which led to the resolutions being passed. I was informed that the press and public
      were excluded from the meetings when the decisions were taken. The reports.


                                         Page 3 of 5
      therefore, were exempt from publication under Local Government Act 1972. I
      therefore requested details o f the grounds relied upon in excluding the press and
      public. I also asked for a copy o f the Authority’s Scheme o f Delegated Powers. The
      Deputy Clerk and Treasurer responded on 25th September (Court bundle l/4/p207).

21.   From the documents then in my possession I suspected that SYPA w ere indeed
       funding the Defence costs out o f the balance o f the £500,000 it had set aside for the
       legal costs o f the “ Scrutiny” . I estimated this to be quite considerable. I advised the
      H FSG o f my suspicions. As a result o f this, some o f the bereaved mothers raised the
      matter with the Home Secretary and the Chairman o f SYPA at a meeting o f the
      Association o f Police Authorities in Blackpool on 6th November.

22.   On 30th November the Assistant Chief Constable SYP, Ian Daines publicly confirmed
      that SYPA were indeed funding the Defence costs and would continue to do so until
      the case was concluded (Court Bundle 1/4 pp205-206). I formally objected to this on
      22nd December, as set out in paragraph 16 o f my first affidavit herein.

                                       Previous funding

23.   It was only when I received the documents from the SYPA in matter CO/582/99 that I
       became aware that after initially refusing to pay the costs o f legal representatives for 6
       officers at the inquest in 1990, the SYPA, on 7th December 1990, resolved to provide
       financial assistance (Court Bundle 1/3/106-107). Such assistance was applied
       retrospectively as the inquests had commenced on 19th November 1990 (Court Bundle
       2/7/583). These decisions were taken in the absence o f press and public.

24.   Members o f the H FSG who funded their own costs o f legal representation at the
      Inquests have, therefore, until recently laboured under the misapprehension that SYPA
      had refused to meet the legal costs o f the police officers at the inquest. The initial
      decision by SYPA to refuse assistance was widely reported in the press . Further, on
      the first day o f the inquest, legal representatives for police officers including
      Duckenfield had spoken in plaintive tones about the Police Authority’s decision to
      refuse funding. I have studied the inquest transcripts for 10th December (this being the
      first day the court sat after SYPA had granted assistance) and can find no reference by
      the officers’ legal representatives to the fact that on 7th December the SYPA had
      resolved to give financial assistance. There was obviously no coverage as the press
      had been excluded from the meeting.

25.   In his skeleton argument in matter CO/582/99 at Paragraph 35, Leading Counsel has
      stated that Philip Hammond would deal with the sensitivities surrounding this aspect o f
      the matter. However, M r Hammond is unable to prepare an affidavit due to shortage
      o f time. Through me he expresses shock and dismay at this recent disclosure. He feels
      betrayed by a system which secretly allows legal representation at inquests for police
      officers, whilst bereaved families managed to afford a single legal representative
      between them at the longest inquest in history. Forty three o f the families each
      contributed £3,500 for the services o f a junior barrister (occasionally replaced by one
      o f tw o solicitors).


                                          Page 4 of 5
26.       H FSG is also aggrieved upon the realisation that the decision o f SYPA to fond the
          officers’ costs at the inquest, had the direct effect o f increasing the costs to be met by
          HFSG, as such a heavy presence o f lawyers inevitably prolonged the length o f time for
          which the inquest sat.

27.      Until 5th February this year the H FSG was again faced with a public funding system
         which, had it been allowed to continue, would have produced such disparity in
         representation as to deeply offend any fair minded person. I produce as exhibit
         AMA/7 Judicial statistics for 1998, relevant to the legal aid arguments.

                                       Committal Proceedings

28.        I have been informed by telephone this morning that the Stipendiary M agistrate in
          Leeds feels, that given the circumstances which prevail in relation to the outstanding
          litigation in the Divisional Court, together with the fact that M r Manning has informed
          the Clerk to the Court that any adverse decisions next week would be appealed, he has
          no option other than to vacate the committal proceedings on 19th April. Further, M r
          Manning, apparently, will be in Israel at the end o f the month. I gather that M r
          Manning has also told the Court that Leading Counsel for M r Duckenfield is involved
          in a lengthy war-crimes trial.

29.      Copies o f the core committal bundle to be relied upon by the prosecution will be
         available in Court on Monday 22nd if needed.




SWORN this nineteenth day of March 1999                           J\
by the above named Ann Marie Adlington at                           *             ^
Liverpool in the County of Merseyside




Before me_______
         Solicitor/Commissioner for OarthTF


Name:



A d d re ss:
CO/856/99            CO/93 4/99

IN THE H IGH COURT OF JUSTICE
O IJEEN ’S BEN CH DIVISION
CROW N OFFICE LIST

IN THE M ATTER OF AN APPLICATION
FOR LEAVE TO APPLY FOR JUDICIAL
REVIEW

BETWEEN:

THE QUEEN
and
THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC
PROSECUTIONS
          Respondent

EX PARTE

David Godfrey Duckenfield
              A pplicant
and
Bernard Dean Murray
              Applicant


TO BE HEARD WITH:
THE QUEEN
and
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
AUTHORITY
          First Respondent
and
ANN MARIE ADLINGTON
          Second Respondent

EX PARTE

THE CHIEF CONSTABLE OF SOUTH
YORKSHIRE POLICE


Ann Adlington
Solicitor
Hillsborough Family Support Group
Central Buildings
41 N orth John Street
Liverpool L2 6RR
