                                                                                       (A
E.R.
                                                                         £
                                                                CRN/92      t
                                                                         6 6 /9 /^ ?
                                                                                 r3




       Miss Harrison
       D Division



       CORONERS INQUESTS : SUPPLY OF INFORMATION TO RELATIVES

   o
       Your note of 14 July requests advice about the release to
       relatives of the deceased of statements made to a firm of
       solicitors by members of the South Yorkshire Ambulance Service
       for the purposes of the Taylor Inquiry into the Hillsborough
       Disaster; the present coroner for South Yorkshire sees some
       merit in releasing these statements (now in his possession)
       although they were not admitted in evidence by his predecessor
       who held the inquest into the death of the boy concerned. The
       makers of the statements have indicated through their legal
       representatives that they do not consent to the release of the
       statements.


       I agree with Messrs. Dibb, Lupton, Broomhead, Solicitors, that
       Rule 57 of the Coroners Rules 1984 does not apply (a
       conclusion which you yourself have reached in paragraph 3 of
       your note). There is therefore no entitlement on the part of
       the relatives to a sight of the statements. The only question
       is therefore whether the coroner has a discretion to release
       the statements. I agree with your conclusion that the
       principle enunciated in the Blair Peach case applies and that,
       in the absence of consent on the part of the makers, the
       coroner would be committing a breach of confidence if he
       released the statements.
                                                      CRN/92   6 6 /9 /5


In my opinion, the application for an order to prevent the
coroner from releasing the statements which, it appears, would
be made by Messrs. Dibb, Lupton, Broomhead on behalf of their
clients in the event of the coroner indicating his willingness
to release the documents is likely to be successful. In these
circumstances, I would suggest that you advise Mr Dorries not
to release them.




                                          CAROLINE PRICE (MRS)
22 July 1992
Legal Adviser's Branch
Room 871
Queen Anne's Gate
Tel : 273 3515
