                                               ///^



IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
                                                      CQ     C)ZLt           199
QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION

CROWN OFFICE LIST

   IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION OF LEAVE TO APPLY FOR JUDICIAL
                              REVIEW

BETWEEN:                                                          £‘>1      .\ -.v,
                                                                      ,H    iriv:
                                                                             epv4<(,\-
                               THE QUEEN
                                                           09 M m j g o p jf ;
                                                      &      o-            M^
                                  and                 &.     CROWN          J:'/’
                                                             OFFir-l’
                 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
                                                                  Respondent
                               EXPARTE

                       BERNARD DEAN MURRAY
                                                                   Applicant



              AFFIDAVIT ON BEHALF OF THE APPLICANT
                                                                     (1) R B M anning
                                                                    (2) First A ffidavit
                                                   (3) Sworn on behalf o f the A pplicant
                                                               (4) Sworn 3 1 0 3 / q q
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE                                             CO______ [99
Q U EEN ’S BENCH DIVISION
CROW N OFFICE LIST
BETW EEN:

                                      THE QUEEN

                                            and


                     DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
                                                                                Respondent


                                       EXPARTE


                            BERNARD DEAN M URRAY
                                                                                  A pplicant


                 AFFIDAVIT OF RICHARD BRUCE M ANNING




I, RICHARD BRUCE MANNING, solicitor and partner in the firm of Walker Morris of Kings

Court, 12 Kings Street, Leeds LSI 2HL, a Solicitor of the Supreme Court MAKE OATH AND

SAY AS FOLLOWS:

1.    I have been at all material times a Partner of Walker Morris Solicitors, Leeds. In 1989

      I was instructed by Mr Bernard Murray to act on his behalf during the Inquest

      proceedings relating to the Hillsborough football disaster which occurred at the

      Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield on the 15th April 1989.



                                             1
2.   In 1998, when the Hillsborough Families Support Group (HFSG) commenced private

      prosecution proceedings against Mr Murray, I was further instructed by him in relation

      to defending him against these proceedings.



3.   I make this affidavit from my own knowledge through the extensive work that I have

      carried out on this matter since 1989.



4.   There is now produced and shown to me marked “RBM 1" a bundle of documents

      relevant to this application.



5.   Bernard Murray worked as a police officer for 26 years. He attained the position of

     Police Superintendent with the South Yorkshire Police and was stationed at Hammerton

     Road Police Station, Sheffield. On Saturday 15 April 1989, Bernard Murray held the

     position of Sub-Divisional Commander of the FI Sub-Division which includes Sheffield

     Wednesday Football Ground at Hillsborough. Bernard Murray had been posted to this

     Sub-Division on the 14 March 1988. He had been regularly carrying out duties in

     connection with football matches at Hillsborough, including the 1988 FA Semi-Cup

     Final   Match. On the day of the Hillsborough disaster, the Divisional Commander in

     charge of Police operations at the match was Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield.

     The match was the FA Cup semi-final between Liverpool Football Club and Nottingham

     Forest Football club. The events of the day led to 96 people losing their lives.



6.   Lord Justice Taylor was appointed by the Government on the 17th April 1989 to cany

     out a public enquiry into the events of the disaster. Oral evidence was heard from 174


                                               2
witnesses between 15th May and 29th June 1989. On the 4th August 1989, Lord Justice

Taylor presented an interim report in which he found as follows:



6.1     The immediate cause of the gross overcrowding and hence the disaster was the

        failure, when Gate C was opened, to cut off access to the tunnel leading to the

        central pens behind the goal which were already overfull;

6.2    They were overfull because no safe maximum capacities had been laid down, no

        attempt was made to control entry to individual pens numerically and there was

       no effective visual monitoring of crowd density.

6.3    The layout of the barriers afforded less protection than they should and this led

       to the collapse of the barrier.

6.4    The Operational Order and police tactics on the day failed to provide for

       controlling a concentrated arrival of large numbers should that occur in a short

       period.

6.5    The presence of a minority who had drunk too much aggravated the problem, as

       did the Club’s confused and inadequate signs and ticketing.



Lord Justice Taylor’s final report was dated the 18th January 1990 and he made several

recommendations in relation to crowd control and safety at sporting events.



The West Midlands Police had been appointed immediately after the disaster to conduct

a review o f the policing operation of the South Yorkshire Police. In March 1990, their

report was submitted to the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) for his consideration

as to whether there was sufficient evidence for prosecutions for manslaughter to be
       brought against seven officers who were in command during the Hillsborough Football

       disaster (including Bernard Murray).



9.    The Director of Public Prosecutions referred this report to two experienced Queens

       Counsel for their opinions. Counsel considered whether there was sufficient evidence

       for charges of manslaughter and offences of culpable misfeasance in public office to be

      made out against the officers. Counsel delivered a joint opinion on the 6th August 1990.

      Based upon the benefit of these advices, the then Director of Public Prosecutions Alan

      Green QC announced on the 30th August 1990 that there was insufficient evidence to

      justify any prosecution for a criminal offence against any member of the South Yorkshire

      Police Force, or any other party.



10.   On the 18th April 1990, the HM Coroner for South Yorkshire, Dr Stefan Popper

      commenced the first of a series of “mini inquests”.The purpose of these was to decide

      statutory questions as to when and where a particular victim died. These were necessary

      because during this period the DPP was still considering possible prosecutions against

      the parties involved. The Coroner did not examine how each victim died.



11.   Following the announcement by the Director of Public Prosecutions on the 30th August

      1990 that there would be no prosecutions, the Coroner’s Inquest resumed on the 19th

      November 1990 and continued until March 1991. This was the “main” inquest into the

      disaster and examined how each of the victims died. Some 230 witnesses gave evidence

      to the resumed Inquest. On the 28th March 1991 the jury returned a verdict of accidental

      death.


                                              4
In April 1993, an application was made by the families of the Hillsborough victims for

a judicial review to quash the inquest verdict and seek a fresh inquest. On the 5th

November 1993 the Divisional Court declined to grant an Order of a Certiorari to quash

the verdict of Accidental Death and to Order a fresh inquest.



Disciplinary proceedings were brought by the Police Complaints Authority alleging

neglect of duty against Bernard Murray and also Chief Superintendent David

Duckenfield. However before the planned hearing, it was announced by the South

Yorkshire Police on the 29th October 1991 that Mr Duckenfield would be retiring from

the force on the grounds of ill health. As a result of his early retirement, he did not have

to face the disciplinary tribunal.



Following Mr Duckenfield’s decision to retire, the Police Complaints Authority decided

on the 13th January 1992 not to proceed with the remaining charges against Bernard

Murray. The reasons for this decision was that it would be :

         “An injustice to the Superintendent who had conducted him self with dignity at
        the Inquest and throughout the investigations fo r him to stand alone and thus
        appear to be a scapegoatfo r faults that may well be attributable to others ”




On the 27 day of August 1992 Bernard Murray retired from the South Yorkshire Police

on the grounds of ill health, having been certified by the Police Surgeon, Dr Everson,

as medically unfit for performing the ordinary duties of a member of the force.



The apparent catalyst that led to a further review of the evidence in relation to the

disaster was a television drama documentary called “Hillsborough”. It was written by
Mr Jimmy McGovern a native of Liverpool. The programme was broadcast on 5

December 1996.



Various allegations were made within this programme, in particular that there was fresh

evidence in relation to the Hillsborough disaster.



Between March and May 1997, the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) conducted a

further review of the allegations that had been broadcasted within the Hillsborough

drama-documentary and generally. The conclusion reached and confirmed (inter alia)

in a letter dated February 1999 from Mr C W P Newell, Director Casework of the CPS

said “it is correct that the Crown Prosecution Service decided in 1997 that the evidence

at that time was not sufficient in its view to provide a realistic prospect of the conviction

by either your Client or Mr Duckenfield for any offence”.



On the 30th June 1997, the Rt Hon Jack Straw, the Home Secretary announced in

Parliament that there would be an independent scrutiny to examine whether there was

any fresh evidence in relation to the Hillsborough disaster. In particular, the Scrutiny was

to examine whether this “new” evidence might have a bearing on the various legal

procedures and decisions that have been taken in relation to the disaster. Lord Justice

Stuart-Smith was appointed to carry out this task. The terms of reference of the Scrutiny

were as follows :

        “To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the

       Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available;

        (a).    To the enquiry conducted by Lord Taylor; or
        (b).   To the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Attorney General for the

               purpose of discharging their respective statutory responsibilities; or

        (c).   To the Chief Officer of South Yorkshire Police in relation to Police

               disciplinary matters; and

        (d).   In relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously available

               is of such significance as to justify establishment by the Secretary of State

               for the Home Department of a further public enquiry; and

       (e).    In relation to (b) and (c) to draw to their attention any evidence not

               previously considered by them which may be relevant to their respective

               duties and to advise whether there is any other action which should be

               taken in the public interest”.



Whilst undertaking the Scrutiny, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith received various submissions

both in writing and in oral form from the HFSG, he met family members in Liverpool

and other people that he thought could aid him in his scrutiny including “new” witnesses

or witnesses who could, it was submitted, supply “additional” evidence.



His report was presented to the House of Commons on 18 February 1998. Lord Justice

Stuart-Smith concluded within Chapter Seven of his report th a t:

        “I have come to the clear conclusion that there is no basis upon which there
       should be a further judicial inquiry or a re-opening o f Lord Taylor’s inquiry.
       There is no basis fo r a renewed application to the Divisional Court or fo r the
       Attorney General to exercise his powers under the Coroners Act 1988.1 do not
       consider that there is any material which should be placed before the Director
       o f Public Prosecutions or the Police Complaints Authority which might cause
       them to re-consider the decisions they have already taken


On the 18th February 1998, the Rt Hon Jack Straw, the Home Secretary said in the
House of Commons in regard to the Scrutiny inter alia :

       “I, the Attorney General and the Director o f Public Prosecutions have considered
       Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report very carefully. We have no reason to doubt his
       conclusions ”.


On the 26th June 1998, informations were laid before a Justice of the Peace in the Petty

Sessional Division of South Sefton by Ann Adlington, Solicitor, acting on behalf of the

HFSG. These informations alleged that Bernard Dean Murray on the 15th day of April

1989 at Hillsborough Football Stadium, Sheffield :



       23.1    Unlawfully killed John Alfred Anderson, contrary to common law.

       23.2    Unlawfully killed James Gary Aspinall, contrary to common law.

       23.3    Willfully neglected to perform a public duty, contrary to common law.



Mr Murray was summoned to appear subsequently at the Court.



As a result o f objections made on behalf of Mr Murray to the HFSG and to the South

Sefton Magistrates Court, the informations were not proceeded with. On the 10th July

1998, the South Sefton Magistrates’ Court allowed the Prosecution to withdraw the

charges and made a consequential order for Defendant’s costs, pursuant to Section 16 of

the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985.



On the 13th July 1998, informations identical as to those that had been laid at South

Sefton were laid by the HFSG before the Leeds Petty Sessional Division. Summonses

were issued by the Stipendiary Magistrate, Mr Nigel Cadbury. These proceedings

continue and Committal proceedings have been listed for the 19th April 1999, with an
       estimated duration of four weeks.



27.    Upon the receipt of the original summonses, I wrote on 3 July 1998 to the Director of

       Public Prosecutions to request that the Director take over the conduct of the proceedings,

      pursuant to Section 6(2) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 and discontinue them,

      pursuant to Section 23(3) of the same Act.



28.   On the 27th July 1998, the CPS wrote Mr Keva Coombes, the then legal advisor to the

      HFSG. Within this letter, Mr George Croston, the Prosecution Team Leader stated :

       “It may help you if you are acquainted with our policy in cases o f this type. The Code fo r
      Crown Prosecutors contains principles that apply to the Crown Prosecution Service
      review ofcriminal proceedings started by the police. There are two stages in the decision
      to prosecute. Thefirst being the evidential test. I f the case does not pass that test, it must
      not go ahead, no matter how important or serious it may be. I f the case does pass the
      evidential test then a Crown Prosecutor must decide i f a prosecution is needed in the
      Public Interest. This second stage is the Public Interest test which I shall come to
      later.

      The Evidential test is an objective one and a Crown Prosecutor must be satisfied that
      there is enough evidence to provide a ‘realistic prospect o f conviction ’ against each
      defendant on each charge. In other words, a jury or bench o f magistrates, properly
      directed in accordance with the law, is more likely than not to convict the defendant o f
      the offence charged.

      Where there is enough evidence to provide a realistic prospect o f conviction the public
      interest must be considered. Crown Prosecutors must balance the factors fo r and against
      prosecution carefully and fairly.

      The policy where proceedings have been commenced by a private prosecutor builds on
      that contained in the Code fo r Crown Prosecutors. The right to bring a private
      prosecution is preserved by Section 6(1) o f the Prosecution o f Offences Act 1985 subject
      to the power under Section 6(2). The Crown Prosecution Service will take over a private
      prosecution where there is a particular needfor it to do so on behalf o f the public



      In the instant case where we have been asked by the Defendants to take over the
      prosecution in order to discontinue it, we would do so i f one (or more) o f the following
      circumstances applies:

                                                9
      »       There is clearly no case to answer. A private prosecution commenced in these
              circumstances would be unfounded, and would, therefore be an abuse o f the right
              to bring a prosecution.

      •       The public interestfactors tending against prosecution clearly outweigh those
              factors tending in favour.

      •       The prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests o f justice.

      The Crown Prosecution Servicewould then regard itself as having to act in
      accordance with our policy.

      Clearly there is a distinction between the “realistic prospect o f conviction ” test in the
      Code and the “clearly no case to answer ” test mentioned above. Accordingly we
      recognise that there will be some cases which do not meet the Crown Prosecution Service
      code tests where nevertheless we will not intervene. It has been considered that to apply
      the Code tests to private prosecutions would unfairly limit the right o f individuals to
      bring their own cases



29.   On the 24th August 1998, the HFSG served upon us the 38 witness statements upon

      which they are seeking to rely for the purposes of the private prosecution proceedings,

      and to secure a committal to the Crown Court under Section 6(2) or section 6(1) of the

      Magistrates’ Court Act 1980.



30.   On the 24th September 1998, the HFSG served upon us their submissions that they were

      making to the DPP in relation to our application for the DPP to take over and discontinue

      the proceedings. The HFSG served further representations upon us on the 2nd October

      1998.



31.   In the light of the submissions made by the HFSG and also the policy letter of the Crown

      Prosection Service of the 27th July 1998, a detailed set of submissions was prepared and

      sent to the Crown Prosecution Service on behalf of Mr Murray on 8 October 1998. This


                                              10
is now produced to me and marked “exhibit RBM6". Within these submissions, it was

argued that the statements and material alleged by the HFSG to be “new fresh evidence”

was in fact information and material which had been available to the 1989 public enquiry

of Lord Justice Taylor.



After lengthy period of consideration, The DPP through a letter from Christopher Enzor

dated the 18th December 1998 and stated th a t:

       “We have considered the evidence, the representations made by the parties and
       all the surrounding circumstances o f the case. We have concluded that we should
       not intervene to take over any o f the charges ”


I was extremely concerned that this important correspondence from the Crown

Prosecution Service contained no reference as to the factual matters upon which the

Crown Prosecution Service arrived at their decision and secondly, that no information

was given as to the way the Crown Prosecution Service applied their discretion under the

Code for Crown Prosecutors and statutes. I therefore wrote to the Crown Prosecution

Service on the 18th December 1998 requesting that they supply this information by

10:00am on the 21 st December 1998.



The response from the Crown Prosecution Service was eventually provided by a letter

dated 1 February 1999 from Mr C W P Newell, Director Casework of the Crown

Prosecution Service which said inter alia”

       “As you know, the Code fo r Crown Prosecutors sets out the general principles
       applied by the Service when (inter alia) deciding whether to continue a
       Prosecution it has taken over; or whether to institute proceedings, or to advise
       the Police whether to do so. It is correct that the Crown Prosecution Service
       decided in 1997 that the evidence at that time was not sufficient, in its view, to
       provide a realistic prospect o f the conviction o f either your Client or Mr
       Duckenfield fo r any offence. However, the decision whether to intervene in a
private Prosecution with a view to terminating it calls fo r different
considerations to apply. It is quite possible fo r a private Prosecution to continue,
notwithstanding that the Crown Prosecution Service is not satisfied, on the basis
o f its own assessment o f the strength o f the evidence, that the evidence would
pass the evidential sufficiency test in the code (that there could be a “realistic
prospect o f conviction ”).

In broad terms the reason fo r this is that Section 6(1) o f the Prosecution o f
Offences Act 1985, the Act which established the services, powers and duties,
specifically preserved the right ofprivate individuals and prosecuting authorities
or bodies other than the Crown Prosecution Service to bring criminal
proceedings. This right is subject (among other limitations) tot he limitation in
Section 6(2) that the Crown Prosecution Service may nevertheless take over the
proceedings with a view either to conducting or terminating those proceedings

Private prosecutors are not bound to apply the Code fo r Crown Prosecutors
when deciding whether to institute proceedings, nor do the Court supply the
evidentiary sufficiency test in the Code when deciding whether there is a case to
answer. The Service therefore recognises that it is not appropriate to intervene
to terminate a private Prosecution without good reason. That general principal
has recently been endorsed by the Law Commission in its consultation paper
number 149 “Consents to Prosecution” (seeparagraph 6.3 and 6.4).

The Services’policy is that it will not take over a private Prosecution with a view
to terminating it unless one or more o f the following apply.

1.      There is clearly no case to answer. A private Prosecution started in these
        circumstances would be unfounded and ought not to be permitted to
        continue; or

2.      The public interest factors tending against Prosecution clearly outweigh
        those in favour (examples might be where the Prosecution is malicious,
        or vexatious o f the offence is one fo r which the Defendant should clearly
        have been cautioned, or where although the offence may be serious, the
        Defendant is terminally ill); or

3.      The Prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests o f justice.

In this case I took the decision not to intervene. After careful consideration I
concluded in respect o f the charges o f manslaughter and wilful neglect to
perform a public duty (which, fo r the avoidance o f doubt, were considered
against each individual separately) that I could not say there is clearly no case
to answer. It was not right, therefore, fo r the service to take over the proceedings
with a view to terminating them.

Against that background, and after specifically considering the appropriate
course to take in these circumstances, I concluded further that it would not be
right to intervene in respect o f the one remaining charge against Mr Duckenfield,

                                 12
              or attempting to pervert the course ofjustice, albeit that I had form ed the view
              that there was clearly no case to answer on that charge alone. The charge o f
              attempting to pervert the course o f justice is a serious one, particularly when
              levelled against someone who was, at the relevant time, a serving Senior Police
              officer. Nevertheless, in the context o f the case as a whole, that charge is not the
              gravamen o f the criminality alleged against Mr Duckenfield and I concluded that
              my approach to that charge should be led by my conclusions on the charges o f
              manslaughter and willful neglect to perform a public duty

              I also considered whether, nevertheless, there were overriding public interest
              factors that should lead to the service intervening with a view to discontinuance,
               but I came to the conclusion that any public interest factors tending against a
              Prosecution did not clearly outweigh those in favour. Nor did I consider that the
              Prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests o f justice ”.



35.   Upon the issue of the summonses the South Yorkshire Police Authority had agreed to

      provide financial assistance to Bernard Murray by indemnifying him in relation to the

      legal fees that he would incur.        The South Yorkshire Police Authority received

      representations from the Hillsborough Family Support Group by their letter of 13 January

      1999 and which effectively asked the authority to review and rescind its decision in

      relation to payment of legal costs and not to provide any further financial assistance to

      Bernard Murray.



36.   Throughout the whole course of time since the disaster but in particular unabated since

      the issues of the summonses, HFSG have continued to make press statements, give

      interviews to newspaper, television and radio including the repetition of allegations

      already judicially discounted. They run a website updated with publicity as to the action

      they are taking and seeking to enlist others to support their activities e.g. the draft letter

      for South Yorkshire council tax payers to object to the continuation of funding.



37.   At a meeting of the South Yorkshire Police Authority on 5 February 1999, written and

                                               13
       oral submissions were considered. The Authority resolved that on balance it did not have

       the legal power to provide financial assistance to Bernard Murray either in regard to the

       Defence of the private Prosecution brought by HFSG or in regard to the costs of Judicial

       Review proceedings against the Crown Prosecution Service. The Authority therefore

       rejected the application of Bernard Murray for financial assistance and further declared

       that its previous decision to make assistance available to him in the criminal Prosecution

       was rendered null and void.



38.    As a result of recognition by the Authority that the legal advice they had received was

       that the point “remains arguable” the Authority agreed to find an appropriate means by

       which the decision could be reviewed by the High Court with expedition.



39.    On the 19 day of February 1999,1received from Hammond Suddards (Solicitors for the

       Chief Constable of South Yorkshire a copy of the Chief Constable’s application for

       Judicial Review of the decision of the South Yorkshire Police Authority lodged with the

       Crown Office under number C 05 82-99.



SWORN at      U l Jl A 1              )
                                      )
                                      )
                                      )

This tUVnl    day of M        199 ^


Before me




Solicitor/Gemmissioncr for Baths

                                              14
                                                                            (1) R B Manning
                                                                           (2) First Affidavit
                                                          (3) Sworn on behalf of the Applicant
                                                               (4) Sworn 3 10 3 j Q ^
                                                                        CO                (99
                                                     IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
                                                     QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION
                                                     CROWN OFFICE LIST

                                                      IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION
                                                      FOR LEAVE TO APPLY FOR JUDICIAL
                                                                  REVIEW

                                                     BETWEEN:

                                                                  THE QUEEN

                                                                       and

                                                             DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC
                                                                PROSECUTIONS
                                                                             Respondent

                                                                   EX PARTE

                                                          BERNARD DEAN MURRAY
                                                                           Applicant



                                                       AFFIDAVIT OF RICHARD BRUCE
                                                                MANNING




                                                     Walker Morris Solicitors
                                                     11 Quebec Street
                                                     LEEDS
                                                     LSI 2HA
                                                     Tel: 0113 283 2500
                                                     Fax: 0113 245 9412
                                                     Ref: RBMAQL.MURRAY

H:\WP\CRIM-MAT\TZB\DRAFT\MURRAY10.WPD\3 March 1999
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
                                                   CO
QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION

CROWN OFFICE LIST

   IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION OF LEAVE TO APPLY FOR JUDICIAL
                              REVIEW

BETWEEN:

                               THE QUEEN

                                  and

                 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
                                                           Respondent
                               EXPARTE

                       BERNARD DEAN MURRAY
                                                            Applicant



               NOTICE OF APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO
                   APPLY FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW
