   HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                (WEST D I S T R I C T )



           INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HIL L SB O RO UG H FOOTBALL

                    S T A D IU M DISASTER

               ON THE 15TH APRIL,             1989



              INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                  ADAM EDWARD SPEARRITT




                            Before

DR. S.L.    POPPER,    LL.B,     B.MED.Sci,        BM. B S , M R C G P

                (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                                At

              The Medico-Legal Centre,
                   W atery Street,
                      Sheffield.

                                On

                    2(Jth A p r i l ,   1990.
                         ------------
                                                                             ^   o -*.

              T RA N S C R I P T OF P R O C E ED I NG S           -      ^
                                                              ^


     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheff ie l d SI 2DX



                                                                                         220
                          A                    INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT




                              Opening Renarks

                          B
                              PROF.   STEPHEN JOKES Called
                                 By THE CORONER


                              DET.    SGT. GRAHAM McCOMBIE Called
                                 By THE CORONER


                              D E T . INSP . MICHAEL LAYTON Called
                                 By THE CORONER


                              Closing Remarks
                          D




                          H

J. L. H a r p h a m Ltd
                              20th April,   1990

                                     INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF ADAM EDv'JARD SPEARRITT

                                    THE CORONER:       Yes, Mr. Fraser.

                                    MR. FRASER:   Sir, in this case I represent Mr. and
                              Mrs. Spearitt, both as a member of the Hillsborough Steering
                              Committee and in a personal capacity through my own practice.
                              They   are present v/ith members of their family in Court, sir.

                                    THE CORONER: Mr. and Mrs.   Spearritt,       I don't know;
                              were you here on the opening day?

                                    MR. AND MRS. SPEARRITT:         Yes.

                                    THE CORONER:  Yes, so you know what we are doing, so I
                          c   am not going to repeat'it for you now because you are already
                              aware of the situation.

                                    I am going   to read n o w the opening when this Inquest
                              was first opened on          the 19th of April. There are one or two
                              errors in this.   D o n ’t worry, we will be dealing v/ith those
                              as we go along, but I would like     to read it as it was done
                              so that you know what happened on that day.
                          D
                                    Then this is a resumed Inquest which was opened on the
                              19th April, 1989.         On that occasion Neil Anthony Parkin, the
                              Acting C o r o n e r ’s Officer said:

                                    "The body which is the subject of this Inquest
                                    has been identified to P.C. 1032 Cameron of the
                                    South Yorkshire Police as that of Adam Spearritt
                          E         by Robert Spearritt, his uncle.     He was 14 years
                                    of age having    been born on the 13th June, 1974
                                    at Liverpool.     He lived at
                                            |, Runcorn in Cheshire.   He was a schoolboy.
                                    He died at the Northern General Hospital following
                                    an incident at Hillsborough Football Ground on
                                    Saturday, 15th April, 1989.     P.C. Cameron
                                    caused the body to be removed to the Medico-Legal
                          F         Centre and there he identified it to Detective
                                    Constable Simon Weigold who subsequently identified
                                    the same body to Prof. Jones.     It is the family
                                    wish that the body should be buried."

                              I then adjourned the Inquest but subsequently we wrote to
                              the families and checked the details.  We were then told,
                              in fact it was Edward Spearritt, that is you, i s n ’t it,
                          G   his father?

                                    MR. SPEARRITT:       It was Ad a m Edward Spearritt.

                                    THE CORONER:       What is your name, Mr.   Spearritt?

                                    MR.   SPEARRITT:     Edward Spearritt.
                          H
                                                            - 1 -

J. L. H a r p h a m Ltd                                                                          222
                                              PROF.    S. JONES


         THE CORONER: That is right.           You signed the form?

         MR.   SPEARRITT:   Yes.

         THE CORONER:  And you told us that your lad was called
   Adam Edward Spearritt and you confirmed the address as
   being correct, the date of birth as being correct and the
   place of birth being Liverpool and its being correct.  It
   was the name that we actually had not got quite right.

         As you also know, of course front the first day, we
   did do the alcohol levels and in the case of Adam they
   were negative.

         We have now got Professor Stephen Jones here, so
   Professor Jones if you would be good enough to come.

         Professor Jones has already taken the oath in respect
   of all the inquests and he is now going to tell us what
   he found in relation to Adam.


                      PROF.   STEPHEN JONES Called
                              By THE C O R O N E R :

Q. Good morning, Professor Jones. - A. Good m orning sir.
   The body was identified to me by Constable Weigold.     It
   was identified as number 94 as Ad a m Spearritt.  There
   were no external injuries to the body at all but there
   were some signs of attempted resuscitation which had taken
   place at the Northern General Hospital.    These were really
   pad marks where pads had been placed on the chest and
   there were various puncture marks where injections had
   been implemented at the hospital.

         There was no external evidence of severe injury
   save for a few abrasions.  There was an abrasion underneath
   the chin and there were a few abrasions on the surface of
   the body consistent with friction abrasions of clothing
   moving on the skin of the body.

         As far as the remainder of the examination was
  concerned there was evidence of asphyxial change which
  were manifested in the presence of cyanosis, that is
  blue discoloration of the face and there were also
  multiple haemorrhages, little petechial haemorrhages
  p resent on.various parts of the body in the sort of
  areas that one normally expects to find them in cases of
  traumatic asphyxia.

         There was also an increased amount of fluid in the
   sac in which the heart is situated.       This fluid was part
   of the process of congestive heart failure which had
   occurred during the time that Adam was still alive and
   his circulation was ma i nt a in ed and this effusion, this


                              - 2 -

                                                                      223
                                          PROF.   S. JONES


fluid around the heart was in fact part of the failure
of the heart to act efficiently during the time that he was
still alive.

      So in summary then really there were no severe injuries
either externally or internally and the changes were all
entirely consistent with death being due to traumatic
asphyxia.

Yes, and in fact I asked you to reconsider the fluid and
in fact you came to the conclusion that the evidence which
you have given is in fact indeed the correct answer? - A.
Correct.

      THE COROWER:    Mr. Fraser,       any questions that you want
to ask?

      MR. FRASER:    No, the family have no questions sir,
thank you.

      THE CORONER:  Have any of you got any questions?
(No response)  Did you understand all that?

      MEMBERS OF THE JURY:       Yes.

      THE WITNESS:    If it would be of any help if I spoke
to the family afterwards I w o u l d be very willing to do
if it wou l d help them in any way.

      THE CORONER:    Well if you would be willing to do that,
then if you wa n t to speak to Professor Jones as he has
offered and if you feel it w o u l d be helpful then yes, thank
you very much indeed.    I would be very grateful to you in
fact if you would do that.    It would be very kind.    Thank
you.

      I now wan t to turn to the Presenting Officer please.


              DET. SGT. GRAHAM McCOMBIE Called
                       3y THE C O R O N E R :

This young m an - I think I can     afford to say that - has
already been sworn but he will      tell us his name for the
record please? - A. My name is      Graham McCombie.  I am a
Detective Sergeant in the W es t    Midlands Police at Co v en tr y
sir.

Would you please take me through the summary which you
have got in front of you? - A. Yes sir.      At about 1155
hours on Saturday, 15th April 1939, Mr. Edward Spearritt
and his son, Adam Edward S pe ardtt , left the family home in
Runcorn travel by private car to Sheffield.      They travelled
v/ith two friends in order to wa t c h the F.A. Cup Semi-Final
due to be played at Hillsborough Stadium that day.

                         - 3 -


                                                               224
                                                                 D.S. G. MCCOMBIE


                                     Mr. Spearritt and Adam were each in possession of a
                               ticket for the Leppings Lane terraces and upon their arrival
                               in Sheffield they made their way to Leppings Lane where
                               they separated from the other two members of their group.

                                     Mr. Spearritt and Ada m entered via a blue gate,
                               which is Gate C, which was open and went into the ground
                               where they made their way into Enclosure 4.   They took up
                           B   a position near to the front perimeter fencing.   Initially
                               there were few people in the pen but following the two teams
                               coming onto the pitch Mr. Spearritt became aware of immense
                               pressure building up from behind him.

                                     Mr. Spearritt could see that Adam, who was in front of
                               him, was getting crushed but he was unable to assist him
                               due to the severe crushing to which he was also being
                           C   subjected.  Mr. Spearritt lost consciousness and was sub­
                               sequently taken to the Northern General Hospital where he
                               was detained for three days.

                                     Shortly after 1505 hours, following the severe crushing
                               in the West Stand terracing, Police Constable Stephen Harratt
                               went onto the terraces and was assisting to remove casualties
                               from Enclosure 3.   The Officer recalls Adam being passed
                           D   from Enclosure 4 to unidentified Police Officers who then
                               took him to Gate 3.

                                     Special C o n s t a b l e w a s        at the front of
                               the Spion Kop at about 1525 hours when he saw two unidentified
                               supporters who were attempting to resuscitate a boy wh o m he
                               now knows to be Adam.  He wen t to assist them and rendered
                               mouth to mouth resuscitation before placing the boy onto
                           E   a temporary stretcher.  W i t h assistance he carried Adam
                               from the pitch to the area behind the North Stand.

                                     Ambulance staff were in attendance at this location
                               and further attempted resuscitation.  This was administered
                               to Adam by Divisional Superintendent Trevor Dale and
                               Ambulancemen ,                and
                           F
                                     Adam was then placed into an ambulance and conveyed
                               to the Northern General Hospital accompanied by Special
                               Constable             During the journey Ambulancemen
                               and        ~| continued their resuscitation attempts.

                                      Upon his arrival at the hospital Adam received
                               emergency treatment from Dr. Roger Quartley, who diagnosed
                           G   Ada m was not breathing and showing no sign of a cardiac
                               output.   Extensive resuscitation was carried out by
                               Dr. Quartley and other medical staff and eventually cardiac
                               output was re-established.   Ada m was then transferred to
                               the Intensive Care Unit where he was further treated by
                               Dr. George Clark, a Consultant Anaesthetist.    Adam failed
                               to respond and at approximately 1630, the same day, Dr. Clark
                               certified life extinct.
                           H

J . L. H a r p h a m Ltd
                                                                                       225
                                                                          D.S. G. MCCOMBIE


                               Q. Can I stop you.   I think that is an error in the transcript.
                                  Can you have a look at page 62.   I think it is 1645 actually?
                                  - A. Yes sir, 1645.

                               Q.    1645 it should be? - A.     That is a further statement from
                                    Dr. George Clark.

                               Q. Yes, that is Dr. Clark's statement, isn't it? - A. Yes sir.
                           B      Do you want me to read that again sir?

                               Q.   Yes, if you would read  it again so that we have got that
                                    sentence correct. - A. Adam was taken to the Intensive
                                    Care Unit where he was further treated by Dr. George Clark,
                                    a Consultant Anaesthetist.  A da m failed to respond and
                                    at approximately 1645 hours, the same day, Dr. Clark
                                    certified life extinct.
                           C
                                          At approximately 2130 hours Police Constable John
                                    Cameron escorted the body otf A da m from the Northern General
                                    Hospital to the gymnasium at Hillsborough Stadium where a
                                    temporary mortuary had been set up.

                                          At 0415 hours on Sunday, 16th April, Mr. Robert
                                    Spearritt identified the body of his nephew to Police
                           D        Constable Cameron in the temporary mortuary.

                                          Police Constable Cameron later escorted Adam to the
                                    Medico Legal Centre and confirmed the identification to
                                    Detective Constable Weigold.

                                          On 16th April 1939, following identification by
                           E        Detective Constable Weigold, Professor Jones carried out
                                    an autopsy and submitted a report giving cause of death.

                               Q. Just to clear up the question of the tickets.    In
                                  paragraph 2 of your summary you actually say that they both
                                  had tickets and as far as you know that is in fact so?
                                  - A. If you would like me to explain, sir, Mr. Spearritt
                                  senior lost his jacket during the confusion after the game
                           F      was stopped and the jacket was wrongly despatched with the
                                  casualty and eventually ended up with the casualty at the
                                  Walton Hospital in Liverpool.    A relative of the casualty
                                  put an advertisement in wh ic h Mr. Spearritt answered and
                                  thinking that whoever owned the jacket had helped their
                                  loved one.  Mr. Spearritt found his jacket and the two
                                  tickets were in the pocket and I have actually seen them
                                  sir.
                           G
                               Q. Indeed, yes.  In fact he did not need them because he
                                  came through Gate C? - A. Exactly but they were both
                                  complete tickets sir.

                               Q. Yes indeed.  I think if you just turn to page 21,
                                  (            |'s statement. I think he says, on that
                                  page he has actually named the lad incorrectly but
                           H      he corrects it subsequently, but he says that he was


                                                               - 5 -
J . L. H a r p h a m Ltd
                                                                                                228
                                       D.S. G. MeCOMBIE



   attempting mouth to mouth resuscitation for about 15 minutes?
   - A. That is correct sir.

Q. And in fact he thought that he man a ge d to get some response?
   - A. Yes sir.

Q. And indeed it is only fair to say Dr. Quartley got some
   response, didn't he? - A.. T hat is quite right sir.

Q. On the other hand one of the Ambulance people when he was
   doing resuscitation,             L I think it is page 433,
   he felt that although they were trying that the boy was lost
   really at that stage, didn't he? - A. He was still attempting
   though sir.

         THE CORONER:   Yes.   Any questions, Hr. Fraser.

         MR. FRASER:  Sir, the family have no particular
   questions for the Officer but I am instructed to make two
   specific points and it may be convenient to make those
   points at this stage.  Although I don't believe the Officer
   will be able to help clarify the position, he at least may
   be able to offer some assistance to Mr. and Mrs. Spearritt.

         The first one sir is the fact that Ada m apparently
   lay dead for some twelve hours before his parents or any
   member of his family were able to find him.   They find
   that distressing and are deeply concerned by the apparent
   lack of organisation that there was in hand on the evening.

         I appreciate that is a m a t t e r for another forum, sir,
   but they specifically w ant me to make that point to you
   as the Coroner for this district.

         THE CORONER:  Make the second point and then I will
   deal with both of them together.

         MR. FRASER:  Sir, the second point you have already
   partly dealt with in your opening on Tuesday.   That was
   the fact that Mr. and Mrs. S pearritt were unable to hold
   Adam when they visited him at this centre.

         I appreciate the geography of the building sir is not
   within your control and so do they, but they urge upon
   you to take up the suggestion that you almost made to
   yourself, that you would consider the possibility of
   arrangements being made for loved ones who visit those
   that they have lost shortly aft er their death to spend
   perhaps a few minutes with them.

         The family appreciate that this is not a Chapel of
   Rest, it is a place where professionals have to work, but
   if you would give serious c onsideration to that possibility
   when you have time at the conclusion of these Inquests,
   this family particularly w o u l d be most grateful.


                            - 6 -

                                                              227
                                        THE CORONER



      THE CORONER:  Yes, thank you.          I accept that you have
instructions to make on the point.          I don't think the Officer
can answer either of the questions.

       If I deal v/ith the first point that you have made.
It is outside the ambit of this Inquest and even if it
were within it it falls outside the parameters I have set
v/ith regard to criticism'of people.

       I am not saying that it m a y not be possible to make
improvements in arrangements but I don't think we can deal
v/ith it at this stage.  I have heard what you have said and
I don't think that I can take the matter any further at
this stage but of course there are other avenues for these
points, as you of course will know, if you feel or if
Mr. and Mrs. Spearritt feel that they v/ant to pursue that
then there are other avenues which they can pursue with
regard to that.

      With regard to the se’cond point I feel for you.    What
more can I say.  We had a difficulty and we have a difficulty.
I am not going to think about the problem at the moment
because I have got enough problems thinking about these
Inquests, but I do intend as soon as I have a little bit
of time I will think about the points you have made, about
the viewing arrangements.   Tha t does not mean to say we
will change them but I v/ill think about them and see (a)
what I really think as to the value and (b) wh a t can be
done because those two things are not the same.

      I don't mind you raising the point.  It is a perfectly
legitimate and proper point that you have raised.  Whether
one can meet it is another question so yes, I will think
about that.

      MR. FRASER:     Thank you sir.

       THE CORONER:  And no doubt discuss it, you know,
wit h colleagues and so on.

      Any questions from anybody else?             (No response)
Thank you very much indeed.


               DET.   INSP. M I C H AE L LAYTON Called
                          By THE C O R O N E R :

      THE WITNESS:  Sir, Michael Layton,           Detective
Inspector, West Midlands Police.

      Sir, in respect of A d a m I have made an examination
of video and visual evidence and I can tell you that in
fact Mr. Spearritt, sir, and his v/ife have viewed photo­
graphs and on a photograph w h i c h has been given the
reference number PR2/21, w h i c h is timed at 1508 and


                           - 7 -
                                                                   228
                                                                        D.I. M. LAYTON



                                    PR2/30, which is timed at 1509, Mr. Spearritt believes that
                                    these photographs may show himself.  They fall within the
                                    area which I have previously described on the first day
                                    where they are not conclusive, but I should say that those
                                    photographs were picked out at the end of five  hours so a
                                    great deal of effort and thought did actually go into
                                    that identification.
                           B              As has previously been stated, the indications are
                                    from those photographs that Mr. Spearritt was in Enclosure
                                    number 4.

                                          Mr. Spearritt has signed a plan of the terraces to
                                    indicate the position where he believes his son was standing
                                    and he also assisted us with a passport type photograph of
                                    Adam.
                           C
                                           The plan has been referenced ESI and for reference
                                    purposes the photograph referred to was referenced RPO D 94.
                                    Having viewed that particular photograph, P.C. Harratt
                                    of the South Yorkshire Police identified Adam as   being a
                                    person   that he believes that he saw being passed from Pen 4
                                    to Gate 3.    He has indicated on a plan the point at which
                           D        he saw   Adam being passed over the dividing fence and he has
                                    referenced that plan SWH/1.

                                          Ambulancemanf                  has viewed visual
                                    evidence and from a photograph has identified Ad a m as being
                                    a person he attempted to revive in the area at the rear of
                                    the Spion Kop.

                           E   Q.         THE CORONER:   So in this particular case the family
                                    photograph has proved to be very very helpful, hasn't it?
                                    - A. Oh yes, indeed.

                               Q. ES/1 we are going to reference C25.  Forgive us about all
                                  these references.  Don't worry about them.  And the other
                                  plan is SWH/1.  That is right, isn't it? - A. That is
                                  correct sir, yes.
                           F
                               Q. We will call that C26. - A. Th a t is right.      That is a plan
                                  submitted by P.C. Harratt.

                               Q. Then if I give you these two, could you show us on the large
                                  plan where these positions are? - A. Yes sir.

                                          (The Officer moves to a visual display b o a r d )
                           G
                                    Sir, if I can refer you first of all to the plan referenced
                                    ES/1 which is Mr. Spearritt's plan.      If we look at the
                                    large scale terrace plan, the po in t at which Mr. Spearritt
                                    believes he was was very close in fact to the gate, gate
                                    of Enclosure 4 in this location h e r e .

                                          Then if we refer to the plan which is referenced
                           H        SWH/1, which is P.C. Harratt's plan, the point at w h i c h he

                                                           -   8   -
J . L. H a r p h a m Ltd
                                                                                               229
                                                                   D.I. M. LAYTON


                              believes he saw A da m being passed over the dividing fence
                              from Enclosure 4 to 3 is in fact at this point h e r e .

                                    THE CORONER:    Thank you very much indeed.     Mr. Fraser,
                              any questions?

                                    MR- FRASER:    No questions,   thank you sir.

                          B         THE CORONER:  Any questions from any of you?       It is
                              clear to you, isn't it?

                                    MEMBERS OF THE JURY:    Yes.

                                    THE CORONER:  I just want to remind Mr. and Mrs. Spearrit
                              of one thing which Mr. Wardrope told us on the first day,
                              I think you must have heard him, you were there, weren't
                          C   you? We were talking about re-starting the heart, can you
                              remember, and I think his opinion  was that nobody who
                              actually came in in cardiac arrest actually survived.

                                    He did say that it was on occasions possible to re-start
                              the heart but the problem with asphyxial deaths, and he
                              illustrated it by referring to asthma if you remember as
                              another not identical but similar sort of situation, he said
                          D   the problem is that even if you re-start the heart the
                              damage is the lack of oxygen to the tissue or the cellular
                              level particularly in the brain.

                                    I just want to remind you of that because it must be
                              very hard for you when you hear about all the attempts which
                              were made at re-starting and people saying:  "Well we thought
                              we had got the heart going" but the trouble is the heart
                          E   you can sometimes do it but it is not the only organ in
                              the body.

                                    Have you any comments on that, Professor Jones, in
                              the light of what I have just said?  Can you come down?

                                    PROF. JONES:  No, I would agree with those comments
                              sir.  The heart is obviously an organ which can be detected
                          F   as to whether it is working or not but there are other
                              tissues and particularly the brain  tissues which of course
                              if they are deprived of oxygen because the heart has not
                              been beating for a certain length of time, that these
                              tissues become irreversibly damaged and so I quite appreciate
                              that in this case where there were perhaps flickers of hope
                              occurring from time to time as the heart was re-started,
                              in fact I think an irreversible situation had already
                          G   arisen.

                                    THE CORONER:  Thank you.  You don't want to ask anythine
                              arising out of that do you, Mr. Fraser?

                                    MR. FRASER:    No thank you sir.

                          H         THE CORONER:    Thank you,   Professor Jones.


                                                       - 9 -
J. L. H a r p h a m Ltd
                                                                                          230
                                     THE COROKER



        I just want to add one more comment to the reply if
you like of what I said in answer to the comments made
by i>ir. and iirs. Spearritt, the first one.

       I also want to remind you and Hr. and firs. Spearritt,
that to a certain extent I did deal with some of the problems
which one faces, if you like, in a disaster situation such
as this.   That is not to say that what I have said this
m orning is not right as well that you can pursue this if
you wish elsewhere, but you do have to remember that there
are quite a lot of difficulties which perhaps looking at
it from another angle one does not always think about, but
you of course quite rightly are looking at it from Adam's
point of view.

      While I am on that I know that you yourself were
injured, Mr. Spearritt, and it must have been a very very
terrible time both for you and particularly for your wife
in those early days.

      That is all the evidence we ars going to take at
this stage.  Thank you for coming.  As I say it is difficult
for me to put myself into your shoes, but as far as one
is able we want you to know that we feel for you.  Thank
you.


               (The Inquest into the death of
                    A DAM EDWARD SPEARRITT
           was adjourned to a date to be f i x e d )
