IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
                                                   CO               [99
QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION

CROWN OFFICE LIST

   IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION OF LEAVE TO APPLY FOR JUDICIAL
                              REVIEW

BETWEEN:

                               THE QUEEN

                                  and

                SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
                                                           Respondent
                               E X PARTE

                      BERNARD DEAN MURRAY
                                                             Applicant



               NOTICE OF APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO
                   APPLY FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE


QUEENS BENCH DIVISION                                                             CO:     /99


CROWN OFFICE LIST


In the matter of an application for Judicial Review


The Queen -v- The South Yorkshire Police Authority


Ex parte Bernard Dean Murray (Applicant)


Notice of application for leave to apply for Judicial Review Order 53 Rule 3(2)


Judgement order, decision or other proceeding in respect of which relief is sought:


The decisions made by the Respondent on 5 February 1998:


       a.     That the Respondent has no legal power to provide assistance to Mr Bernard
              Dean Murray in relation to his costs and expenses of defending the private
              prosecutions brought against him by the Hillsborough Family Support Group
              (“HFSG”) by information dated 10 July 1998 and that any previous decision of
              the Respondent or any Officer acting under its authority to make such assistance
              available is null and void.


       b.     That the Respondent has no legal power to provide financial assistance to Mr
              Bernard Dean Murray in relation to the costs of any Judicial Review proceedings
              brought by him whether in relation to the decision of the Crown Prosecution
              Service not to take over the conduct of private prosecutions and discontinue such
              prosecutions under the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 or to any decision of
              the Clerk to the Sefton Magistrates’ Court to challenge the payment of the costs
              of the proceedings from Central Funds or to any other decision of any Court

                                              1
                 authority or body arising from such prosecutions and accordingly to reject the
                 application of Mr Bernard Dean Murray for financial assistance in relation to
                 such proceedings.


Relief sought:


       i.     Certiorari to quash the decision of 5 February 1999 identified above.


       ii.    A declaration that the Respondent has vires to provide financial assistance to
                 Bernard Dean Murray in relation to his costs and expenses of defending the
                 private prosecutions brought against him by the Hillsborough Family Support
                 Group.


       iii.      A declaration that the Respondent has vires to provide financial assistance to
                 Bernard Dean Murray in relation to his costs and expenses of defending the
                 private prosecutions brought against him by the HFSG as and when such costs
                 and expenses are incurred and irrespective of the outcome of the prosecution and
                 any application for costs made against the private prosecutor.


       iv.    A declaration that the Respondent has vires to provide financial assistance to
                 Bernard Dean Murray in relation to his costs and expenses of defending the
                 private prosecutions brought against him by the HFSG irrespective of whether
                 he has attempted to obtain or could obtain financial assistance by way of Legal
                 Aid and/or a declaration that the availability or otherwise of Legal Aid is an
                 irrelevant consideration.


       v.     A declaration that the Respondent has vires to provide financial assistance to
                 Bernard Dean Murray in relation to the costs and expenses of any Judicial
                 Review proceedings brought by him relating to the decision of the Director of
                 Public Prosecutions not to intervene in the private prosecution.


       vi.    A declaration that Bernard Dean Murray has a legitimate expectation to his costs

                                                 2
                 and expenses of defending the criminal prosecution will be made by the
                 Respondent as and when such costs and expenses are occurred.


        vii.     The Applicant seeks an expedited hearing of the substantive application for
                 Judicial Review (if leave to move is granted) together with an Order abridging
                 time for service of the Respondent’s evidence to 7 days or such further period as
                 the Court deems appropriate and that this application shall be consolidated and
                 heard with the application of the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, Crown
                 Office reference number C058299.


The Applicant’s Solicitors are:
Walker Morris Solicitors
Kings Court
12 King Street
LEEDS
LSI 2HL
Reference: RBM/BQW


GROUNDS ON WHICH RELIEF IS SOUGHT:


1.      The issues in this case are:


        1.1.     Whether the Respondent was in error in law in resolving on 5 February 1999 that
                 it has no legal power to provide financial assistance to Bernard Dean Murray in
                 relation to his costs and expenses of defending the private prosecutions brought
                 against him by the HFSG by information dated 10 July 1998 and in determining
                 that any previous decision of the Authority or any Officer acting under its
                 authority to make such assistance available was null and void.


        1.2.     Whether the Respondent was wrong in law in resolving that it had no legal power
                 to provide financial assistance to Bernard Dean Murray in relation to any Judicial
                 Review proceedings in respect of the private Prosecution brought against him.


                                                 3
     1.3.   Whether the Respondent has vires to provide financial assistance as and when
            costs are incurred in defending the private prosecution and whether power is
            limited to meeting any costs incurred and not recovered from other sources.


     1.4.   Whether the Respondent has vires to provide financial assistance irrespective of
            the availability of Legal Aid.


2.   Background.


     2.1.   The Applicant is jointly charged with manslaughter and misfeasance in Public
            Office arising out of the 96 deaths following the disaster on 15 April 1989 at the
            Hillsborough Football Ground where he was a Senior Police Officer, second in
            command. The prosecution is brought privately on behalf of HFSG.


     2.2.   On 17 April 1989 Lord Justice Taylor was appointed to carry out an enquiry into
            the events of the disaster. His interim report was made public on 4 August 1989.
            Immediately after the disaster the West Midlands Police had been appointed to
            conduct a review of the policing operation of the South Yorkshire Police. In
            March 1990, their report was submitted to the Director of Public Prosecutions
            (DPP) for his consideration as to whether there was sufficient evidence for
            prosecutions for manslaughter to be brought against seven officers who were in
            command during the disaster (including Bernard Dean Murray). The Director of
            Public Prosecutions referred this report to two experienced Queen’s Counsel for
            their opinions as to whether there was sufficient evidence for charges of
            manslaughter and offences of culpable misfeasance in Public Office to be made
            out against the Officers. Counsel delivered a joint opinion on 6 August 1990 and
            on 30 August 1990 with the benefit of these advices the then DPP announced that
            there was insufficient evidence to justify any prosecution for a criminal offence
            against any member of the South Yorkshire Police Force or any other party. In
            June 1997, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was appointed to conduct an independent
            scrutiny as to whether there was any new evidence relating to the disaster. His
            scrutiny report was presented to the House of Commons on 18 February 1998.


                                             4
       He concluded that there was no basis for reopening Lord Taylor’s enquiry nor did
       he consider that there was any material which should be put before the DPP or
       the Police Complaints Authority which might cause them to consider decisions
       already taken. In 1997 the Crown Prosecution Service considered again whether
       there was any evidence to support any prosecution arising out of the disaster and
       again decided that the evidence was not sufficient to provide a realistic prospect
       of conviction and therefore decided against any form of prosecution.


2.3.   On 26 June 1998 informations were laid in the South Sefton Magistrates’ Court
       by Ann Adlington, Solicitor acting on behalf of HFSG which allege that Bernard
       Dean Murray had unlawfully killed John Alfred Anderson, unlawfully killed
       James Gary Aspinall and had willfully neglected to perform a public duty. On
       28 June 1998 Bernard Dean Murray made application to his former employees,
       the South Yorkshire Police Authority, for financial assistance in defending these
       proceedings.


2.4.   Objection was taken to the proceedings in the South Sefton Magistrates’ Court
       so that on 10 July 1998 the Prosecution withdrew the charges and made a
       Consequential Order for the Defendant’s costs pursuant to Section 16 of the
       Prosecution of Offences Act 1985. On 13 July 1998, informations identical to
       those which had been laid at South Sefton were laid by HFSG before Leeds Petty
       Sessional Division. These proceedings continue and committal proceedings have
       been listed for 19 April 1999.


2.5.   On 27 February 1998 in the light of private prosecutions then threatened against
       Bernard Dean Murray, the Respondents resolved:


       I.     That in the light of the findings of Lord Justice Stuart Smith enquiry and
              his comments on the outcome, members do not believe that there is any
              new evidence to cause them to reconsider the Authority’s previous view
              and remain of the opinion that the Officers acted in good faith.



                                        5
       ii.    That the Authority agrees to authorise the Clerk and Treasurer to consider
               applications for financial assistance from Officers (serving and retired)
               in accordance with the provisions of Home Office Circular 77/87
               Financial Assistance to Police Officers in Legal Proceedings.


2.6.   Pursuant to the said decisions Bernard Dean Murray has had the expectation that
       his legal costs would be met by the Respondent and significant sums have been
       incurred by way of defence costs.


2.7.   On 3 July 1998 a request was made on behalf of Mr Bernard Dean Murray to the
       Director of Public Prosecutions to request that the Director take over the conduct
       of the proceedings pursuant to Section 6 (2) of the Prosecution of Offences Act
       1985 and discontinue them pursuant to Section 23 (3) of the same Act. On 18
       December 1998 it was announced that the DPP would not take over conduct of
       the proceedings. At an interlocutory hearing of the Prosecution at Leeds
       Magistrates’ Court on 21 December 1998, Leading Counsel acting for Bernard
       Dean Murray indicated that it was proposed to apply for Judicial Review of the
       decision of the DPP and that such application would be lodged when the DPP had
       given written reasons for their decision. An oral intimation from the Crown
       Prosecution Service had been given on that day that such reasons were already
       in draft form. The written response from the CPS was eventually provided by
       letter dated 1 February 1999. On 5 March 1999 an application for leave to apply
       for Judicial Review was lodged with the Crown Office and given reference
       number CO/934/99. This application is consolidated with application reference
       CO/856/99, issued by Winckworth Sherwood Solicitors on behalf of David
       Godfrey Duckenfield, the other Defendant in the criminal proceedings issued by
       HFSG. On 22 December 1998 an application was made on behalf of Mr Bernard
       Dean Murray to the Respondent to extend financial assistance to cover the
       proposed application for Judicial Review of the decision of the DPP not to
       intervene.


2.8.   On 22 December 1998, Ann Adlington on behalf of HFSG wrote to the

                                        6
        Respondent objecting to the Respondent providing financial assistance to Mr
        Murray (and Mr Duckenfield). A further letter dated 5 January 1999 sets out the
        objection in greater detail. Those letters complained both about the provision of
        ongoing financial assistance and the proposed funding of an application for the
        Judicial Review of the decision of the DPP. On 5 February 1999, the Respondent
        resolved that it had no power to provide financial assistance to Bernard Dean
        Murray in relation to his costs and expenses of defending the private prosecutions
        by HFSG and in relation to the costs of any Judicial Review proceedings.
        However, the Authority conceded that it was arguable as to whether a power
        existed and indicated that it would not object to an application being made by the
        Chief Constable of South Yorkshire for leave to apply for Judicial Review of
        their decision of 5 February 1999. On 10 February 1999 notice of application for
        leave to apply for Judicial Review was lodged on behalf of Michael Hedges,
        Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police and given reference number
        CO/582/99. Leave was granted by Mr Justice Latham on 12 February 1999.


2.9.    As Bernard Dean Murray does not oppose the relief being sought by the Chief
        Constable of South Yorkshire in his application for Judicial Review reference
        CO/582/99 and having regard to rules of the Supreme Court Order 53 Rule 9 it
        did not seem necessaiy to seek to have Bernard Dean Murray made a Respondent
        in those Judicial Review proceedings. HFSG were made a Respondent to those
        said proceedings.


2.10.   By an Affidavit sworn on 26 February 1999 Ann Adlington, Solicitor to the
        HFSG, said inter alia at paragraph 7 (2) “the Applicant (the Chief Constable of
        South Yorkshire) has no sufficient interest in the decisions of the Authority to
        make this application alternatively no sufficient interest in relation to some of the
        relief sought”. Further in the same Affidavit as at paragraphs 83 and 84 HFSG
        specifically challenged the locus standi of Chief Constable of South Yorkshire.
        The Applicant in this application for leave to apply for Judicial Review has a
        direct personal interest in the relief which he is seeking and therefore clearly has
        a sufficient interest in the matter to which the application relates.           This

                                         7
               application is thus necessary in case the Court agrees that the Chief Constable of
               South Yorkshire does not have locus standi, as it provides the certainty that this
               important issue will be Judicially resolved expeditiously.




3.     The Law


       These are the submissions of law made to the Police Authority as settled by Counsel.


1.     The discretion to authorise funding is derived from the statutory power under section
111(1) of the Local Government Act 1972 and the statutory duty under section 6 of the Police
Act 1996.


The power
2.2    The power of the Police authority: Section 111(1) LGA 1972, so far as is material:
       “...a local authority shall have power to do anything (whether or not involving
       the expenditure ... of money...) which is calculated to facilitate, or is conducive
       or incidental to, the discharge of any of their functions ”
“... the word “functions” embraces all the duties and powers of a local authority; the sum total
of the activities Parliament has entrusted to it. Those activities are its functions.” (Per Lord
Templeman, Hazell -v- Hammersmith L.B.C. [1992] 2 A.C. 1 at page 29F.)


2.3    The sub-section is couched in the widest possible terms. It is elementary that such a broad
enabling provision cannot empower a local authority to do an unlawful act, or to do anything
which is expressly or by necessary implication prohibited by other statutory provisions, or to do
anything which is not truly in discharge of its functions. But unless so limited the power exists
and is exercisable subject only to challenge on the basis of an improper exercise of discretion
amounting to Wednesbury unreasonableness.


2.4     Section 111(3) is an example of an express limitation. It restricts the power to raise or

                                                8
lend money except in accordance with other statutory provisions relating to those matters. But
this has no relevance to the present case. The Police authority’s resolution does not involve
borrowing or lending money.


The duty
3.1     The duty of the Police authority: Section 6(1) of the Police Act 1996 (re-enacting s.4 of
the Police Act 1964 as amended):
        “Every Police authority ... shall secure the maintenance of an efficient and
        effective Police force for its area.”
Discharge of this statutory duty is a function of the authority within the meaning of section
111(1) above. The scope of the duty under section 6(1) is not restricted to fulfilment of the
objectives provided for by sub-sections (2) and (3). The matters there mentioned are not
exhaustive of the objectives which the Police authority may promote in discharge of the section
6(1) duty.


3.2    In R -v- Derbyshire Police Authority, ex p. Wilson (unreported, 20 July 1989), the scope
of section 6, (then section 4 of the 1964 Act) was said to define the duty of the Police authority
and the purposes for which the authority may spend the money provided, namely to secure the
maintenance of an adequate and efficient Police force: Ralph Gibson L.J., (pp.4-5).


3.3    Adapting Lord Templeman’s speech in Hazell -v- Hammersmith L.B.C.:
“Accordingly a local authority can do anything which is calculated to facilitate or is conducive
or incidental to the local authority’s function of [securing the maintenance o f an efficient and
effective Police force for its area],” (ibid. page 29F).


3.4    A Police authority is entitled to be guided by Home Office advice in determining the
scope of its duty to secure the ‘maintenance of an efficient and effective Police force’, (see R -v-
Derbyshire Police Authority, ex p. Wilson (unreported, 20 July 1989), per Ralph Gibson L.J. 6-
7). Home Office circulars 77/1987 and 4/1998 have both stressed the importance of Police
officers being able to carry out their duties in the confidence that their Police authority will
support them if they act in good faith and exercise their judgment reasonably. With reference to
the scope of the power under section 111(1) of the 1972 Act, paragraph 5 of Circular 4/1988


                                                  9
states:
              It could be argued that to allow payment to be made to officers (either former
          or serving) involved in criminal proceedings would in some way facilitate or be
          conducive to the Police authority’s broad functions. For example, failure to
          provide financial assistance could adversely affect the morale of the force if
          officers had to meet their own costs after an acquittal.”
It is important to note that payment of costs after an acquittal is given by way of example only.


The principle at issue is as to the provision of financial assistance in general. Paragraph 6 states:
          “It is for individual Police authorities to decide in the particular circumstances
          of a case and on the basis of legal advice whether to make financial assistance
          available to officers in Criminal Proceedings.”
The original decision of the Police authority was correct in principle and well within the proper
exercise of a discretion under section 6 of the 1996 Act. The proposed payments were rightly
judged to be calculated to facilitate, to be conducive to, and to be incidental to, the discharge of
the functions arising from section 6.


4.1       Section 88 of the Police Act 1996 (re-enacting section 48 of the Police Act 1964) does
not determine or affect the scope of the section 6 duty with respect to funding the Defence of
criminal charges brought against individual officers.


4.2       The section exists simply to extend the common law doctrine of vicarious liability for tort
to the relationship between the chief constable and his officers: (the original statutory provision
reversed the decision in Fisher -v- Oldham Corporation [1930] 2 K.B. 364), and to make
consequential provisions as to the payment of damages and costs by the Police authority which
would otherwise fall upon the chief constable by operation of sub-section (1). Viewed from the
standpoint of the parliamentary draftsman, sub-sections (2) and (4) are necessary to relieve him
from the ordinary civil consequence of bearing the damages and costs, which is the usual
position of a vicariously liable employer.


4.3        Sub-section (2) imposes a duty to indemnify the chief constable in respect of damages
as well as costs. This is on the premise that he is liable only as a joint tortfeasor by operation


                                                   10
of sub-section (1).


4.4     Sub-section (4) becomes necessary to accomplish two objectives which would not arise
by necessary implication if it did not exist. First, it makes clear that the Police authority may
relieve the principal tortfeasor of liability. But secondly, and importantly, it has effect that the
authority may make a payment in respect of damages as well as costs. This establishes an
important principle which would not necessarily be derived from the terms of section 111 (1) of
the Local Government Act 1972 if that were the only statutory authority for such a payment.
Having provided authority for payment of damages, it is a natural and necessary next step to
associate that with express power to make payment in respect of costs.


4.5     There is nothing inherently contrary to ordinary canons of statutory construction in
parliament making an express provision for something which might arguably be derived by
implication from another statutory provision, especially where to omit an express provision
might, in the context of other express provisions, be mis-interpreted.


4.6    On its proper construction, sub-section (4) cannot be interpreted as demonstrating that
parliament has given no power to a Police authority to fund a criminal Defence.


4.7    Once the provisions of the section are properly understood in this way, the principle
expressio unius can be seen to have no application to the true interpretation of the scope of the
power under section 6. There is no basis for the suggestion that section 88(4) might be
interpreted as precluding financial assistance for non-tort claims. It is not, and cannot possibly
have been intended to be, a provision circumscribing the authority’s powers in discharge of its
wide-ranging statutory duty under section 6.


Cases on Section 111(1)
5.1    The Authority’s Solicitor has suggested that the scope of section 111 (1) as it applies to
this case, might be affected by recent case law. We have identified such case law as might have
a bearing upon the true interpretation of that section. We have concluded that, upon careful
reading, none of the cases establishes any basis for undermining the propositions outlined above.
It is unnecessary to set out any extensive analysis of the cases. We believe it sufficient to identify


                                                  11
and extract the essential ratio of each case, as follows. None of the cases justifies a conclusion
that the section 111(1) power is limited by other provision or authority so as to preclude the
Police authority from deciding to authorise expenditure in what it perceives to be a proper
discharge of its duty under section 6.


5.2     Hazell -v- Hammersmith and Fulham L.B.C. [1992] 2 A.C. 1. Two main issues arose:
first, whether swap transactions were within section 111(1) of the 1972 Act; second, whether an
interim strategy of damage limitation after it appeared the swaps might be ultra vires was within
the sub-section. The swap transactions were held to have been ultra vires because they were not
incidental to the authority’s borrowing function “having regard to the provisions and
limitations of the Act of 1972 regulating that function”. (See Lord Templeman, p.3 IE.) This
is a clear example of the general power of section 111(1) being circumscribed by other specific
statutory provisions, namely Schedule 13 of the 1972 Act, which Lord Templeman said (page
33H-34A): “establishes a comprehensive code which defines and limits the powers of a local
authority with regard to its borrowing. The Schedule is in my view inconsistent with any
incidental power to enter into swap transactions.” Transactions under the interim strategy were
struck down because they could only have been incidental to transactions which were themselves
ultra vires.


5.3     McCarthy & Stone (Developments) Ltd -v- Richmond Upon Thames London Borough
Council [1992] 2 A.C. 48. The House of Lords held that pre-application planning advice was not
a function within section 111(1), and that to charge for such a service did not facilitate, nor was
it conducive to or incidental to, functions of considering and determining planning applications.
It followed that to charge for such a service could not bp brought within the sub-section. Lord
Lowry (page 75A) categorised such charges as “incidental to the incidental and not incidental
to the discharge of the functions.”


5.3     Credit Suisse -v- Waltham Forest L.B.C, [1997] Q.B. 362 [C.A.] Here the Court of
Appeal struck down the authority’s guarantees to a bank in respect of loans to a company the
authority had set up in breach of its statutory powers; similarly, an agreement to indemnify the
company was ultra vires. Again, the basis of the successful challenge to the authority’s action
was that it contravened other express statutory provisions. Neill L.J. said (374 C): “... where

                                                12
Parliament has made detailed provisions as to how certain statutory functions are to be carried
out there is no scope for implying the existence of additional powers which lie wholly outside
the statutory code.” (It is important not to be misled by the immediately following reference in
his judgment to section 111(3): “Section 111(3) makes it clear the power to enter into financial
obligations is subject to any statutory controls which maybe imposed.” ‘Financial obligations’
refers to lending and borrowing only; there are no relevant statutory controls affecting the
present situation.) Credit Suisse -v-Allerdale Borough Council [1997] Q.B. 306 [C.A.] is to the
same effect in different circumstances.


5.4    Sutton L.B.C. -v- Morgan Grenfell & Co Ltd (1996) 29 H.L.R. 608. Here, guarantees and
indemnities were struck down because they were held not to be incidental to the authority’s
legitimate function; this was an example of the incidental to the incidental. Peter Gibson L.J.
approved a formulation of Elizabeth Appleby Q.C.:
       “Where Parliament has expressly enacted provisions which define the means by
       which local authorities are to carry out their functions, section 111(1) cannot be
       relied upon in support of performance of those functions by other means not
       expressly empowered by relevant provisions.”
We respectfully agree with that. It is necessary to be careful about the passage in the judgment
of Peter Gibson L.J. which immediately follows the citation: (page 617). It is not intended to say
any more than that the authority’s powers under section 111(1) are not circumscribed unless
there exist specific statutory provisions regulating the exercise of powers in particular
circumstances.'




Conclusion
6.1    There is no identifiable statutory provision which can properly be said to circumscribe
the application of section 111(1) to the issue before the Police authority. Their discretion is, to
that extent, unfettered subject only to Wednesbury unreasonableness.


6.2    Comparisons with other areas of local authority functions regulated by statutory schemes
are likely to prove unhelpful. The Police Act 1996 is predicated on the basis that Police
Authority and Chief Constable will work together. The former’s ability to act is circumscribed

                                                13
    by the requirement to take advice from the latter and from the Secretary of State and the
    community (see sections 7, 8 and 96). The latter’s ability to act is circumscribed by the
    requirement to follow the guidance of the former. Thus, the power given to the Police Authority
    is wide. The instrument of regulation of that power is not statute or statutory instrument, but
    consultation and agreement. In other words, precisely the exercise thus far undertaken in this
    case. Thus it is submitted that the authority has power to fund a Police officer (serving or
    retired) in such proceedings, applying section 111(1) of the 1972 Act and section 6 of the 1996
    Act.


    4.       Expedition


             4.1.   Leave to appeal having been granted by Mr Justice Latham on 12 February 1999
                    a full hearing before the Divisional Court has been fixed to commence on 22
                    March 1999. It is therefore sought upon leave being granted for this application
                    effectively to be consolidated with and heard at the same time as the application
                    reference CO/582/99.




    Signed:


    Dated:
                     li.               .
)




                                                    14
                                                                   CO              199
                                                  IN THE HIGH COURT OF TIISTTCF.
                                                  QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION
                                                  CROWN OFFICE TJST

                                                  IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION
                                                  FOR LEAVE TO APPLY FOR JUDICIAL
                                                              REVIEW

                                                  BETWEEN:

                                                               THE QUEEN

                                                                    and

                                                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                            AUTHORITY
                                                                        Respondent

                                                                EXPARTE

                                                       BERNARD DEAN MURRAY
                                                                        Applicant



                                                     NOTICE OF APPLICATION FOR
                                                    LEAVE TO APPLY FOR JUDICIAL
                                                              REVIEW




                                                  Walker Morris Solicitors
                                                  11 Quebec Street
                                                  LEEDS
                                                  LSI 2HA
                                                  Tel: 0113 283 2500
                                                  Fax: 0113 245 9412
                                                  Ref: RBM.AQL.MURRAY


H:\WP\CRIM-MAT\TZB\DRAFT\MURR3.FUN\9 March 1999
