                            HILLSBOROUGH INQUEST

                          RELEASE OF DOCUMENTATION



Following the Hillsborough disaster in April 1989 the West Midlands
Police were asked to investigate on behalf of the Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire.  West Midlands Police took a considerable number of
statements, such statements obviously intended to be used for the
criminal inquiry, Lord Justice Taylor’s public inquiry and the inquest.

Members of the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service (SYMAS)
who had been involved in the disaster made statements to a legal firm
instructed by SYMAS rather than to police officers.  These statements
were apparently handed over with the statement-maker giving SYMAS a
consent form for the use of the statement in Lord Justice Taylor’s
inquiry only.

Before, during and after the inquest relatives of many of the victims
wrote to the South Yorkshire Police asking for copies of statements from
policemen, ambulancemen or members of the public who had been involved
with their particular relative.   Typically these would be the statements
of police officers who first found the deceased and who perhaps
attempted resuscitation before transporting them to the gymnasium which
was used as a temporary mortuary.   In some instances SYMAS personnel
were involved because the deceased had been resuscitated by them and/or
rushed to hospital.

H M Coroner for South Yorkshire (West) at that time was Dr S L Popper, I
was only appointed upon his retirement in November 1991.

Following the report of Lord Justice Taylor Dr Popper decided to hold
"mini inquests" on each of the deceased to assist the relatives in
finding out the circumstances of the individual deaths.             The Taylor
Report had of course only dealt with the disaster as a whole.             Bearing
in mind the scale of the paperwork Dr Popper apparently considered it
impracticable to call individual witnesses or deal with their statements
as documentary evidence.             He decided therefore to deal with the basic
factual evidence (effectively the who/where/when set out in The
Coroner’s Rules but not the "how") by hearing from an individual
presenting officer in each case.             This officer was a West Midlands
police officer who had dealt with the identification enquiries and each
gave heresay^evidence based on the statements of the v a rious.ffhe)
witnesses, / w i t n e ^ T l ^ t r ^ ^                                by name and
in individual some instances short passages were read out but in the
main there appears to have been simply a summary of the facts contained
within those statements.

Following the inquest the South Yorkshire Police refused to release any
statements until all possibility of criminal or disciplinary proceedings
had been removed.  This has now of course happened and the request for
statements has been renewed.  The police have taken the view that they

                                                                Cont/d....

DESAAR
                                  -   2 -



will only release statements with the consent of the maker but in most
instances that has been forthcoming.   This office has been asked for
statements by   a small number of the relatives but no real dispute has
arisen because in each case all parties concerned have been quite happy
to see the documents released.

It should be emphasised that in many cases the relatives involved have
suffered for some three years or more without a detailed or precise
knowledge of the events surrounding the death.    In my view their wish to
have sight of   the statements involved is perfectly understandable for
two reasons.    Firstly, there is a natural concern to know the
circumstances surrounding the death of a loved one and secondly a
certain degree of mistrust of the establishment in South Yorkshire has
arisen and relatives wish to be assured that the deceased had died
immediately and was not left unattended or improperly cared for to die
heedlessly.

A problem now arises because Mrs Spearitt has asked for sight of four
statements relating to the death of her son, Adam.  One statement is
from a serving South Yorkshire Police Officer who (almost uniquely) has
refused consent for his statement to be released.  This does not cause a
problem as far as I am concerned because this officer (again unusually)
gave evidence in person at the inquest and I do not believe it can be
suggested in any way that his statement would come within Rule 57.

The remaining three witnesses are SYMAS personnel and in each case they
do not consent to release of their statements.  The South Yorkshire
Police have therefore refused to give Mrs Spearitt copies of the
documents and she has written to me.

I am very tempted to release the statements to Mrs Spearitt on the basis
that whilst they may not in the strictest sense come within Rule 57, the
Hillsborough inquest was a very unusual situation necessitating
procedures being adopted to deal with situations envisaged by The
Coroner’s Rules.  Had Adam Spearitt died in isolation there is no doubt
that either Mrs Spearitt would have heard the witnesses in person or
that their statements would have been dealt with in such a way that Rule
57 certainly did apply.  It seems to me therefore that it is unfair upon
Mrs Spearitt to deny her what would otherwise have been her right.

I have one caution on this point of view.  One of the SYMAS personnel
involved is a senior officer and the majority of his statement relates
to his dealings with the disaster as a whole.  This gives room for some
mischief and I do not lose sight of the fact that relatives of six of
the deceased (not including Mrs Spearitt) are seeking to have the
inquest re-opened.

I have been very open in my views on this to the Chief Executive at
SYMAS and our disagreement is perfectly amicable.  I invited SYMAS to
take legal advice which they have done and the reply from Messrs Dibb

                                                           Cont/d....

DESAAR
Lupton & Co is at Annex C.

In short they resist the release of the statements but do not take the
argument very much further.  It is indicated that if I intend to release
the documents that an order may be sought to prevent me doing so.  I am
most certainly prepared to give the Ambulance Service proper notice and
have written to them accordingly.

I would be grateful of your views as to the efficacy of releasing these
statements notwithstanding the objection of the statement maker.

          Annex   A.   copy Rule 54 Coroners Rules 1984.
            "     B.   transcript of inquest 18/04/90.
            "     C.   transcript of inquest re Spearritt 20/04/90.
            "     D.   copy letter Messrs Dibb Lupton.




DESAAR
