                    From Sir M alcolm Thornton, M .P .

                             HOUSE OF COMMONS
                             LONDON SW1A OAA




                                                         iptember 1996
Rt. Hon. Michael Howard, QC,
Secretary of State,
Home Office,
50 Queen Anne's Gate,
LONDON. SW1H 9AT




Dear Michael,

Re: M r g - Anno Williama.

My constituent, Anne Williams, has given me a copy of the letter
which she wrote to you recently.   I should be very grateful for
your comments and look forward to hearing from you.

Kind regards.

Yours ever,




                  Malcolm and signed in his absence.
Rt. Hon Michael Howard. MP                        Mrs. Anne Williams.
Home Secretary.
                                                      Formby
                                                      Merseyside.




Dear Mr Howard,
                    My name is Anne Williams I lost my 15 year old son Kevin
Daniel at the Hillsborough disaster on the 15th April 1989.

Mini-inquests had been held in the cases of all victims in April and May 1990, for
the purpose of presenting allegedly non-controversial evidence as to the
circumstances of individual deaths. This evidence was presented only as
summaries by investigating Potice Officers from the West Midlands Police force.

In the case of Kevin the evidence presented at the Mini-inquest was bizarre. On
the 2nd May 1990, the statement dated 27th Aprif 1989 of PC Bruder, an off duty
Merseyside Police Officer, was summarised. The summary omitted the evidence
in relation to vomiting the pulse and an ambulance that Mr Bruder said passed
him at 3.37.pm while he was attending to Kevin.
The evidence of Special Constable Debra Martin of the South Yorkshire Police
was summarised, including the assertion that at 4.pm.t Kevin opened his eyes,
said "Mum" and died.

On the 3rd of May 1990, a statement was signed by PC Bruder retracting his first
statement. On the 3rd of May my husband and 1were also visited by a Det
Sawyers of the West Midland Police, he came to tell us that PC Bruder has now
changed his statement a year after he had made his first statement

On the 4th May 1990 the coroner held another Mini-inquest on Kevin, the
retracted statement was summarised, and Docter Slater was recalled to say that
death must have occurred before Miss Martin tended Kevin. Doctor Stater was
called again to say that the twitching spoken of by PC Bruder in his new
statement was possible after death, in spite of the severity of the asphyxia.

There was so much confusion in Kevin's case that I needed to see the
statements of Pc Bruder and SWPC Martin my M. P. Sir Malcalm Thornton
helped me get the statements off the South Yorkshire Police, 1was shocked
when I read them there first statement made within weeks of the disaster say that
Kevin was alive up to 4.pm. that day, the second statements made a year after all
 the signs of five had been changed, I was even more confused f new I needed to
 speak to PC Bruder and SWPC Martin.

 I had a meeting with PC Bruder at Hope Street Police dtation were he worked one
 of Mr Bruders superiors was present I took with me Miss Coleman who did some
 research on Hillsborough, enclosed is a copy of the notes we made of my
 meeting with Mr Bruder.

 I then tracked down SWPC Martin she had left the Police force, she wanted to
 come to Formby to tell me what had happened to Kevin. Miss Martin tokJ me that
 she had made her first statement up from notes she had made in her pocket book
 on the day of the disaster, Miss Martin also told me that she was visited at her
 home by two West Midland Police officers who put pressure on her to change her
 first statement, Miss Martin was sticking to her orginai statement, enclosed is a
 copy of the statement that Miss Martin wrote out the day I met her in the
 presence of my solicitor Ann Addlington.

My memorial went to the Attorney General in April 1992. It showed that Bolder
and Martin had been induced to change their evidence. They adhere to their
original accounts that Kevin was alive long after 3.15.p.m. Neither has ever been
called to give evidence, but each has been presented to the Coroner's Court as
wrong-headed arid feeble.

I was refused a new inquest so then I went for a judicial review with new
evidence, the West Midland Police were served with a writ they never admitted or
denied the alegations against them. On the 5th of November1993. again I was
refused a new inquest on Kevin.

 I could not come to terms with Kevin's death I needed to find out everything that
 had happened to Kevin, the inquest should have given me the answers. The
questions that should have been answered are who the person was, were he
died, how he died and what he died firom, with the 3.15 pm cut off point I have not
had all these questions answered, I have spent hours talking to forensic
pathologist about Kevin’s injuries, Dr lain West suggest that Kevin may have
been alive after 3.15 pm. Dr J. Bums M.D. F.R.C. Path of the Department of
forensic Pathology at the University of Liverpool has made a fresh report, dated
11th April 1994.
This offers substantial support to the evidence of Dr West and to the evidence of
Debra Martin. Kevin may have been capable of speaking to her.

I had seen a lot of visual evidence to try and find Kevin, / spotted the ambulance
that Mr Bruder was so adament about entering the ground at 3.35.pm. at the
Pennistone end and would have passed Kevin and Mr Bruder at 3.37.pm. while
he was attending to Kevin. The ambulance was on a video compiled by the West
Midland Police,
fn June 1994 Roger Cook ran a programme about Kevin's case Roger Cook also
found Mr Tony Edwards who was the assistant to the driver of the ambulance
that came on the ground at 3.35. pm.
Tony Edwards asserts that he was interviewed by West Midians Police in some
detail but was never called to give evidence. He made it quite clear that a second
ambulance was involved and appears on video yet West Midland Police never
pressented the court with this information or apprised the court of the existence of
Tony Edwards or the relevance of his evidence. This amounrts to deltiberate
concealment and suppression of evidence. Enclosed is a copy of Mr Edwards
statement and a photograph of the Ambulance entering the ground at 3.35.pm.
The photograph was taken from the West Midland Police Video.

On the Cook Report Dr Popper admitted that there was difficulty with Mr Bruders
evidence with regard to the timing of the ambulance, he said he was worried
because if he was in error if you like on the ambulance he might have been in
error on other things.

I also found two of the carriers that carried Kevin across the pitch on an
advertising board Mr Steven Hart and Mr Tony O'Keefe both say Kevin was alive.
I have a timed photgraph of this taking place the timing is 3.32. pm.

John Prescott, a hitherto untraced spectator who saw PC Bruder give first aid to
Kevin, has now been located and had made a statement. This statement offers
still further support to the evidence of PC Bruder and the ambulance.
Enclosed is a copy of Mr Prescotts statement and a copy of a still photograph
taken by a photographer for the Times which shows Kevin tying on the ground
with PC Bruder giving mouth to mouth, John Prescott kneeling to the left of the
photo (in the light jumper) and two unknown people.

The reason I am writing to you Mr Howard is because I have written to Sir Ronald
Hadfield the Chief Constable of the West Midland Police (Letter enclosed) asking
for my complaints to be investigated by an independent Police force.
On the 30th April 1received a letter off               staff officer to the Chief
Constable saying that my letter had been forwarded to the Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire Mr Richard Wells.fletter enclosed)
I was quite supprised that The West Midland Police had refered my letter to the
South Yorkshire Police when they were the force that the West Midland Police
were investigating, I do realise that the south Yorkshire Police hold all the
documentation on Hillsborough as I have been dealing with them for the past 5
years trying to get information on Kevin.

On the 23 May I received a letter off Chief Superintendent Lowe saying that the
matter I mention in my letter has been subject to a thorough and vigorous
investigation which resulted in the allegation not being substantiated.
1do not understand which allegation Mr Lowe means, I thought I had made it
quite clear in my letter to Sir Ronald Hadfletd that I was complaining about the
West Midland Police suppressing the evidence of the ambulance and putting
pressure on PC Bruder and ex S.W.P.C. Martin to change there first statements.
I will always remember Miss Martin and Mr Bruder telling me that Kevin was the
only one they had resuscitated that day and thats why they would not forget him,
miss Martin was a dental nurse she told me she probably had more medical
experience than most of the P.C.s that day, all she was doing was helping a little
boy why should she lie.

I took the Police letters to my M.P. Sir Maicalm Thornton who has supported me
ail these years,! explained to Sir Malcalm that 1needed the answers to my
compliants he agreed with me and said he would write to the south Yorkshire
Police for me. At the Moment there is a recess in the house so I have not been
able to contact Sir Malcalm so I decided to ring the South Yorkshire Police.
I spoke to P.C. Greenway who deals with the Hillsborough evidence I rang him on
Friday the 3rd August, I explained to him that I have had no answers to my
complaints and that if I sent the evidence in to him would he please investigate it.
I am at the moment getting the evidence ready to send to South Yorkshire, I am
going to send them the video with the ambulance on, Johnny prescotts statement
which is new evidence, Miss Martins statement, my meeting with P.C.Bruder, it is
 a shame Mr Bruder would not put it in writing.
Also P.C. Greenway informed me that they have redeved a letter of my M.P. Sir
Malcalm Thornton and have written back to him.

Please Mr Howard could you make sure that my complaints are looked into
property, I no I have the evidence, 1would not mind if another Police force
investigated my complaints. 1also feel that through the changing of witness
statements and the suppressing of the ambulance in kevin’s case it has stopped
Kevin having a proper inquest on him. Sir Malcalm Thornton took Kevin's case
for a Pariiamentry debate on the 26th October 19941 attended the debate
because 1felt that the truth of what happenedto Kevin is recorded for all time in
the Hansard. Most importantly, the 3 .15.pm cut off time does not relate to Kevin
as the new evidence clearly shows, (copy of Hansard enclosed).

 Also do you think it would help if I wrote to the main Police complaints authority
in London?




                                Yours Sincerely
