                                 OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR                   MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                              WATERY STREET
                                         SOUTH YORKSHIRE                      SHEFFIELD
                                              (West District)
                                                                              S3 7ET
    STEFAN L. POPPER, LL.B., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                  CORONER


                             Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721
                                                                  'ioJUN 9)     17 th - J u n e ............... 19 ...91..



SLP/JT.
CRN/91 66/21/1.




Miss G. Harrison,
E Division,
Home Office,
Q u ee n A n n e ’s Gate,
London. SW1H 9 A T .



Dear Miss Harrison,

Thank you for your letter of the 1st of M a y enclosing a copy letter from
Eddie O ’Hara MP re Mr and Mrs. Aspinall. I am sorry to read the second
p ar ag r a p h of Mr. O ’H a r a ’s letter.

In the light of the second paragraph of your letter, I do not think that it
is ne cessary for me to enter into a detailed justification into the points
raised.

You might however be interested to k n o w that shortly after the conclusion of
the inquests a press release was issued by the West Midlands Police and I
w i l l quote one paragraph from it:-

         "As a matter of interest the C o r o n e r ’s Inquests sitting wi th
          a Jury had been the longest running in recent history, if not
          for all time.    Including the interim inquests in April and
          May of last year the Coroners Court sat for a total of
          n inetyth ree days over a total of ni n et ee n weeks.    There were
          over 520 appearances by witnesses and 540 exhibits examined.
          The transcripts of the proceedings amounted to over 8,650
          pages recording over 3.6 mi llion w ords spoken".

-You may also be interested to k n o w that my recollection is that the
solicitors representi ng the vast majority of the bereaved (including I
b elieve Mr. and Mrs. Aspinall) were very satisfied that I agreed to take
evidence in respect of each individual de ceased in April/May 1990. Because
the D.P.P. had not yet completed his inquiries and it was therefore important
not in any w ay to prejudice his decision, the evidence wh ic h was taken
w a s limited to questions of who, wh en and where and matters of a
n on -c on tr ov er s ia l nature.

After    the D.P.P. ann ounced his decision I made arrangements to resume the
in quests ai»3 this commenced on the 19th of November 1990.
