                            H O U S E OF C O M M O N S
                               L O N D O N SW1A0AA

9th April 1991



The Rt.Hon.Kenneth Baker MP
Home Secretary
THE HOME OFFICE
co Queen Anne's Gate
 ! Ion SW1




Dear Home Secretary,

RE: M R .& MRS. ASPINALL,                                jyiERSEYSIDE   -

                     HILLSBOROUGH INQUEST

I have received representations from my constituents, M r .& Mrs.Aspinall
who lost a son at the Hillsborough tragedy.

They expressed extreme dismay and distress at what they saw as a
carefully orchestrated evasion of the key issues at the recent inquest.
In particular, M r .& Mrs.Aspinall have asked me to put the following
six questions to you:

1.   Why alcohol tests were made on the dead at the football ground
      and not  the living (i.e. the police who had responsibility for
      crowd control?

2.   Why was no advice given to the families about the possibility
     of ignoring mini inquests and having full presentation of evidence
     to the jury at the main inquest?

3.   Why was no control exercised over the flow of crowd outside
     the ground?

4.   Why did M r .Popplewell not allow any evidence of events after 3.15 p
     when many died up to an hour afterwards?

5.   Why were only two options given to the jury by M r .Popplewell
     and not the third option of criminal negligence?

6.  Why did   the families have to bear the costs of the inquest
     (£3,000 per family).   The police,allegedly, spent £1 million
     in defence costs - this was not only a burden but. was inequitable.
                                                       fe
I would very much appreciate your observations on these matters.

Yours sincerely,
                                                                             v -,
                                                                        >' i ' P
                                                                               t

"^oLcks      'c^sj
Eddie O'Hara MP
(Knowsley South)
