                                                       DIBB L U P T O N
                                                       BROOMHEAD
                                                       ----------------- S O L I C I T O R S    -----------------



                                                                                                                                               F o u ntain Precinct
                                                                                                                                                       Balm G reen
                                                                                                                                                Sheffield SI 1RZ
Your R e C P D / rP jA\ D
                        u // 9y 44 // 9y 0u                                                                         Telephone 0742 760351 Fax m 2   7005b8/ 73m8
                                                                                                                                           M D X 10.521 Sheffield
OurRelAJC/GA




                                                                                                                                     22 June 1992

         C P Dorries Esq
         H M Coroner
         Medico-Legal Centre
         Watery Street
         SHEFFIELD
         S3 7ET



         Dear Mr Dorries

         Hillsborough Inquests - Adam Edward Spearritt
         My clients:__ South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service

         Thank you for                          sending             me       copies            of        the        transcripts               which           I
         requested.

         I have been through the transcripts and considered rule 57 of The
         Coroners Rules.

         It seems to me that rule 57 relates to documents produced by, or put
         to, witnesses in the course of their giving evidence.      The three
         statements which you have been asked to supply copies of do not come
         into that category.

         The case summaries contain matters which seem to have been taken
         from the statements but they do not expressly refer to the
         statements themselves.

        The status of the summaries themselves was dealt with by Dr Popper
        on 18 April 1990. I would refer you to the paragraph which starts
        at E on page 16 and finishes at A on page 17 of the transcripts for
        that day (unfortunately the transcript has 2 numbering systems; the
        pages are also numbered 13 and 14). That paragraph makes it clear
        that all of the evidence to be given by the Presenting Officer was
        hearsay. At no time did the Presenting Officer who dealt with the
        inquest of Adam Edward Spearritt produce the SYMAS statements, nor
        were they put to him.



                                              A list of partners names is available for inspection at th e above address

                                               Regulated by th e Law Society in th e conduct of investm ent business
Continuation   2


Date   22 June 1992


       I should also add that the statements themselves were actually
       produced for the Hillsboroguh Inquiry and not for the inquests. I
       enclose copies of consent forms signed by the 3 individuals
       concerned in May 1989 which authorised the release of the statements
       to the police in connection with the Hillsborough Inquiry.

       In all the circumstances I suggest that it is not appropriate to
       release copies of the statements without the consent of the 3
       individuals who made those statements;   my understanding is that
       they object to the release of the statements.

       I shall be away from the office until 29 June;     perhaps we could
       speak upon my return.

       In any event I should be grateful if you could confirm that you will
       not release copies of the statements without giving reasonable
       notice of your intention to do so, in order that there is an
       opportunity for my clients to seek an order preventing this.
       Yours sincerely




       A J CALLAGHAN
       Partner




                                                           RECEIVED

                                                          2 3 JUN 1992
                                                     H. M. CCPO^EP'S
