                      M ERSEYSIDE PO LICE A U TH O RITY


At a Special Meeting o f the Merseyside Police Authority held on Monday, 2nd November
1998 in the Meeting Room, West House, Mercury Court, Liverpool the following were
present


                             Elected M embers

                             Mrs. C. Gustafson (Chairperson o f the Authority)
                             S. Foulkes
                             F. Prendergast
                             Lady Doreen Jones
                             D, Martin
                             M. E. Rimmer
                             W. Weightman
                             Mrs. K. Wood

                             M agistrate M embers

                             Mr. M. J. Amos J.P.
                             Mr. A. Cowman J.P.
                             Mr. K. Jackson J.P.

                             Independent M embers

                             Mr. P. Burke
                             Mr. P. Coogan
                             Dr. E. A. Agalamanyi
                             Mr. G. F. Hill
                             Mr. N. Langley

       Apologies

       Apologies for absence were received on behalf o f Councillor M. Storey OBE


94     C h airp erso n ’s Announcements

       The Chairperson reported a request made by the Hillsborough Family Support to
       permit its Chairman, Mr Trevor Hicks to address the Authority. She also
       informed Members o f a petition to be submitted by the Group in respect o f the
       appointment of the Chief Constable (Designate).

       RESOLVED

       i)     That the request for Mr Hicks to address the Authority be approved and
              the petition received by the Clerk in respect o f the appointment of the
              Chief Constable (Designate) be noted; and



Comms/mins/auth/021198 ^
                                          9
      ii)    that in accordance with Standing Order 10, the Authority agreed to permit
              the recording that part o f the meeting during which the press and public
             were not excluded.


95    M r T rev o r Hicks - Statem ent

      Mr Trevor Hicks addressed the Authority and referred to the information sent to
      each Member of the Police Authority by the Hillsborough Family Support Group.
      He requested the Authority to reconsider the decision made by the Authority’s
      Appointments Committee to appoint Mr Bettison as the C hief Constable.

       RESOLVED That Mr Hicks’ statement be noted and that he be thanked for his
       attendance.

96    Post of C hief C onstable - R eport o f the C lerk to the A uthority

       The Authority considered whether the press and public should be excluded during
       the consideration o f the report o f the Clerk to the Authority.

       RESOLVED That consideration o f pages 1 to 22 o f the report o f the Clerk in
       respect o f the post o f Chief Constable be held in public.

       Accordingly, the Authority then considered, in public, pages 1-22 o f the Clerk’s
       report to the Authority and the additional information provided by Her Majesty’s
       Inspector o f Constabulary.

       At this point in the proceedings the meeting stood adjourned for fifteen minutes.

       Local G overnm ent (Access to Inform ation) Act 1985

       RESO LV ED - That in accordance with the provisions o f the Local Government
       Act 1972, the public be excluded from the meeting for the following item o f
       business on the grounds that it involves the likely disclosure o f exempt
       information as defined in paragraphs 1 and 12 o f Part 1 o f Schedule 12A to the
       Act.

97.     Post of C hief Constable

       The Authority considered the remainder o f the report o f the Clerk to the Authority
       in respect o f the decision making process leading to the appointment o f the Chief
       Constable and which reported on the issues raised by Members o f the
       Appointments Committee at its meeting held on the 19th October 1998.




 Comms/mins/auth/021198                  10
       The meeting was adjourned for approximately 90 minutes whilst Members o f the
       Authority met informally and in private with Mr N. Bettison, Chief Constable
       (Designate) who made a statement and answered questions from Members o f the
       Authority.

        At the end o f this informal meeting Members:-

       RESOLVED That Mr Bettison be thanked for addressing the Police Authority in
       an open, honest, and sincere way and answering and discussing all issues in a
       statesman-like manner.

       The meeting reconvened to discuss further issues surrounding the appointment o f
       the Chief Constable.

       The Clerk circulated to all Members a copy o f a letter from Martin Edwards, an
       employment law specialist with Mace and Jones Solicitors, which set out detailed
       legal advice on the issues arising from the Chief Constable’s employment.


       RESOLVED

       (i)     That the Merseyside Police Authority affirms the decision o f the
                Appointments Committee to appoint Norman Bettison to the post o f Chief
                Constable o f Merseyside and the Authority looks forward to a fruitful and
                mutually beneficial partnership with Mr Bettison and the Force in serving
                the community o f Merseyside in the future;

               (Councillors S. Foulkes, D. Martin and F. Prendergast requested that their
               dissent be recorded).

       (ii)    that a letter be sent to Maria Eagle MP requesting that she provides
                evidence on which she based her statement in the House o f Commons on
                8th May 1998 (and be copied to the Prime Minister and the Home
                Secretary), and a reply be requested by 12th November 1998 and reported
                to the next meeting o f the Authority on 19th November 1998;

       (iii)   that the contemporaneous notes o f the informal meeting with Mr Bettison
               be provided to Members o f the Authority and released to the public in due
               course; and

       (iv)    that the Authority instructs the Clerk to request the Acting Chief
                Constable, Mr Paul Acres, to again pursue the issue o f the leak o f
                confidential information; and

       (v)     that a report be submitted to a future meeting o f the Authority reviewing
                the structure, staffing levels and workload o f the Police Support Unit in the
                light o f experience since the re-organisation o f the Unit following the
                Police and Magistrates Court Act 1994.




Comms/mins/auth/021198                   11
            (Note: Mr K. Jackson JP left the meeting at 6.30p.m. and took no part in
            the decisions o f the Authority)




      Minutes 94 to 97 received as a correct record the 19th day o f November 1998


                    CHAIRPERSON OF THE AUTHORITY
                     (The meeting closed at 8.50 p.m.)




Comms/mins/auth/021198
                                       12
