02/11 *98 10:06    01512361936                HF S 6                -->2364527                      Pg. J2 -v


                                                                                          > s80A%




                          Hillsborough Family Support Group



        2 November 1998

        David Hemhaw
        Clerk t o Merseyside Police Authority
        P O Box 101A
        West House
        Mercury Court
        Titbebarn Street
        Liverpool L69 2NU

        Dear Sir



        S would (ike the opportunity to address the meeting which wifi take place this afternoon
        regarding the appointment of Norman Bettison a* Chief Constable of Merseyside I should be
        grateful for a tew minutes to put the concerns of the Hillsborough Family Support Group to
        the MPA.

        Please contact the KFSG office to let me know it’this will be possibls.


        Yours feithfWly




       Trevor Hicks
       Chairman




                mom 01512361919. F a x 0 lS 1 2 3 6 1506. E M aH iafo@ hfsg.org
              lit F loor C entral Buildings 41 N orth Jo h n S treet JLiverpool L 2 SRR
0 2 /it '98 10:05 01512361936                              >2364527   Ps- 01




                           Hillsborough Family Support Group




         TO:

        FAX NO:          S >^b       <-tES°


        FROM:           ^ »-^v9\   fhc<^

        °A T E :


       FAX NO: 0151 236 1936

       TELEPHONE NO; 0151 236 1919

       NO OF PAGES TO FOLLOW:                      [

      MESSAGE:

        If               Ik^rkPt'W        ^       iAj^
        f e    w    4                n /u * .   ~+'v u ^
                                                           w aM &         ,




                            Faat01512 3 « im EM ail tafo@H|Wore
   I , I W c « t« lB afld in es 41 North John S tr^ t
  * 9/ 41/ H it U : * r      jw u U W 3 3 8 9 X1 SJ                T B B m HICKS EWL                                 m   i




                                      Hillsborough Family Support Group



                                    Re;Nonnan Bettison Appointment

                 It k n o w well documented that the Hillsborough Family Support Group are appalled at the
                 appointment, by the Merseyside Police Authority, o f Noonan Bettison as the Chief Constable
                 o f Merseyside. The insensitivity o f the appointment is clear and we feel that the HFSG families
                 and the people o f Merseyside are M y justified in demanding that this appointment be
                 revoked.

                 Furthermore, it is our belief that the selection procedure is so badly flawed that the
                 appointment cannot be allowed to stand. The conduct o f the Police Authority during that
                 process and the subsequent events is an absolute disgrace, bordering on incompetence, that
                 renders M r Bettison’s position untenable and reduces the Police Authority’s credibility to
                 absolute zero.

                It is clear both from the Scrutiny o f Lord Justice Stuart-Smith and the statements released to
                us by Jack Straw following that Scrutiny that the then Superintendent Bettison had a
                significant involvement in Che “Liaison Unit” charged by South Yorkshire Police in minimising
                their responsibility and shifting the blame to others, not least the fans ofM erseyside clubs.

                This involvement was not “peripheral” as is claimed in 23"* October 1998 press release o f the
                Chief Inspector o f Constabulary. We have documents whose dates span many months,
                (including the period from October 1989 - January 1991 when Bettison’s application states be
                was a Superintendant o f the traffic division) but where he is clearly show s on the circulation
                list which includes the other “liaison” unit officers.

                The South Yorkshire Police memo to the Deputy Chief Constable o f July 12* 1990 (in the
                raddle o f tLSabove dates!) is undeniably written by the then Superintendent Bettison. This
                document clearly demonstrates M r Bettisons role in preparing the defence o f South Yorkshire
                Police.

               As stated by Maria Eagle in Parliament, the “liaison unit orchestrated what can only be
               described as a black propaganda campaign” which aimed to deflect the blame for what
               happened onto anyone other than themselves.They were also involved in a systematic attempt
               to change details o f the statements to emphasise the slant in favour o f South Yorkshire Police




CtWRMAN                                               VICE-OIAIXMAN/SECRETARY                     TREASURER.
T.HMts                                                P liatnimmtl
      HitfSani                                        2f Rajenwn*
                                                      U m p o rt                                  8ir1*afc£3*i
                                                      u tm                                        MW’WysH&s
TcW^x; ttlTBI-MRSM                                    TcWm: 0)51.724 )771                         iwsmjurtiiTSH
M o b ifc rn T O -JIIU S I                            Mobile: M lfJ-JM l 21
  9V   ti. V»i   »'AA      991^33               rxtevuK m a s s s w l                               @02




Much o f the Manie deflection was, as stated earlier, directed towards football fans on
M erseyside, the very people that M r Bettison now claims to have empathy with.

It is oar belief that M r Bettison was less than frank in disclosing to the Authority members Ms
part in the liaison unit aftd to tal involvement in the Hillsborough aftermath. This view is
apparently reinforced by the application documents.

Notwithstanding the A uthority's failure to faring these m atters out, we believe it was
incumbent o f M r Bettison to bring such m ateria feet to the attention o f the Selection P anel
The declaration at the conclitsion o f the application states I understand that should 1
conceal any material feet, I wiD, i f engaged, he liable to the termination o f my appointment.”
W e believe that Bettisons M u re to outline his involvement is concealment o f material fact and
so renders the selection procedure flawed. We call on the Authority to act accordingly and to
revoke the appointment.

This whole saga, *nd M r Beaisons part ia it, has grossly undermined M rBettison’s perceived
integrity and cre&Tiffity with the people o f Merseyside. We believe he should do the decent
thing and withdraw Ms candidature.

We believe th at some members o f the Police Authority Selection Panel didnot have all the
relevant information to hand when they chose to appoint M rB ettisoa Some members may not
have received certain key documents and some o f these docnments do not make clear the foil
extent o f Betttsons wideand many months o f involvement post BBM>orough.

The Committee o f the HFSG invited Councillor Dave M artin, Councillor Frank Prendergast
and Councillor Carole Gustafson to meet us in Liverpool Apologies were received to rn Stove
M artin, who had a prior engagement on civic duties. No communication was received from
Carole Gustafson.

We had a iliH and candid disew ssw With Frank                                          ^ aa3®*ee
voted unanimously to accept his apology (and that o f D as* M artin) for their part in
appointing M r Bettison in ignorance o f the role he had played in the “inquiry team” . They
should have been aware o f Ms connections from M aria E agle's statement to the House o f
Commons on 10* May 1998 but did not make the connection on names. W e accept that they
are not as closely involved as w e are and w ithout the correct documents could not he M y
aware o f Bettisocs total involvement with Hfflsborough. We have given them the benefit o f
the doubt in i& e d tto n w ith the dispute over who was o r w as not served with afl o f the
coirect papets. This p o s a ^ b a s h ^ a c e ^ b j r tte d e tk to ^ A iite iity iB tn s d if t

5 S S they should not resign b at should remain in post on the Police Authority to assist
the Authority to put right their dreadffl mistake.

This whole saga, not only the insensitive decision but the inept handfag o f the reaction to it
calls into question the suitability o f Carole Gustafeon to chair the Authority and David
H eftste* to be its deifc. 'lU k w a ifg m M a i o f
unprofessional and we believe they are unfit to lead the authority and should hnmedfctdy step
down.
28/10    m 11:37      FAX 01S35 891483                 TREVOR HICKS M L




        If, as they have stated o» various occasions, they were aware o f M r Bettison’s connections
        -with HUIsfeorough then their cavalier attitude and total disregard for the feelings, bath o f the
        Family Group and the people ofM erseyside renders them unfit to manage the Authority
        There is some doubt, because o fth e conflicting statements, just what Carole Gustafson did or
        did not know. It Is our belief that she did know o f the connection and we fed she should have
        investigated this connection and probed ft at iittervicw. It is somewhat inconceivable that she
        did not know when the Clerk, with whom she needs to work dosdy admits to knowing!

        The nsKuniag six members o f the Selection Panel were apparently aware o f Mr Bettison’s
        Hillsborough connection. They failed to bring this to the fore during the selection procedure
        and are similarly guilty o f insensitivity, lack o f judgement and skiD and similarly should step
        down.

        Should the Chairwoman, Clerk and other members o fth e Selection Committee fail to step
        d a m , we call on all Merseyside and related Council’s, who have already adopted resolutions
        rejecting the Scrutiny and/or criticising South Yorkshire Police’s part in proceedings to pass a
        vote o f no confidence and/or censure these members o f the Police Authority.

        TheH FSG accepts th a t* is not qualified to comment upon M r Bettison’s potential abilities as
        a prospective CMef Constable and w e are merely protesting a t Us appointment to Merseyside.
        K is a m atter for aay other Police Authority not connected with Hillsborough whether they
        consider him to be a fit candidate.

        It is our understanding that the      phase in the appointment o f a Chief Constable is the
        approval by the Home Secretary o f such appointments . We are today calling upon lack Straw
        to intervene in this unmitigated iness and refuse to ratiiy the appointment. A Chief Officer can
        onlypoEce effective^ with the consent o f the people. The people have expressed th e r opinion
        and an overwhelming majority have made it clear to Bettinson he is not welcome.

        The constant stream oftw ists and turns in this saga turned & ce, are behind our issuing this
        -
        ur
         i<
          c.
           |
           Itw J-frmemorandum.
                     ...- —.
                           <
                           ■. i t s$ *
                                     w—*-. Aca
                                       tcm  —jto
                                               *..assist—Aa•~
                                                            %
                                                            |Irf*a
                                                                 tII
                                                            oerter    .*  -
                                                                          •
                                                                          '
                                                                          .J* o t our postaon M
                                                                   unaerstaiiuing              MM4
                                                                                              ana kmu
                                                                                                  to
        the speed; resolution o fth is unsavoury sequence o f events.

        Finally, it is our intention to ,sea£ this statement to members o f tie Police Authority with other




        unortrfes«fin*i m untur


        *
         Trevor Hicks
         Chairman HFSG
                                                                                   < 5#q %£.


                                   SOOTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                Ref:
        From; Paiic* Constable « 1 C reenw ay                  Station/D ejrt: Hillsborough Inqu,

        To:    Please see distribution list                    D*t8?        17 January 1991



              SUBJECT:    SUMMARY OF INQUEST 16.1.91



               The following witnesses gave evidence at the Inquest,

               Superintendent Roger Marshall    Police Officer (South Yorkshire Police)
               Trevor Hicks                     Liverpool Supporter
               Paul Hand                        Liverpool Supporter
               Shaun Michael Fortune            Liverpool Supporter
               Jeffrey Rex                      Liverpool Supporter

              Superintendent Marshall    continued giving evidence under cross-
              examination by Mr Isaacs, for Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.     He
              asked   questions   relating   to   crowd   behaviour,  C.C.T.V.   and
              conmuhicstions with Ground Control.   Mr Hale asked questions relating
              to Lord Justice Tailor's recommendations, behaviour of fans, using
              barriers sad cordons and mounted Officers to control and direct crowds
              and their effect. The Coroner concluded by asking questions relating
              to crowd figures and the effect delaying kick-off would have on fans
              outside.

              Trevor Hicks, with M s wife Jennifer arid daughters Victoria and Sarah,
              travelled to Sheffield by private motor car, arriving at l.^Opm. They
              were in possession of match tickets.    Victoria and Sarah died in the
              tragedy. They entered the Leppings Lane end of the ground at 1.50pm.
              Trevor, Victoria and Sarah went through the tunnel into Pen 3.
              Jennifer Went into the North Stand.     He then went into Pen 1,     He
              described the conditions as they developed in Pen 3 and the fans
              becoming distressed and agitated. He mentioned his attempts to attract
              ttie attention of two Police Officers who were on the steps leading to
              the Ground Control box at separate times, without success.           He
              described going onto the pitch via Gate 1 and finding the bodies of his
              two daughters and the »e«ie*& assistance given to them. He positively
              identified the first Police Officer ha saw as Superintendent Greenwood.
              He was "able to make this identification after seeing that Officer in
              the corridor outside the chamber being used by the Lord Justice Taylor
              Inquiry on 30 May 1989-

              Mr Isaacs addressed the Coroner in the absence of the Jury as to the
              Coroner's loss of control over witnesses in relation to restricting
              them to what they saw and heard and not what they thought and their
              opinions. The Coroner accepted these comments.

              Paul Hand travelled to Sheffield by private motor car, arriving at 12
              noon. After visiting licensed premises, he went to the Leppings Lane
              end of the ground, arriving at 1.15pm. He entered the ground through a
              turnstile an(i went through the tunnel into Pen 3-     He described the
              Conditions in the pen as they deteriorated.    He mentioned seeing two
              girls, in front of him. One was supporting the other, who had fainted.
              After a .aSsive surge, he lost sight of the two giks.       These girls
              were Victoria and Sarah Hicks who died in the tragedy.

Gen/2
SttfittRY OF INQUEST 16.1.91



Shaun Fortune travelled to Shef?ieId from Bristol by coach, arriving at
1 .30p«. He attended immediately at the ground, which he entered by the
turnstile at the Leppings Lane end of the ground, at l-35pm- He went
through the tunnel and into Pen 3* He described the conditions in that
pen as they deteriorated.   He mentioned seeing two girls in front of
him, one in a distressed condition. After an almighty Surge* he lost
sight of the two girls. These girls were Victoria and Sarah Hicks.

Jeffrey Rex travelled to Sheffield from Bristol by coach, the same
coach as Shaun Fortune.      His evidence was virtually identical to
Fortune's In every respect, including identifying the Hicks’ girls.

It was noticable that the evidence of Hand, Fortune and Rex progressed
rapidly, taking forty minutes to complete. The hearing, which normally
concludes around 4.00pm, over-ran to 5-2Qpm.       Fortune and Rex had
travelled frjja Bristol in one vehicle and the Coroner allowed then both
to give evidence in order that they could both return to Bristol
together, eliminating transport difficulties.

Mr Harming, for Superintendent Murray, addressed the Coroner.         He
advised the Coroner that he felt from ft.00pm justice had not been done,
he felt under pressure not to ask questions.




l* o lie e “Cm>i»t4uxe y i



Distribution:


The Chi.::,.? Constable
The Deputy Chief Constable
Chief Superintendent Wain
Chief Superindent Mountain - Management Services
Superintendent Bettison
Detective Chief Inspector Brooke
