                                        MERSEYSIDE
                                        POLICE
                                        at
                                        A Unrwr'sijinrv
                                            iJ rlU iU l I




K/133/98                                                       16th October 1998

  STATEMENT FROM DAVID HENSHAW, CLERK TO MERSEYSIDE

                             POLICE AUTHORITY



in response to considerable speculation in the press regarding information made

available to Merseyside Police Authority during the recruitment process which led to

the appointment of Norman Bettison as Chief Constable, I would like to clarify the

following points.



“At the Appointments Committee Meeting on Thursday, 24th September when the

shortlisting of candidates was undertaken, the Committee had a Set of papers before

them. This included details of applicants’ careers, an assessment from Her

Majesty’s Inspector of Constabulary Dan Crompton, who was also present at the

meeting, are! background papers containing guidance from the Home Office on the

appointment of Chief Constables and associated paperwork.




                                                      more,.
                                          2
“At that meeting R/ler^eyside Police Authority members of the Appointments

Committee had material in front of them which indicated Mr Bettison’s experience,

both in South Yorkshire and West Yorkshire Police Ponces. This included a specific

reference to his involvement in the team set up within South Yorkshire Police Force

following the Hillsborough disaster. This reference was included in an assessment

of Mr Bettison by Her Majesty's Inspector of Constabulary,



"Appointments Committee members had this material from the date of the

shortlisting, almost three weeks ago, through the process of interviews, culminating

with the offer* of appointment following the final interviews on Tuesday, 13th

October.



"Police Authority members therefore had information in front of them during the

whole of the process from shortlisting to final appointment which indicated Mr

Bettison's involvement in the team set up after the Hillsborough disaster.




                                                more.,,
                                         3

“The interview process and questions and answers put to and given by candidates

are private and confidential, as in normal personnel selection procedures.

Her Majesty’s Inspector of Constabulary Dan Crompton was present throughout the

whole process, as was I, and we were not asked at any stage, by any member of the

Appointments Committee, about this aspect of Mr Bettison’s experience.



"Because this appointment is so high-ranking, the focus of interview is on the senior

command experience of officers over and above the rank of Superintendent and

candidates were specifically asked to address their application to the personal

competencies required of a Chief Constable,”



                                      -Ends-

For further information contact:_____




ref: mpa/r)®»Sfelfe!ateme2
