                       MERSEYSIDE POLICE AUTHORITY


                   and Members
             BoSrarlty

                27th April, 1989


               JOINT REPORT OF THE CLERK AND THE TREASURER


                        The Hillsborough Disaster
                       Contribution to Relief Fund

             the tragic events at Hillsborough on the 15th April, 1989,
        fj^nds were set up by a variety of organisations to ensure that
        |§§hip befalls the bereaved and injured.

   It^l/imderstood that all those funds have now been co-ordinated into
  -'^^liisborough Disaster Appeal Fund' administered jointly by
   g^ffield and Liverpool City Councils. It is further understood that
   jythe time members consider this report, Trustees of that fund will
   havebeen announced.


  Ifeig^Xjuring local authorities have made contributions to the fund and
  renters will wish to consider whether the Police Authority should make
 fitsown contribution.
 P'      ;
 12.1. Ite Authority is enpowered to incur, firstly, expenditure
 K    ■’which is incidental to its functions; that is expenditure
        which is not essential or necessary for the provision of
        the police service, but linked with that provision.

       The circumstances of the disaster are clearly linked with
       policing provision, both in the very nature of the event
       and because of its direct relevance to the Authority's
       area.

  2-2. Secondly, expenditure which facilitates or is conducive to
       the Authority’s functions is also permitted. Although its
       principal purpose is entirely different, any contribution
       wxild also be a firm indication to the public of the
       Authority's synpathy and concern, which would, in these
       exceptional circumstances, satisfy the criteria set out at
       the beginning of this paragraph.

:j% sun which the Authority decided upon by way of a contribution
      cane out of its contingency fund.

      members instructions are requested.



                                 R. PENN,
                          Clerk to the Authority



                              David Fellows,
                        Treasurer to the Authority
 1/2/V l/e
