                                                       NOT FOR PUBLICATION BY VIRTUE
                                                       OF PARAGRAPHS 1 AND 12 OF PART
                                                       I OF SCHEDULE 12A OF THE LOCAL
                                                       GOVERNMENT ACT 1972


                        M ERSEY SID E PO L IC E A U TH O R ITY

T o:    The C hairperson and M em bers
        of the Police A uthority

M eeting: 2nd N ovem ber 1998

                                 Post of C hief Constable

                 R E PO R T O F TH E C L E R K T O TH E A U TH O R ITY

1.     PU R PO SE O F T H E R E PO R T

1.1    To advise Members o f the decision-making process leading to the appointment of
       the C hief Constable, Merseyside Police Force; and to report upon the issues raised
       by Members o f the Appointments Committee at its meeting on 19th October 1998.

2.     RECO M M EN D A TIO N

2.1    That the recruitment process, interview arrangements and appointments procedure
       for the post o f Chief Constable be noted;

2.2    that the decision o f the Appointments Committee, acting under delegated powers,
        to appoint Norman Bettison to the post o f Chief Constable be noted; and

2.3    that the subsequent media reporting o f the appointment, the issues raised at the
        meeting o f the Appointments Committee o f 19th October 1998 and the Clerk’s
        responses to those matters, be noted.

3.     BACKGROUND TO TH E R E PO R T

3.1    The Appointments Committee is responsible for making appointments to posts o f
       Assistant Chief Constable and above. On 20th July 1998, the Committee met to
       discuss the recruitment process for the post o f Chief Constable. Subsequently the
       post was advertised in the Police Review with a closing date o f 28th August 1998.

3.2    The Appointments Committee then met to shortlist applicants for the post on 24th
       September 1998. The Clerk and Her Majesty’s Inspector o f Constabulary (“the
       HMIC”) attended the meeting in an advisory capacity as recommended by the
       Home Office “Guidelines on Selection Procedures for Chief Officer
       Appointments in the Police Service”. In a Chief Constable’s recruitment process,




                                              1
        the HMIC acts as principal adviser to the Committee on operational policing
        matters.

3.3     At the shortlisting meeting the HMIC’s assessment o f each o f the seven applicants
        was circulated to Members. This assessment outlines each applicant’s operational
        policing experience and assesses the applicant’s suitability for appointment to the
        post o f Chief Constable.

3.4     It should be noted that the Clerk had in his possession exactly the same
        information as members and had no additional information about each applicants
        operational experience over and above that contained in the HMIC assessments
        and the application forms

3.5     The Appointments Committee decided to shortlist all seven o f the applicants for
        the post o f Chief Constable (although one candidate withdrew prior to the final
        interviews).

3.6     The final interview process took place on Monday 12th October 1998 and Tuesday
        13* October 1998. At the end o f the Panel interviews and discussions on Monday
        12th October 1998, the Committee agreed that three candidates, Norman Bettison,
        Robert Davies and Paul Kernaghan should go forward to the final interviews on
        Tuesday 13th October 1998.

3.7     At the end o f the formal interview process on Tuesday 13th October 1998 and
        following the discussions o f the Members o f the Committee, the Appointments
        Committee unanimously agreed that Norman Bettison was the best candidate and
        accordingly offered the post o f Chief Constable to him, subject to medical
        clearance. A press release was issued by the Authority on the afternoon o f
        Tuesday 13th October 1998 announcing his appointment.

3.8     Following M r Bettison’s appointment, there has been considerable media
        reporting from Wednesday 14th October 1998 onwards about his involvement in a
        small inquiry team set up by South Yorkshire Police following the Hillsborough
        tragedy in April 1989 (with particular emphasis on a statement made by Maria
        Eagle M P in the House o f Commons on 8th May 1998) and the extent to which
        Members o f the Appointments Committee had been aware o f this during the
        recruitment process. Consequently, a meeting o f the Appointments Committee
        was held on Monday 19th October 1998 to give Members the opportunity to have
        a full and frank discussion about Mr Bettison’s appointment and subsequent
        media coverage.

 3.9     Part o f the meeting o f the Appointments Committee was open to the press and
         public, with the remainder o f the meeting being in closed session.

 3.10    At the meeting the Clerk confirmed that the details o f Mr Bettison’s involvement
         in the South Yorkshire inquiry team set up after the Hillsborough tragedy were
         contained in the HMIC’s narrative assessment o f Mr Bettison circulated at the
         shortlisting meeting on 24* September 1998.




                                                 2
3.11   The HMIC, Mr Dan Crompton, was present at the meeting on 19th October 1998.
       He confirmed that Mr Bettison was not involved in any o f the pre-planning or
       policing o f the Hillsborough match. He confirmed that Mr Bettison was a
       member o f a small enquiry team set up by the South Yorkshire Police after the
       tragedy, and that this team had looked at existing football policing strategies in
       South Yorkshire and safety at football ground issues.

3.12   Two Members o f the Committee, Councillors Martin and Prendergast, stated that
       they had not seen the HMIC’s assessments, had not taken them away with them at
       the end o f the shortlisting meeting and had not used them in the interview process.
       When the Clerk was asked to comment on this in the open part o f the meeting, he
       stated that as Councillors Martin and Prendergast were saying that they had not
       had the HMIC’s assessments, he as Clerk accepted what they were saying in good
       faith.

3.13   At the end o f the Appointments Committee on Monday 19th October 1998 it was
       agreed that there would be a special meeting o f Merseyside Police Authority on
       2nd November 1998 to give all Members o f the Authority the opportunity to
       consider a detailed report from the Clerk and that Mr Dan Crompton, HMIC,
       would attend the meeting to advise Members of Mr Bettison’s operational
       policing experience and answer any further questions that Members may have. It
       was also agreed that arrangements should be made for the Chief Constable
       Designate to meet informally with all Members o f the Authority.

3.14   In order to complete the background section o f this report Members should be
       aware that_______________ Head o f Personnel, was informed by telephone on
       the morning o f Monday 19th October 1998 (prior to the meeting) that Mr Bettison
       is medically fit to take up the post of Chief Constable. This was subsequently
       confirmed in writing by letter dated 19th October 1998, received 20Ih October
       1998. Further, prior to the shortlisting meeting on 24Ih September 1998 the Home
       Office confirmed by letter o f 22nd September 1998 that the Secretary o f State was
       prepared to approve the appointment o f any one o f the seven applicants for the
       post. Then, following the appointment o f Mr Bettison, the Home Office
       specifically confirmed that the Secretary of State had formally approved his
       appointment by letter dated 22nd October 1998, received 23rd October 1998.

3.15   The remainder o f this report examines in detail the following: -

       (i)    The decision-making process leading to the appointment o f the C hief
              Constable; and

       (ii)   The issues raised in detail at the meeting o f the Appointments Committee
              on 19th October 1998.

       It is important that these issues are presented in detail so that Members o f the
       Authority who are not Members o f the Appointments Committee are fully aware
       o f the matters under consideration.




                                                    3
4.           TH E D ECISIO N -M A K IN G PR O C ESS

4.1          Approval o f the Recruitment Process

4.1.1        The Appointments Committee met on 20th July 1998 to consider and approve the
             recruitment process for the post o f Chief Constable.

4.1.2        The Agenda for the meeting contained a copy o f the “Home Office Guidelines on
             Selection Procedures for Chief Officer Appointments in the Police Service”,
             together with copies o f the following documentation for consideration by the
             Committee:

             Levels o f personal competences previously agreed
             Shortlisting matrix
             Application form
             Text for draft advertisement
             Contents o f Information Pack
             Letter from Mr Langley, Independent Member (commenting on previous
             recruitment processes).

4.1.3        The minutes o f the meeting are attached to this report as A ppendix 1 and record
             the decisions taken by Members when deciding on the recruitment process to
             adopt for the post o f Chief Constable.

 4.2         Advertisement of the Post

 4.2.1       The post was advertised in the Police Review on 27lh July 1998 with a closing
             date o f 28th August 1998.

 4.2.2        The Clerk sent out a covering letter with each o f the Information Packs to
              prospective applicants. The full text o f the letter is attached at A ppendix 2.

 4.2.3        In his letter the Clerk specifically informed applicants o f the Appointments
              Committee’s wishes regarding the completion o f application forms in accordance
              with their resolution o f 20th July 1998 (Appendix 1 refers). He states.-

              “Please note that the application form allows you to complete three pages o f
              relevant experience. The Appointments Committee are clear that there is
              sufficient opportunity within the form for candidates to demonstrate their
              strengths so please be specific in addressing your application to the personal
              competences listed. W e would also request your application form in typewritten
              format to assist our evaluation”.

     4.3      The shortlisting for the Post

     4.3.1    The Appointments Committee met to consider the shortlisting o f applicants fo r
              the post o f Chief Constable on 24Ih September 1998.




                                                     4
4.3.2   The Agenda for the meeting contained copies o f all applications for the post,
        together with copies o f the Job Description, Person Specification/Personal
        Competences, Shortlisting Schedules prepared by the Clerk and blank copies o f
        these schedules for Members’ own use. The Agenda contained a note about these
        shortlisting schedules as follows:-

        “At the Appointments Committee meeting, in addition to the application forms
        and the Clerk’s assessment o f the candidates, you will have a range o f information
        available to assist you in deciding which candidates to shortlist, including the
        HMIC’s assessment o f each candidate.

        The attached blank proforma shortlisting schedules reflect the schedule used by
        the Clerk when measuring each o f the applications against the person
        specification criteria. They are enclosed as models to assist you in your
        assessment o f the applications."

4.3.3   The letter accompanying the Agenda also advised Members that the Home Office
        “Guidance on Selection Procedures for Chief Officer Appointments in the Police
        Service” had previously been circulated but that additional copies could be
        obtained from the Police Support Unit.

4.3.4   The Job Description and Person Specification/Personal Competences are attached
        at A ppendix 3. Mr Bettison’s application form is attached at A ppendix 4 and the
        Clerk’s shortlisting schedule in respect o f Mr Bettison is attached at Appendix 5.

4.3.5   Dr E A Agalamanyi attended the shortlisting meeting as a substitute Member o f
        the Appointments Committee in the place o f Mr P Coogan and then subst ituted
        for Mr Coogan throughout the remainder o f the recruitment process.

4.3.6   At the beginning o f the meeting, the Clerk stated that the paperwork before
        Members was self-explanatory but that the Authority needed to learn the lessons
        from the recent Industrial Tribunal case. He advised Members during the course
        o f the meeting that they should take advantage o f all the information available,
        both from the Clerk and the HMIC, and that Members should ensure that they
        considered all the material before them and made their own assessments about
        applicants.

4.3.7   A few minutes into the meeting the Clerk asked that the HMIC’s written
        assessment o f each applicant be circulated to Members o f the Committee. The
        Committee Secretary then gave a copy o f the assessments to each Member in the
        Chamber. It is unclear whether this was handed to each Member, placed on the
        table in front o f each Member, or a combination o f both approaches depending on
        whether a Member reached out and took the assessments from the Committee
        Secretary. The HMIC’s written assessment o f Mr Bettison is attached at
        Appendix 6.

4.3.8   In the Chief Constable’s recruitment process, the HMIC acts as the Committee’s
        principal adviser on operational policing matters and, as such, his assessment o f




                                               5
        the applicants is important. His detailed role is set out in the Home Office
        Guidelines. H e prepares a narrative assessment o f each applicant based on their
        o w   Chief Constable’s assessment, together with any other information that he
              n


        can obtain from any other job relevant sources. This assessment includes details
        o f an applicant’s operational policing experience coupled with an assessment o f
        the qualities o f the applicant and a marking o f his/her suitability for appointment
        to the Chief Constable’s post. The Home Office Guidance makes it clear that in
        addition to the shortlisting schedules prepared by the Clerk, which measure each
        applicant against the person specification, the Committee should also have
         available to it the assessments o f the HMIC, and that he will, if required, be
         available at the meeting o f the Committee to explain to Members the way in
         which his assessments were prepared.

4.3.9   It should be stressed that the Clerk has the same information as Members and has
        no additional information about an applicant’s operational policing experience
        over and above that contained in the application forms and the HMIC
        assessments.

4.3.10 During the meeting the Clerk advised the Committee to invite the HMIC, M r Dan
       Crompton, to report verbally on his written assessment o f each o f the applicants.
       However, despite him being present at the meeting, some members o f the
       Committee felt this was not appropriate and the Clerk’s advice was not followed.
       However, as the matter was not formally put to the vote and as there was no
       formal resolution not to take into account the HMIC s assessments, it was the
       Clerk’s understanding that Members were content to rely on the HMIC’s written
       assessments alone and that these assessments were retained in the possession o f
       Members for subsequent use in the interview process.

4.3.11 As stated earlier in the report, two Members o f the Appointments Committee,
       Councillors Martin and Prendergast, have stated publicly that they had not seen
       the HMIC’s assessments and did not take them away with them at the end o f the
       shortlisting meeting. This matter is discussed later in the report as one o f the ^
       issues raised by Members o f the Appointments Committee at their meeting on 19
       October 1998.

 4.3.12 Following a general discussion about each o f the applicants, it became clear that
        the overriding view o f the Members was that all seven applicants should be
        shortlisted for interview and the Committee so resolved. The Committee then ^
        went on to discuss the arrangements for the interview process scheduled for 12
        to 13th October 1998.

 4.3.13 By the time that the minutes o f the meeting on 24th September 1998 were finalised
        the Agenda papers for the meeting o f the Authority on I st October 1998 had been
        printed. Whilst provision had been made on the Agenda sheet for the minutes o f
        the Appointments Committee to be circulated at the meeting as item 7D, the
        Chairperson considered that it would be inappropriate to report the minutes to that
        meeting as the name o f each o f the shortlisted candidates was reported in the
        minutes. In the absence o f the Clerk, the Solicitor to the Authority in consultation




                                                    6
        with the Chief Constable advised that the minutes could be referred to the next
        full meeting o f the Authority on 19th November 1998. A copy o f the draft
        minutes is attached at Appendix 7.

4.4     The final interview process

4.4.1   The final interview process took place on Monday 12th October 1998 and Tuesday
        13th October 1998, preceded by an informal dinner with candidates, as follows:-

        Monday 12th October 1998 - Panel interviews and discussions
        Tuesday 13th October 1998 - Formal interviews

4.4.2 Prior to the Panel interview process, one candidate, M r J P Hamilton, withdrew
       from the shortlist and therefore only six candidates moved forward to the
      interview stage.

4.4.3   The Agenda for the interviews included a Programme for Members, Details o f
        Interview Panels, Interview Timetable, Job Description and Person Specification,
        Summary o f Candidates, Copy application forms for each candidate and
        shortlisting summary and individual shortlist schedules prepared by the Clerk.

4.4.4   On Monday 12th October 1998 the Members o f the Appointments Committee
        were divided into two panels, A and B. Panel A asked pre-prepared questions
        about management issues and Panel B asked pre-prepared questions about
        operational issues. The composition o f the Panels was as follows:-

          Panel A                               Panel B

          M em bers                             M em bers

          Cllr Ms C Gustafson                   Cllr F Prendergast
          Cllr D Martin                         Cllr Lady Doreen Jones
          Cllr Mrs K Wood                       M r K Jackson
          M r M J Amos                          M r N Langley
          Dr Agalamanyi

          Officer in attendance as Adviser       Officer in attendance as Adviser

          Mr D Henshaw                          M r D Crompton

        Personnel support was provided throughout by Mrs                Head o f
        Personnel [Strategic Services].

        Details o f the questions asked by Panels A and B are attached as Appendix 8.

4.4.5 Each Panel Member was asked to score or rate a candidate’s answers in a range
      from 5 - Excellent to 1 - Poor. At the end o f the interviews the total scores for
      each candidate from Panels A and B were compiled. All Members o f the




                                               7
         Committee then met to discuss the merits o f each candidate and whether they
         should be taken forward for final interview.

4.4.6    Following the assessment o f each candidate, the Committee agreed that three
         candidates should proceed to final interview by the full Appointments committee
         the following day. The three candidates were:

         Norman Bettison
         Robert Davies
         Paul Kemaghan.

4.4.7    At the interviews on Tuesday 13th October 1998 candidates were asked to make a
         short presentation and were also required to answer a number o f pre-prepared
         questions. Details o f the presentation topic and questions are attached as
         A ppendix 9.

4.4.8    Again, each member o f the Appointments Committee was asked to score or rate a
         candidate’s answers in a range from 5 —Excellent to 1 —Poor. At the end o f the
         interviews the scores were totalled as a guide to the performance o f each
         candidate and there was a discussion o f the relative merits o f each. Following this
         discussion, the Appointments Committee unanimously resolved that Norman
         Bettison was the best candidate and resolved that he should be appointed as the
         n e w C hief Constable o f Merseyside, subject to medical clearance o f his fitness to
         take up the post.

4.4.9    On the afternoon o f Mr Bettison’s appointment, Tuesday 13th October 1998, the
         Police Authority issued a press release announcing his appointment. The full text
         o f the press release is attached at A ppendix 10. The release provides
         biographical details o f M r Bettison, his reaction to his appointment and concludes
         with a statement from the Chairperson on behalf o f the Authority as follows:

          “We had an outstanding list o f candidates with all the qualities we were looking
          for, for the leadership o f the Merseyside Police Force. We are sure Norman
          Bettison will be an outstanding Chief Constable and look forward to working with
          him in Merseyside.”




 5.       T H E ISSUES RAISED AT T H E M EETIN G O F T H E A PPO IN T M E N T S
          C O M M IT T E E ON MONDAY 19th O CTO BER 1998

 5.1      The H M IC ’s Assessments o f the C andidates

 5.1.1    As stated in paragraph 4.3.8 o f this report, in a Chief Constable s recruitment
          process, the HMIC acts as the Appointment Committee’s principal adviser on
          operational policing matters.




                                                  8
5.1.2   The HM IC’s assessment o f Mr Bettison contained the following paragraph:

        “Has had a varied career particularly from Chief Inspector - Careers Dept -
        member o f a small enquiry team reporting to the Chief Constable on the
        Hillsborough incident - Head o f Traffic - Sheffield City Sub Division.”

        The full text o f the HMIC’s assessment is attached at A ppendix 6.

5.1.3   The Clerk circulated the HMIC’s assessments to Members at the shortlisting
        meeting o f the Appointments Committee on 24th September 1998. However, the
        Clerk cannot confirm definitively whether the Committee Secretary who
        circulated the assessments handed them directly to Members or placed them on
        the table in front o f each Member.

5.1.4   At the meeting the Clerk advised Members that they should invite the HMIC, who
        was present throughout the meeting, to comment verbally on his assessment o f
        each o f the candidates, but Members declined this advice and did not ask the
        HMIC to do so. As Members seemed to be o f the overriding view that all seven
        candidates should be shortlisted, this may have influenced their decision about
        whether to hear from Mr Crompton at the meeting, since they may have
        considered that to do so would add little value to the shortlisting process.

5.1.5   The Committee did not vote on whether to hear the HMIC and did not formally
        decide not to consider the HMIC’s assessments. It was therefore the Clerk’s clear
        understanding that Members were content to rely on the written assessments o f
        the HMIC, without verbal explanation, and that these assessments were retained
        by Members at the end o f the shortlisting meeting for subsequent use by them in
        the interview process.

5.1.6   At the meeting o f the Appointments Committee on 19th October 1998, Councillor
        Martin and Councillor Prendergast stated publicly that they had not seen the
        HMIC’s assessments, had not taken them away with them at the end o f the
        meeting and had not used the assessments in the interview process. When the
        Clerk was asked to comment on their statements, he acknowledged again
        publicly, that as Councillors Martin and Prendergast were saying they had not had
        the HMIC’s assessments, he as Clerk accepted what they were saying in good
        faith.

5.1.7   Other members o f the Appointments Committee did, however, confirm that they
        had the HM IC’s assessments at the shortlisting meeting on 24th September 1998:

        •   Mr Langley confirmed he received the assessments on 24th September 1998
            and that he kept them up to the main interviews;

        •   Mr Amos confirmed he received the assessments on 24th September 1998 and
            retained them for subsequent use;




                                            9
        •   D r Agalamanyi confirmed he received the assessments on 24th September
            1998, that he kept them, made notes on them and returned them at the end o f
            the process;

        •   Cllr Wood confirmed that she received the assessments on 24th September
            1998, kept them, and handed them back at the end o f the process on Tuesday
            13th October 1998;

        •   M r Jackson confirmed that he received the assessments on 24* September
            1998, found them most beneficial, and kept them up to the final interviews;

        •   Councillor Lady Doreen Jones acknowledged that the assessments had been
            circulated at the meeting on 24th September 1998, but that she had commented
            that she did not believe it was appropriate for the HMIC to give a verbal
            summary o f those assessments in the meeting.

5.1.8   The Clerk is not aware that any o f the HM IC’s assessments were left in the
        meeting room at the end o f the shortlisting meeting on 24Ul September 1998.
        Enquiries were subsequently made o f the staff who administered the meeting.
        They confirmed that no copies o f the HMIC assessments were handed back to
        them and none were remaining on the tables in the meeting room after the
        meeting.

5.1.9   At the meeting on 19th October 1998, it was generally acknowledged that Mr
        Bettison’s involvement in the enquiry team set up by South Yorkshire Police after
        the Hillsborough tragedy was not discussed at any stage in either the panel
        interviews, the formal interviews or indeed in any o f the exchanges between
        candidates and members o f the Appointments Committee. However, some
        Members felt that it was the duty o f the Clerk or Dan Crompton to specifically
        raise this matter with the Committee.

5.1.10 The Clerk indicated that he did not believe it would have been appropriate for him
       to highlight that part o f the HMIC’s reference relating to M r Bettison’s
       involvement in the enquiry team and that had it been raised directly with him, he
       would probably have advised that Mr Bettison’s involvement in the team, when
       he held a relatively junior rank, was not on its own a material consideration to be
       taken into account by the Appointments Committee. However, he acknowledged
       that he could not be definitive as his answer would have depended on the context
       in which any question was raised.

5.1.11 The HMIC, Dan Crompton, stated that he would have been wary about giving
       further information on one aspect o f M r Bettison’s experience, as to do so may be
       discriminatory and may have disadvantaged him. He said his duty was to provide
       the Committee with his written assessment o f each candidate and that what he
       said in his assessment o f Mr Bettison was very clear.




                                             10
5.1.12 In order to assist the Committee discussions on 19th October 1998, M r Crompton
       provided the Committee with additional details o f Mr Bettison’s involvement in
       the small enquiry team set up after the Hillsborough tragedy. He explained that
       Members needed to take account o f Mr Bettison’s rank at the time in the context
       o f overall command structures. As a Chief Inspector he was a relatively junior
       officer within the team. Mr Crompton confirmed that Mr Bettison was not
       involved in the operational decision-making before or at the match and was not
       involved in the crucial issues o f policing the match. He was not a key witness in
       the Lord Justice Taylor Inquiry nor was he the subject o f any criticism by this
       Inquiry. He was a junior member o f the small enquiry team which looked at
       existing football policing strategies in South Yorkshire and safety o f football
       ground issues which included looking at Officers’ factual accounts/perceptions o f
       what happened in the ground on the day o f the tragedy.

5.2     M r B ettison’s Application Form

5.2.1   At the meeting on 19th October 1998, some Members raised concerns that Mr
        Bettison’s application form did not detail his employment with South Yorkshire
        Police prior to October 1989, almost 6 months after the Hillsborough tragedy.
        (Mr Bettison’s application form is attached in full at A ppendix 4).

5.2.2   As stated previously (paragraph 4.2.3 refers), the Authority gave clear guidance to
        applicants on the completion o f the application form, and specifically directed
        applicants to address in their applications the extent to which they met the
        personal competences required o f a Chief Constable. Mr Bettison’s application
        form therefore focused on his senior command experience gained at
        Superintendent rank and above in order to demonstrate that he had the
        competences that the Authority were looking for.

5.2.3   At the meeting o f the Appointments Committee on 19th October 1998, in private
        session, the HMIC noted that some Members believed that M r Bettison may have
        shielded his experience post the Hillsborough tragedy from the Appointments
        Committee. However, he stated he did not believe this to be the case and that he
        had had sight o f an application form submitted by Mr Bettison to Humberside
        Police in September 1998 which again focused on his senipr command experience
        and was very similar to the application submitted to Merseyside Police

5.3     M edia reporting following the appointm ent of the Chief Constable

5.3.1   Following the appointment o f Norman Bettison the Authority issued a press
        release announcing his appointment on the afternoon o f Tuesday 13,h October
        1998. This press release is attached at Appendix 10. Mr Bettison’s appointment
        was widely reported in the local press and on local television and radio.

5.3.2   However, by Wednesday 14th October 1998 the local press, local television and
        radio stations were reporting that during a debate in the House o f Commons in
        May 1998 Maria Eagle MP had accused the South Yorkshire team (o f which Mr
        Bettison was a part) o f orchestrating a black propaganda campaign which aimed




                                             11
        to deflect blame for what happened at Hillsborough on to anyone other than
        themselves. The Police Authority was asked to comment about whether they
        w e r e a w a r e o f M r Bettison’s involvement in the small enquiry team set up after
        the Hillsborough tragedy and upon his suitability for the post o f Chief Constable
        o f Merseyside Police.

5.3.3   A press release was issued by the Authority at approximately 4 pm on the
        afternoon o f 14th October 1998. A copy o f this press release is attached at
        A ppendix 11. A press release was also issued by West Yorkshire Police Press
        Office on behalf o f Mr Bettison. This is attached at A ppendix 12.

5.3.4   At the meeting on 19th October 1998 some Members expressed concern about the
        timing o f the issue o f the press release at 4 pm on 14th October 1998 and the
        content o f this press release.

5.3.5 With regard to the timing o f the press release, the Clerk first spoke with the
      Chairperson at approximately 8.00/8.15 am when both were travelling to London
      (on different trains). The Chairperson had tried to contact the Clerk on Tuesday
      evening and had left a message on his pager, but because o f domestic difficulties
      (a power blackout) he did not receive that message. The Clerk and the
      Chairperson talked about the mounting press interest in M r Bettison’s
      appointment and agreed that a press statement should be issued by the Authority
      later that day. As the Clerk did not have any o f the relevant documentation on the
      appointment o f the Chief Constable with him, he undertook to make some
      enquiries and check some factual information before preparing any statement for
      issue to the press.

5.3.6   On 14th October 1998, the Clerk had a series o f high level meetings (Ministerial
        level) in London and the Chairperson had a meeting o f the Association o f Police
        Authorities (“the APA”) and associated briefings.

5.3.7   In between meetings, the Clerk spoke to Police Support Unit staff, staff in his own
        office, the HMIC and Norman Bettison in order to establish the factual position
        and began to telephone individual members o f the Appointments Committee to
        obtain their perspective o f the media coverage.

5.3.8    As stated, both the Clerk and the Chairperson were in meetings during the course
         o f the morning o f 14th October 1998 and the Clerk was not therefore able to speak
         to the Chairperson until approximately 1 pm, but had left messages about,his
         availability with both the Association o f Police Authorities’ staff and the
         reception staff at the building where the meeting was taking place (Woburn
         House). He had also given contact telephone numbers to the Head o f Legal and
         Administrative Services, to be passed on to the Chairperson. During their 1 pm
         conversation the Clerk updated the Chairperson on the preparation o f the press
         release, the situation from a media perspective, and informed her that both he and
         Police Support Unit staff had spoken directly to some Members about the media
         situation.




                                               12
5.3.9   During the course o f the afternoon the Clerk became aware that West Yorkshire
        Police had issued a press statement on behalf o f M r Bettison (attached at
        A ppendix 12); In between meetings, during the course of the afternoon, the
        Clerk continued to make calls as before and finalised the Authority’s press
        release. By this time it was mid-afternoon. It was not until approximately 3.15
        pm (when the Clerk’s 2 pm meeting had finished and the APA meeting had
        ended) that the Clerk was in a position to discuss the press release with the
        Chairperson and seek her approval to it. The Clerk eventually read the terms o f
        the press release to the Chairperson over the telephone and she approved its
        release. The press release was therefore issued at approximately 4 pm.

5.3.10 With regard to the content o f the press release, this was discussed in some detail
       at the meeting o f the Appointments Committee on 19th October 1998.

5.3.11 Councillors Martin and Prendergast were concerned about the paragraph o f the
       press release which stated:

        “Merseyside Police Authority was aware o f Mr Bettison’s operational policing
        experience including his association with Hillsborough, when as Chief Inspector
        he was part o f South Yorkshire’s team o f officers set up following the tragedy.
        Mr Bettison was not involved in any o f the pre-planning or policing o f the
        match.”

        They stated that they felt this would lead members o f the public to believe that all
        Members o f the Authority had had the HMIC’s ’assessments o f the candidates.

5.3.12 In response, the Clerk stated that the press statement was issued only after
       consultation with the Chairperson who approved its release, and that they had
       taken a judgement about what was the most appropriate statement to issue on
       behalf o f the Authority. The statement indicates that the Police Authority as a
       body corporate, had the HMIC’s assessments before it, as did the Appointments
       Committee. At the meeting on 19th October 1998 the Clerk acknowledged that
       the statement did not reflect the perspective o f individual members o f the
       Appointments Committee, nor was it intended to do so.

5.3.13 On 16th October 1998 the Clerk issued a statement in response to considerable
       speculation in the press regarding the information that was available to
       Merseyside Police Authority during the recruitment o f the Chief Constable about
       the operational policing experience o f Norman Bettison. The statement was
       issued on the afternoon o f Friday 16th October 1998 as a direct response to the
       publication o f an extract from the HMIC’s report on the front cover o f the
       Liverpool Echo earlier that day. The statement clarified the Clerk’s
       understanding o f the material that had been before the Appointments Committee
       during the recruitment process. A copy o f the Clerk’s statement is attached at
       A ppendix 13.




                                               13
5.3.14 On the afternoon o f Friday 16th October 1998 the Clerk discussed with the
       Chairperson the issue o f the press statement and the need for a meeting o f the
       Appointments Committee to discuss the matters raised by the media since 13th
       October 1998. It was suggested that a meeting might take place on the morning
       o f Saturday 17th October 1998 but in the event it was agreed that a meeting o f the
       Appointments Committee should take place on Monday 19th October 1998 at
       10.00 am, to be followed by a briefing for all Members o f the Police Authority at
       11.30 am. Members were informed o f these meetings in a letter from the Clerk
       delivered by courier on Friday 16th October 1998.

5.3.15 A short press release was issued by the Police Authority following the meeting o f
       the Appointments Committee on 19th October 1998. This is attached at Appendix
       14. It later transpired that the Force issued a press statement later that day which
       indicated that M r Bettison would be taking up his employment with the Force
       from 16th November 1998. The issue o f this press statement was neither
       discussed with the Clerk or the Chairperson o f the Authority nor was it approved
       by them. The Clerk wrote to all Members confirming this by letter o f 20th
       October 1998 (enclosed at A ppendix 15).

5.3.16 On 22nd October 1998, following confusion over an interview with the
       Chairperson o f the Police Authority broadcast by Radio Merseyside that morning,
       the Chairperson issued a further statement clarifying Radio Merseyside’s
       reporting o f her comments. This press release is attached at A ppendix 16.

5.3.17 On Saturday 24th October 1998 a press release was issued by Her Majesty’s Chief
       Inspector o f Constabulary, David O ’Dowd. The Cierk was not aware in advance
        that this press release was to be issued. A copy o f the press release is attached at
        A ppendix 17.

5.4      The support and information received by Members of the Authority from the
          Clerk during the period of intense media reporting of the Chief Constable’s
          appointment

 5.4.1    At the meeting on 19th October 1998 some Members felt that the media interest in
          the Chief Constable’s appointment had been badly handled, particularly on
          Wednesday 14th October 1998, and that the Authority had appeared in a poor
          light. The Clerk’s response is set out below.

 5.4.2    The events o f Wednesday 14th October 1998 should be seen in the following
          context. As already stated the Clerk and the Chairperson were in London, and
          spoke during the day when each o f their commitments permitted. In addition, the
          Clerk spoke with some Members o f the Authority during the course o f the day
          and recollects conversations with Councillor Martin, M r Langley and M r Amos
          and towards the end o f the day a conversation with Councillor Lady Doreen
          Jones. Also, throughout the course o f the day, he spoke with the HMIC and
          Norman Bettison’s office.




                                                14
5.4.3   Earlier in the day, when he became aware that reporters from Radio Merseyside
        were trying to contact individual Members o f the Police Authority prior to the
        11.30 am “phone-in” programme, he asked staff from the Police Support Unit
        (PSU) to ring Members whose telephone numbers are in the public domain to
        advise them that they may be contacted and to offer media support. The PSU
        staff contacted Councillors Foulkes and Weightman, M r Langley, Mr Hill, Mr
        Burke and spoke with Councillor Martin’s secretary. A message was left on
        Councillor Rimmer’s answerphone. Staff were unable to contact Councillor
        Prendergast (and believed he may be away), Councillor Lady Doreen Jones,
        Councillor Storey, D r Agalamanyi and Mr Coogan. The telephone numbers o f
        the three Magistrate Members are not issued by the Police Authority and they
        were not contacted by staff prior to the 11.30 am “phone-in” programme on Radio
        Merseyside. Nor was contact made with Councillor Kate Wood who was
        travelling to London and was unlikely to be contactable by the press at that time.

5.4.4   Later that day, the Clerk arranged for a short letter to be sent to all Members o f
        the Police Authority enclosing a letter Mr Bettison had sent to the Chairperson,
        the MPA press release (14.10.98) and Mr Bettison’s press release issued by West
        Yorkshire Police (14.10.98). These letters were sent out by courier for same day
        delivery to all Members.

5.4.5   On Friday 16th October 1998, the Clerk wrote to all Members o f the Police
        Authority. (A copy o f the letter is attached at Appendix 18). Attached to his
        letter was a supplementary sheet which gave details o f his contact telephone
        numbers should any Member wish to speak with him over the weekend period
        prior to the meeting o f the Appointments Committee on 19Ih October 1998. The
        formal Agenda papers and notification for the meetings on 19th October 1998
        were sent to Members at the same time as the Clerk’s letter together with copies
        o f two press releases. They were couriered on the afternoon o f Friday 16th
        October 1998 for same day delivery to Members.

5.4.6   The Clerk recalls speaking with various Members, both at his instigation and
        theirs, between Wednesday 14th October 1998 and the meeting o f the
        Appointments Committee on 19th October 1998 and subsequently.

5.4.7   Both the Clerk, his officers in the Police Support Unit and Knowsley’s media
        team have been available to provide advice and support to Members on request
        since the appointment of the Chief Constable on 13 October 1998 and have also
        approached Members directly with information about current media
        developments.

5.4.8   The Clerk has throughout the period o f media interest, endeavoured to offer
        information, advice and support to Members and has sought to act in the best
        interests o f the Authority at all times.




                                               15
5.5      The exclusion of press and public from the m eeting of the A ppointm ents
         Com m ittee

5.5.1    Some Members o f the Appointments Committee were concerned that the meeting
         on 19th October 1998 had been called as a closed meeting from which the press
         and public were excluded and that this may have created an impression amongst
         members o f the public that the Committee “had something to hide”. They were
         anxious that the meeting be open to the press and public if possible.

5.5.2    The Authority’s Solicitor advised that the Agenda indicated that the meeting
         would be in closed session because during the course o f the meeting it was
         considered that exempt information within one o f the categories defined by the
         Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985 might be disclosed, namely

         “ 1.   Information relating to a particular employee, former employee or
                applicant to become an employee of,       the authority.”

5.5.3 The Clerk then advised that the meeting could be in two parts, with the press and
      public being present for the first part o f the meeting, provided that no personal
      information relating to an employee or an applicant to become an employee o f the
      Police Authority was disclosed to the press and public. He advised that care
      would have to be taken by Members to ensure that they did not inadvertently
      disclose such information in the open session. Members accordingly resolved to
      hold the meeting in two parts with the press and public being present for the first
      part o f the meeting.

5.6      The C hief C onstable’s appointm ent

5.6.1 At the meeting o f the Appointments Committee on 19th October 1998, the
       Solicitor to the Authority confirmed that the Authority had offered the post o f
       Chief Constable to Norman Bettison subject to medical clearance and that he had
       accepted the post. The Authority received this medical clearance by telephone on
       the morning o f the meeting and this was confirmed in writing by letter dated 19'
       October 1998, received 20th October 1998 (attached at A ppendix 19). The Home
       Office had previously indicated the Secretary o f State’s support for all seven
       applicants. In such circumstances the Authority’s Solicitor confirmed that the
       Authority had a binding agreement with Mr Bettison.

5.6.2     The Home Office subsequently confirmed that the Secretary o f State had formally
          approved Mr Bettison’s appointment, by letter dated 22nd October 1998, received
          23rd October 1998 - attached at A ppendix 20).

 5.6.3    She went on to advise that it would be wrong to speculate about the Authority’s
          potential financial liability to Mr Bettison should the Authority subsequently
          breach the agreement with him.




                                                16
5.6.4   Both the HMIC and the Authority’s Solicitor advised Members that Mr Bettison
        had been appointed as Chief Constable o f the Merseyside Police Force and could
        only be removed from his post pursuant to the statutory provisions which provide
        for the retirement o f a Chief Constable in the interests o f the efficiency o f the
        Force or his removal following a serious disciplinary offence. Neither was
        applicable in this instance.

5.7     The publication of confidential inform ation in the Press

5.7.1   At their meeting on 19th October 1998, Members o f the Appointments Committee
        were concerned about the publication o f confidential information in the Liverpool
        Echo on 16th October 1998, namely an extract from the HM IC’s assessment o f
        Norman Bettison. (Indeed his assessment was subsequently reproduced in the
        Liverpool Echo a second time on Friday 23rd October 1998 on this occasion in
        full).

5.7.2   Members o f the Committee confirmed that they were fully aware o f their duty to
        preserve the confidentiality o f papers they receive in the course o f their Authority
        business and which are contained in exempt reports. Further, Home Office
        guidance provides that material distributed to Members during the recruitment
        process is confidential to them and their advisers. As Members take this duty o f
        confidentiality very seriously, they resolved that the Clerk be asked to write to the
        Merseyside Police with a request that the “leak” o f the HMIC’s report be
        investigated formally by the Force.

5.7.3   The Clerk wrote to the Chief Constable’s office on 21st October 1998 and
        received an initial reply on 27th October 1998. Members will see that copies o f
        the letters are attached at A ppendix 21. The Acting Chief Constable’s
        preliminary view is that a police enquiry would be inappropriate in circumstances
        where he believes any breach o f confidentiality would not entail criminal conduct.
        He does however indicate that he is willing to discuss the matter further with the
        Clerk.

5.8     Papers used in the recruitm ent process

5.8.1   During the course o f the Appointments Committee meeting on 19Ih October 1998,
        the Clerk informed Members that as a result o f developments since the
        appointment o f the Chief Constable on 13th October 1998, he had given
        instructions to staff that any papers handed back by Members at the end o f the
        recruitment process for confidential disposal, should be retained. As a result, staff
        were able to locate and return 7 sets o f papers (some o f which were incomplete).

5.8.2   The Clerk then offered to let Members identify and retrieve their papers to assist
        them with their discussions at the meeting on 19th October 1998.

5.8.3   Some Members were very concerned that papers which had been handed back to
        the Clerk for confidential disposal, were still in his possession some 6 days after
        the end o f the recruitment process.




                                                 17
5.8.4   In response the Clerk stated that when he was made aware that not all the papers
        had been disposed of, he took a judgement that those papers should be preserved,
        in order to assist Members in any subsequent discussions about the C hief
        Constable’s appointment and to preserve for them some record o f the papers they
        used during the process. He confirmed that he thought his judgement was right
        and stood by his decision to retain the papers for M embers’ use.

6.      CONCLUSION

        This report advises Members o f the decision-making process leading to the
        appointment o f the Chief Constable, Merseyside Police Force; and reports upon
        the issues raised by Members o f the Appointments Committee at its meeting on
        19th October 1998.


                                   D G HENSHAW
                                 Clerk to the Authority


Contact Officer: Janet Orchard, Solicitor to Merseyside Police Authority
                 Tel. No.




                                              18
                                                                                APPENDIX I

                      MERSEYSIDE POLICE AUTHORITY


                          APPOINTMENTS COMMITTEE




At a meeting o f the Appointments Committee held on Monday 20th July 1998 in the
Meeting Room, West House, Mercury Court, Liverpool the following Members were
present


                                Elected

                                Cllr. Ms C. Gustafson (Chairperson o f the Committee)
                                Cllr F. Prendergast
                                Cllr Mrs K. Wood

                                Magistrate

                                Mr. M. J. Amos J.P.
                                Mr. K. Jackson J.P.

                                Independent

                                Mr. P. Coogan
                                Mr. N. Langley

       Apologies

       Apologies for absence were received on behalf o f Councillors Lady Doreen
       Jones and D. Martin.

1.    Minutes

       The minutes o f the meeting o f the Committee held on the 28th April 1998 were
       received as a correct record and signed by the Chairperson.

2.    Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985

       R ESO LV ED That under the provisions o f Section 100A (4) o f the Local
       Government Act 1972, the public be excluded from the meeting for the
       following item o f business on the grounds that it involves the likely disclosure
       o f exempt information as defined in Paragraph 1 o f Part 1 o f Schedule 12A to
       the Act.




comms/mins/appts/200798
                                           19
     Recruitment Process - Chief Constable

     The Committee considered the report o f the Clerk to the Authority in respect
     of the arrangements to be made for the post o f Chief Constable, following the
     previous recruitment where no appointment had been made.

     RESOLVED

     i)         That the letter prepared by Mr N. Langley in respect o f the recruitment
                process be noted;

     ii)        that the shortlisting meeting o f the Committee be scheduled for the 24th
                 September 1998 commencing at 5.00 p.mand Panel and Formal
                 Interviews scheduled for the 12/13th October 1998 and that the
                 shortlisting and formal interview meetings be held at Mercury Court;

     iii)       that the advertisement for inclusion in the Police Review on the 31st
                July 1998 as detailed in the report be approved subject to the word
                “expect” in substitution for the word “hope” and inclusion o f the word
                “provisional” referring to interviews on the 12th/13th October 1998 and
                circulated to all Police Authorities;

      iv)        that a standard number o f additional information sheets per application
                 be established;

      v)         that instructions be given to candidates in respect o f typed applications
                 only;

      vi)        that arrangements be made for a buffet on the evening o f the 11th
                  October 1998 and the Panel Interviews on the 12th October 1998 to be
                  held at theTraining Centre, Mather Avenue;

      vii)       that the Clerk in consultation with the Chairperson be authorised to
                  arrange appropriate accommodation for shortlisted candidates;

      viii)      that in terms o f the shortlisting process, arrangements be made for
                 members to receive advanced notification of the Clerk’s assessment of
                 candidates based upon applications assessed against the personal
                 competences and provided with blank matrices to assist in their own
                 assessments;

          ix)    that in respect o f the interview process;

                  a)      the Clerk and Her Majesty’s Inspector o f Constabulary be
                          requested to draft specific questions and ten minute presentation
                          scenarios and that the Committee decide on those to be used;




comms/mins/appts/200798
                                              20
               b)      the personal competences as detailed in Appendix 3 to the
                       report be approved subject to two new competences being
                       introduced on Leadership and Vision and the deletion of
                       Information Search and the levels required within personal
                       competences be agreed as follows:-

                                      Judgement - very high,
                                      Self Confidence - very high,
                                      Strategic Perspective - very high,
                                      Achievement Focus - very high.
                                      Communication - very high,
                                      Building Teams - very high,
                                      Influencing Others - very high
                                      Vision - very high,
                                      Leadership - very high

               c)      during the interview process, Members be requested to score
                        individual candidates against the personal competences agreed
                        above; and

                c)     general and medical references be taken up as appropriate on
                        offer o f appointment.

4.      Urgent Items

        The following two items which were not included as part of the Agenda were
        deemed urgent by the Chairperson in order that the committee could be
        appraised of two strategic issues concerning the post of Chief Constable and
        the outcome o f Industrial Tribunal proceedings against the Authority.

5       Local Government (Access To Information) Act         1985

        RESOLVED That under the provisions o f Section 100A(4) of the Local
        Government Act 1972, the public be excluded for the following items o f
        business on the grounds that they involve the likely disclosure o f exempt
        information as defined in Paragraph 1 o f Part 1o f Schedule 12A to the Act.

6   .   Post of Chief Constable

        The Clerk verbally reported on the impending retirement of the Chief
        Constable, and arrangements being made for the Assistant Chief Constable
        (Designate) to act as Chief Constable.

         RESOLVED That the report be noted.

7.      Merseyside Police Authority -v- Willis

         The Clerk reported verbally on the outcome of the above Industrial Tribunal.




comms/mi nsIappts/200798
                                             21
      RESOLVED That the finding o f the Industrial Tribunal in favour o f the
      Authority be noted and the Committee places on record its thanks to the staff
      involved.




        Minutes 1 to 7 received as a correct record the 1Oth day o f August 1998




                             Chairperson o f the Committee




                            (the meeting closed at 11.00 a.m.)




comms/mins/appt s/200798
                                          22
                                                                                                                                                 APPENDIX 2

                                                                                                                                         MERSEYSIDE
                                                                                                                                         POLICE
D cm      Q      H ^ f is h O W B.A.. M .S o c .S c !., F.t.M gt_. CJofk t o th e A u th o rity
                                                                                                                                         AUTHORITY
                                                                                                  P.       O .       B O X          1 0    ] A     W E S T       H O U S E

                                                                                                  M E R C U R Y              C O U R T      T1T HEBARN            STREET

                                                                                                  L    I   V     E   R   P    O    O   L            1    6   9     2 N U

                                                                                                  TEL:     0151-236               4748       FAX:       0151-236     4527



O      ^ ?'Ci-                                                                                    DATE:              31 Ju ly 1998

YOUR REP:                                                                                         W H E N T E LEP H O N IN G PLEASE C O N T A C T :




                        Dear Applicant,

                        Thank you for taking the time to seek information about the post of Chief Constable -
                        Merseyside Police.

                        Within this pack I have enclosed a number of documents giving you a wide overview of
                        Merseyside Police Authority and Merseyside Police, its Corporate Strategy and some
                        background information on Merseyside.

                        It is proposed that the shortlist will be decided on 24th of September, and those called for
                        interview will be informed as soon as practicable. The interview dates are scheduled for the
                        12 and 13 of October, with an evening event on the 11* of October. Shortlisted candidates
                        will be supplied with an interview schedule nearer the time.

                        If you are interested in working towards making Merseyside a safer and better place, please
                        complete the enclosed application form and return it to me by the 28thAugust - envelopes
                        should be endorsed ‘Strictly Confidential’.

                       Please note that the application form allows you to complete three pages of relevant
                       experience. The Appointments Committee are clear that there is sufficient opportunity
                       within the form for candidates to demonstrate their strengths so please be specific in
                       addressing your application to the personal competences listed. We would also request your
                       application form in typewritten format to assist our evaluation.

                       I look forward to receiving your application and thank you for the interest you have shown in
                       this exciting opportunity. If you would like an informal discussion about the post with me,
                       please telephone me on_____________at Knowsley Metropolitan Borough Council (the lead
                       authority for Merseyside Police Authority) where I am Chief Executive.
                            lire C i n ^ o r a U r




                       DAVID HENSHAW ‘
                       Clerk to the Authority



                                                                                                  23
24
                                             JOB DESCRIPTION                            APPENDIX

 Ep$t Title                       :   C hief Constable

 Accountable to                   :   The Police Authority for Merseyside Police Force
                                      as defined within the Police Act 1996

R esponsible for              :        [i]     The direction and control o f the Merseyside Police
                                               Force in accordance with the Police Act 1996, in
                                               order to provide Merseyside with an effective and
                                               efficient police service.

                                      [ii]     The fulfilment o f all statutory and legal obligations
                                               o f the office o f C hief Constable.




Aims of the Job:

1.       To work with the Police Authority and the Force to set the strategic direction o f
         policing in Merseyside.

2.       To act as the high profile leader o f the Force by communicating a consistent vision
         o f what must be achieved.

3.       To lead the chief officers o f the Force in ensuring the performance o f the Force by:

                 reading and influencing the external and internal environments affecting the
                 Force;

                 the development and implementation o f strategies to further the policing o f
                 Merseyside. In achieving this you will collectively have to gain support for
                 the Force;

                 the process o f Force planning, implementation o f plans and the control of
                 the planning process; and

                 evaluating and improving performance.

4.     To create and implement a planning framework which has due regard to the local
        policing plan issued by the Police Authority.

5.     To ensure that all o f the resources o f the Force are used in a planned way so that
        effectiveness and efficiency result.

6.     to harness the full potential o f staff towards the aims o f the Force by creating an
        atmosphere in which people are enabled to give o f their best.



REC RUITM ENT/C E/CCJ D/PGD                       25
7.      To represent the image and interests o f the Force both at a local and national level.

8.      To ensure that the Force’s organisation develops to meet the changing demands o f
        policing.

9.      To actively encourage and support the involvement o f other agencies and the
        public at large to work with the Force to fulfil the aims o f the policing plan.

10.     To ensure the provision o f professional advice to the Police Authority so that its
        members are able to fulfil their functions.




  RECRUITMENT/CE/CCJD/PGD                   26
                                  MERSEYSIDE POLICE AUTHORITY

                                       CHIEF CONSTABLE




PERSON SPECIFICATION

Personal Competences


Personal competences are the key skills used by effective senior managers to make
decisions and achieve results. The personal competences most likely to lead to effective
performance are specified in each element o f the Senior Management Standards.

Effective senior managers in any organisation need to be able to draw on a repertoire o f
nine personal competences. These are listed along with the level required for the post o f
Chief Constable:

-            judgement                    [Very High]
-            self confidence              [Very High]
-             strategic perspective       [Very High]
-            achievement focus            [Very High]
-             communication               [Very High]
-             building teams              [Very High]
-             influencing others          [Very High]
-             leadership                  [Very High]
    -         vision                      [Very High]


    Each o f these competences can be observed through the key behaviours demonstrated by
    senior managers, as outlined in the following 5 pages.




        RECRUTTMENT'CE/CCJD/PGD
                                             2?
                                               -   1   -




Judgement

Kev behaviours                                                 •               •••••   •

An effective senior manager

        identifies the most important issues in a complex situation
        identifies implications, consequences or causal relationships in a situation
        uses a range o f ideas to explain the actions, needs and motives o f others
        focuses on facts, problems and solutions when handling an emotional situation
        uses instinct and intuition to assess situations and people
        identifies new patterns and interprets events in new ways

Description

This competence concerns using a range o f skills to evaluate situations and people, and to
develop plans and approaches for action.

Effective managers use analytical and logical approaches to understand people and events
and to establish priorities and connections. They also use creative and intuitive approaches
to assess situations and problems and to produce solutions.

Effective managers may demonstrate different profiles within this competence - some being
more analytical and logical, others more creative and intuitive - or they may be strong in all
 aspects.

 Self Confidence

 Kev behaviours

 An effective senior manager

            acts in an assured and unhesitating manner when faced with a challenge
            takes the leading role in initiating action and making decisions
            maintains beliefs, commitment and effort in spite o f set-backs or opposition

 Description

  This competence is about acting with self assurance, and displaying drive and initiative,
  even in difficult situations.

  Managers with this competence are likely to have faith in their ow n judgement, believe they
  will succeed in their endeavours, and persist in this belief even though t ey may encoun er
  initial difficulties or the opposition o f others.

  Self confident managers will usually feel comfortable about taking the initiative in making
  decisions and about t a k i n g an independent course o f action when they feel it is appropriate.




                                                       28
   RECRUITMENT/CE/CCJD/PGD
                                              -2 -

Determination to succeed, arising out o f self-belief, is also an aspect o f this competence.
Managers with a high degree o f this competence will be better able to work under pressure           -
and cope with stress. They will be able to maintain their drive and energy, and to present
themselves in a wide range o f situations as positive and self assured.

Strategic Perspective

Kev behaviours

An effective senior manager

        works towards a vision o f the future based on a strategic perspective
        acts with good understanding o f how different parts, needs or functions o f the
        organisation and its environment fit together
        clearly relates goals and actions to the strategic aims o f the business
        takes opportunities when they arise to achieve longer term aims or needs.

Description

This competence concerns the manager being able to place immediate goals and activities in
a strategic context. This involves seeing how one area o f activity is affected by and affects
other parts o f the organisation or its environment.

The competence involves taking a longer term perspective, considering what will happen
several years hence, and establishing a vision o f the future.

An important part o f the competence lies in managers setting out their vision o f the future
to others in such a way as to gain acceptance and support.


Achievement Focus

 Kev behaviours

 An effective senior manager

         sets high quality goals that are demanding o f self and others
         sets objectives and priorities in uncertain and complex situations
         tackles problems or takes advantage o f opportunities as they arise
         calculates risks and takes decisive action
         focuses personal attention on specific details that are critical to the success o f a key
         event

 Description

 Managers with this competence are geared towards achieving results and they will set
 ambitious goals and objectives for themselves and others. They will also deal with
 problems as they arise, and take advantage o f any emerging opportunities. Recognising
 and evaluating the risks that may lie ahead, and then taking firm action, is an aspect o f this
 competence.
                                                29
 RECRUITMENT. CE/CCJD/PGD
Com m unication

Key behaviours ,

An effective senior manager

       conveys difficult ideas and problems in a way that aids understanding
       recognises and responds to the needs and feelings o f others

Description

This competence concerns communicating clearly with others. It may be used in a wide
range o f circumstances, from formal presentations to day-to-day meetings. A feature o f
managers with this competence is that they carefully consider what message they wish to
communicate and then decide how best to do so. This may involve thorough planning o f a
presentation, the use o f different media to reinforce a message, or even the establishment o f
systems to ensure good communication within the department or organisation.

Effective managers use this competence to achieve results. They communicate to inform,
instruct, persuade and encourage others to communicate with them. Managers who are
particularly competent in this area exhibit conviction and belief in what they have to say,
which is closely linked to the self confidence competence.

 Building Teams

 Kev behaviours

 An effective senior manager

        keeps others informed about plans and progress
        builds a desire to work together and builds co-operation within a team
        builds ownership o f controversial decisions by involving others in the decision­
        making process
        evaluates people’s capabilities to do the job and take action

 Description

 This competence concerns working effectively with others at the same level or a more
 junior level within the organisation. The manager may use the key behaviours in the
  context o f a loose team or a coalition o f peers from other parts o f the organisation and/or
  in the context o f an immediate team o f direct reports.

  The first two behaviours are about encouraging co-operative working. Depending on the
  circumstances, this may be achieved either formally or informally, and the team may e
  well-defined and well-established or a loose group o f senior managers who do not
  necessarily see themselves as a “team”.

  The third behaviour is an aspect o f empowerment, where the senior manager involves
  others in the process o f making difficult decisions, and takes time to enable others to
  explore the problem and arrive at, or contribute towards, solutions.

  RECR U1TMENT C E/CCJD/PGD                       «■» v
                                             -4


The final behaviour is about evaluating the capabilities o f the people who report to the
senior manager.


Influencing Others

Kev behaviours

An effective senior manager

        uses a variety o f means to influence others
        creates and prepares strategies for influencing others
        understands the culture o f the organisation and acts to work within it or influence it
        develops and uses networks to trade information, support or other resources

Description

This competence concerns the manager being able to persuade others to provide support
and other resources. It is a competence that is used in dealing with peers and other
colleagues, more senior managers, people outside the organisation - including customers
and suppliers - and others within the organisation who may be in more junior positions.

Managers with this competence are likely to think ahead to situations where they envisage
the need to influence others, and to plan their approach, taking into account the likely
reactions o f other parties.


Leadership

Kev behaviours

An effective senior manager

         shows clarity o f thought processes
         leads by example
         keeps a firm grip on macro issues whilst allowing other managers to develop and
         grow
         is forward looking in terms o f organisation structure, Force needs and performance
         recognises and encourages individual and collective effort and the value o f
         ‘partnerships’

Description

Is visible, approachable and earns respect, takes the initiative in decision making and sets
objectives and priorities clearly; maintains a quality outcome and acts decisively having
assessed the risks.




 RECRUTTMENT/CE/CCJD/PGD                     31
                                             -5 -

Vision

Kev behaviours

An effective senior manager

         does not settle for the ‘here’ and ‘now’
         recognises the value o f environmental scanning
         ensures that strategy, policies and practices are aimed at the longer term
         investment in police/public service - not ‘short-termism’
         recognises that social trends will impact on decision making i.e., external police
         service delivery
         invests in the right people, particularly at management level

Description

Creates and secures commitment to a clear vision and provides a balanced overview o f
complex situations; is able to form coherent and broadly based concepts and plans to
further the long-term aims o f the organisation.




                                                    32
  RECRUITMENT/CEVCCJD/PGD
                                                                            ^ •Ct S e tte r
                                                                              APPENDKH-
          WEST YORKSHIRE                                                 PO Box 9
                                                                         Laburnum Road
                                                                         Wakefield
                                                                         WF1 3QP
                                                                         Tel: (01924)292113
                    Force Headquarters                                   Fax: (01924) 2^2180


Your ref. HOP[SS]GC/HES
 Our ref. NGB/RB

 12 August 1998




Mr David G Henshaw, B.A., M.Soc.Sci., F.I.Mgt
Clerk to Merseyside Police Authority
PO Box 101A, W est House
Mercury Court
Tithebarn Street
Liverpool L69 2NU




Application for the Post o f Chief Constable - Merseyside Police

Thank you for the comprehensive Candidate Information Pack which was sent to me
earlier this week. I found it very helpful. I have completed the application form and
the equal opportunities monitoring form, and these are enclosed.

I have noted the relevant dates for shortlisting and interview, and can confirm that I
am available on those dates. I also notice your offer of informal discussions about
the post, and I should like to consider that offer after the shortlisting procedure




                                                   33
                            A ssistant Chief Constable Nonnan Bettison
                                    Divisional Operations (West)
                                                                                                                                                           Q- * le k k



                                                                                                                                  MERSEYSIDE
                                                                                                                                  POLICE
David G. Henshaw     s . a .. m . s o c . s c l . F .i.M g t..   C le rk to t h e A u th o rity
                                                                                                                                  AUTHORITY
                                                                                                          ° - BOX        101A      WE S T     H. OUSE
                                                                                                       E R C U R Y C O U R T T I T H E B A R n S TREET
                                                                                                        i V E R P O O L                        L 6     9       2 N u
                                                                                                       it: 0 1 5 1 - 2 3 6 474 8       FAX: 0 1 5 1 - 2 3 6 4 5 2 7


OUR REF:      HOP[SS]GC/JHES                                                                       DATE:          31st July 1998
Y O UR REF:                                                                                        V.HEN T E L E P H O N IN G PLEASE C O N T A C T :


                                                                                         Gaynor Coldrick, Head o f Personnel - 0151 443 3584



                                                                                 APPLICATION FORM

                                                            Application for the Post of Chief C o n s ta b le

              Your careful completion o f this form will assist the Authority in giving foil consideration
              to your application. All information will be treated in strict confidence.

              Please complete the form in typescript to facilitate photocopying and return under
              confidential cover to:

              The Clerk to the Authority, Merseyside Police Authority, PO Box 101 A, West House,
              Mercury Court, Tithebam Street, Liverpool L69 2NU

              1.       PERSONAL DETAILS

              Surname                                                                                  Forename[s]
                                  BETTISON                                                                                   NORMAN GEORGE
              Address

                                 HUDDERSFIELD


              P0StC0de           HD5



              ttome i el. No                                                                           Business Tel. No.

              Are you related to a Member o f the Merseysi<ie Police Authority, or a serving police
              officer or a member o f the Merseyside Police Support Staff?


                                                                                                                                          XJ&ES/NO
              If yes, please give details


              G/MPA/ACC/MPAAPPL/I4.I t .97/JHes


                                                                                                  3£
             e d u c a t io n



    Secondary School
                                          From         To
                                                              Numbers o f qualifications
                                                              with dates and grades
                                                              [subjects not required]
   SOUTH GROVE SCHOOL
                                              1967    1972        O ’ Levels
   ROTHERHAM
                                                                  CSEs (I




  College/Umversity/Correspondence       From
  Course [state i f foil or part time]                       Qualifications gained with
                                                             dates and grades


 UNIVERSITY O F OXFORD
                                          1983       1986
 QUEENS COLLEGE                                                     3A Degree
 Full Time                                                     Psychology & Philosophy
                                                               Later converted to MA

 HALLAM UNIVERSITY
                                          1988       1991
 BUSINESS SCHOOL                                               Master of Business
 Part Time                                                     Administration Degree




G/MPA/ACC/MPAAPPL/14.11.97/JHes


                                         35
                                                                             K j -cv




         TRAINING



 Courses attended [with dates and any qualifications obtained]


  Listed below are the principal, and most relevant training courses:


  1996       Top Management Programme, with the Cabinet Office

  1995       Management of Disaster and Civil Emergency Course, Bramshill

  1992       Strategic Command Course, Bramshill

  1991       Intermediate Command Course, Bramshill




Name and type o f membership o f professional bodies [with dates admitted]




G/MPA/ACC/MPAAPPL/14.11,97/JHcs

                                               36
              PRESENT EMPLOYMENT


   Force name and address
                                                   Date commenced   1Maj ,1993
       West Yorkshire Police
       PO Box 9
       Laburnum Road                               Current salary   £
       W AKEFIELD
       WF1 3QP




 Position held with brief outline o f duties


  ASSISTA NT CH IEF CO NSTABLE (DIVISIO NAL OPERATIONS)




vi--------------------------------------




G/MPAJACC/MPAAPPt/14.11.97/JHes
 5.    DETAILS OF PREVIOUS EMPLOYMENT [MOST RECENT FIRST!
       INCLUDING POLICE SERVICE

 Employer:                         —~ '             '               — :-----------       :_____
             W est Yorkshire Police                                                  -

 Address:
             PO Box 9
             Laburnum Road
             W AKEFIELD
Post Code:
             W F13Q P                                   ™ -N o :   0 1924 292113
Job Title:
             Held several portfolios, including ACC - Management & Information Support, ACC
             Personnel and A C C Operations Support


Date Appointed: 1 M a y 1 9 9 3                          Sakuy.


Reason for Leaving:




Employer:                              ~                                             —
             South Yorkshire Police

Address:
             Snig Hill
             SHEFFIELD


PostCode.    S38L Y                                     Tel. No:   0114 220 2020

Job Title:
             Chief Superintendent
             Corporate Development

Date Appointed:       April 1992 - M ay 1993             Salary:


Reason for Leaving:
                       Promotion




G/MPA/ACC/MPAAPPU14.I I.97/JHes


                                               38
                                                                                           ^   -Ct ' 3 e ^




     5' S e I C     k    !   OF PREVIOUS EMPL0™ = ^ [CONT]iNCLUDING POLICE

     Employer:
                   South Yorkshire Police

    Address:
                   Snig Hill
                   SHEFFIELD


    Post Code.     5 3

                                                              Tel. No;    0114 22 0 2020
    Job Title;
                  Superintendent
                  Divisional Commander

   Date Appointed;
                                                               Salary:
                              January 1991 - April 1992

   Reason for Leaving:

                              Promotion




  Employer:
                 South Yorkshire Police


 Address:
                 Snig Hill
                 SHEFFIELD


 Post Code:      § 3 8LY
                                                           •Tel. No:     0114 220 2020
 Job Title:      Superintendent
                 Traffic Division


Date Appointed:              October 1989 - January 1991
                                                            Salary:

Reason for Leaving:
                             Development




G/MPA/ACC/MPAAPPL/14.11.97/JHes


                                                    39
6.      RELEVANT EXPERIENCE/INFORMATION




Please include details o f previous experience with particular reference to its relevance to
the post being applied for.
I have directly addressed the nine competences -:n the person specification with examples of
recent, relevant experience.

JUDGEMENT

The experience of having m ade successful decisions in the past gives me an added self
assurance when resolving current, difficult, situations. My record is consistent. I have the ability
to set issues in a wide context and thereby reach sound conclusions. My decisions to defend
two high profile Industrial Tribunal cases, giving lengthy evidence, personally, on Force policies
and culture, were entirely vindicated by the results. In between these cases, I authorised a
settlement of £5,000 in a less contentious case to reduce the potential for unnecessary and
negative publicity.

I am particularly satisfied with my track record in assessing and selecting staff. I have been
personally involved in all promotions of Chief Inspectors and Superintendents for the last five
years. The quality of our managers is reflected in the changed culture and improved
performance of the Force, and in the numbers of recent Strategic Command Course graduates.

SELF CONFIDENCE

I enjoy seeing my ideas and decisions turned into successful outcomes. The root of self
confidence lies in an optimistic outlook and the preparedness to take the initiative. I am strong
in both of these areas.

 I have the proven ability to bring order out of chaos, tested to the full as Gold Commander
 following the Leeds bombing last year. Later I led the Yorkshire side of the investigation which
 was linked with the Aintree incident. The frequent planned and spontaneous presentations that I
 deliver on behalf of the Force demand a different kind of confidence but, no matter what the
 pressure, I present myself as positive and self assured.

 STRATEGIC PERSPECTIVE

 I have held every portfolio at ACPO rank. This has enabled me to develop a strategic view of
 policing on a broad canvas.

 I have made a significant contribution to the strategic development of two large metropolitan
 police forces, where my skills have been tested. I have learned, in the process, that the strategy
 at the top of an organisation must be consistent, pursued energetically, and owned by the whole
 organisation, in order to bring about effective change. Without action and commitment,
 strategies are mere words.

 ACHIEVEMENT FOCUS

  I have developed, in my current post the process of performance review. At the beginning of
  the planning year I take the Police Authority Policing Plan and meet with each of my
  Superintendents, and their management teams, at their Division to agree local objectives,
’ performance targets and devolved financial plans. I ensure that the aggregated targets m eet
i Police Authority and community expectations. I then visit Commanders each quarter to review
 Hhe performance and financial position, offering advice, support and, above all, encouragement.
  The results are outstanding.


G/MPA/ACOMPAAPPU14.11,97/JHes
 6.      RELEVANT EXPERIENCE/INFOR\LATION [Continuation sheet]



  There are three key elements to this approach. r irstly, I select the right managers who share an
  achievement focus; secondly, I empower them —rough a devolved regime; thirdly, I am clear
  about what is required and show an interest in ti~e outcomes. In such an environment, constant
  improvement and success becomes the norm.

  Further evidence of my achievement focus is drswn from my time as ACC responsible for
  Complaints and Discipline, I had a determination that public complaints of incivility and
  confrontational assault could be reduced. Applying the principles above, particularly monitoring
  outcomes, has led to a 62% reduction in public complaints in these areas. W hat gets led, gets
  managed.

  COMMUNICATION

  Police forces are particularly difficult organisations in which to communicate successfully owing
  to the many widespread sites of operation and srift working. I have an open approach. I give
  people early indication of issues, consult widely and provide whatever information an individual
  has a right to know.

  Success lies in considering what another person or body will need to know, or will want to have a
  say in. I work to meet those needs. A key group that I always consider in this way is the Police
  Authority, who want early information and the opportunity to contribute. I believe that a
  consistent approach, along these lines, is crucial to a successful partnership.

  My written and verbal skills will be assessed in the competition. I am experienced in using a
  variety of media to get my message across. Events have ranged from a keynote presentation to
  the ACPO/APA Summer Conference last year on the subject of drugs strategies, to frequent
  appearances on behalf of the Force, and occasionally the Service, in television and radio
  interviews.

  BUILDING TEAMS

  I realise how effectiveness can be achieved through teamwork and maximise every opportunity.
  Inside the organisation I have demonstrated this in many ways. In my previous portfolio area, I
  combined the Force Intelligence function with the HQ Squads, getting rid of the unhelpful
  demarcations between the different groups. There is now a virtuous cycle of intelligence driven,
  targeted operations which deliver better intelligence, with excellent results.

  More recently, I was dissatisfied with the quality of service provided to the public through our
  area control rooms. I have now integrated the whole call handling process across switchboard,
  control room and divisions with significant and positive impact on the public attitude surveys.

  W herever I have worked, I have been able to build integrated and motivated teams, creating a
  shared focus and joint endeavour.

  Beyond the Force, the Police Authority are key members of the policing team. Co-operation,
  openness and shared information, achieves results. The construction of the annual policing plan
  must be a joint enterprise, and I am committed to working in this way.

  Externally, the teamwork that is possible in true partnership with other agencies has to be
  maximised. My current work with Local Authorities in establishing the Responsible Authorities,
• under the Crime and Disorder Act, is rewarding and promises great benefits for the communities
 vw e jointly serve.




G/MPA/ACC/MPAAPPL/14.11.97/JHes


                                                41
                                                                                            ^       C| "Seth.


 6-        RELEVANT EXPERIENCE/INFOR\L\TION [Continuation sheet]




  INFLUENCING OTHERS

  I have developed my negotiating skills over many years. Building on a solid foundation of trust
  and open communication, I believe that successful negotiation is about understanding where the
  other person is ‘coming from’ and respecting their position. It is often necessary to look for a
  means of meeting anothers needs whilst pursuing, in a determined way, the desired goals. An
  example of this approach is in the fundamental change that I brought about in the area of ill-
  health retirements. On taking over the personnel portfolio, ill-health retirements accounted for
  82% of all leavers (today it is 24% ). I identified quickly that it was often a motivational issue
  rather than a health issue. I saw every individual, personally, as soon as a senior m anager had
  a hint of an ill-health retirement ‘plan’. My focus was on reducing the numbers leaving the
  organisation, but the success was due, firstly, to influencing the individuals to consider the
  benefits of a post which matched their state of health; secondly, in convincing the Police
  Federation of not only the organisational, but also the personal benefits in retaining experienced
  officers; and, ultimately, raising the consciousness of the whole organisation that ill-health
  retirement was no longer a matter of personal choice. The cultural change that I achieved still
  holfls good today.

  LEADERSHIP

  My leadership skills have been regularly tested in the operational environm ent I was Gold
  Level Commander throughout the Bradford riots in 1995, attending the scene following the first
  skirmish. I established, and led, the Gold command room throughout the violent weekend that
  followed. Similarly, I was Gold Level Commander in dealing with the afterm ath of the Leeds
  bomb last year. I have led that investigation and many other major and serial criminal
  investigations undertaken by the Force.

  Leadership is equally crucial inside the organisation. My commitment to reducing ill-health
  retirements has resulted in savings of between five and seven million pounds per year over the
  last three years. My drive to see equality of treatment and opportunity as non-negotiable, and
  the introduction of initiatives to sustain it, have been acknowledged in Industrial Tribunal reports
  and HMIC Inspections.

  Leadership is tested by the extraordinary, rather than by the routine. It is a t these critical times
  that everyone looks to ‘the boss'. In these situations, whether operational or organisational, my
  decisions have rarely followed the easiest option, but they have consistently delivered success.

  VISION

  The key public satisfaction levels in W est Yorkshire, expressed through the most recent
  surveys, hover around the 90% figure. This does not yet fulfil our potential as a police force.

  The simple and clear vision to which I am totally committed is that we may not be able to
  prevent or detect every crime, but we are capable, always, of leaving the person, who turns to
  us for help, satisfied and reassured. This is the ultimate performance indicator of the police
  service.

 ^The key task for a Chief Constable is building the team that will deliver this vision, working in
    partnership with the policy authority, to provide the service the people of Merseyside deserve. I
 •. know what is required and am committed to making it happen.




G/MPA/ACC/MPAAPPL/14.1 t.97/JHcs


                                                     42
                                                                                 ^    ' Q ’^ e fc fc v c




  7.        REFEREES



  Please give names, addresses and occupations o f two persons willing to give vou a
  reference, one o f which must be your current employer.


  1. Name:                                        2. Name:

        Address:                                     Address:

              W est Yorkshire Police                      W est Yorkshire Police Authority
              PO Box 9                                    Town Hall
              Laburnum Road                               W AKEFIELD
              W AKEFIELD                                  W F1 2HQ
              W F13Q P


       Relationship:
                                                     Relationship:
                       Chief Constable                            Chairman




 10.       DATES NOT AVAILABLE FOR INTERVIEW [EF ANY]




Canvassing either directly or indirectly will disqualify a candidate from appointment.

DECLARATION


I declare that to the best o f my knowledge and belief, all statements, contained in this form
are correct and I understand that should I conceal any material fact, I w ill, if engaged be
liable to the termination o f my appointment.

I agree that the information contained herein should be treated in the strictest confidence.


v
Signed.                                               Date         12 August 1998


G/MPA/ACC/MPAAPPL/l 4.11.97/JHes



                                            43
44
                                                                                                                    .................................

  MERSEYSIDE POLICE AUTHORITY

 CHIEF CONSTABLE                                                       SllSiiiilip                                                                                  BStllilsislfilil
                                                                                ;         SSIIIIII
                                                                               i

 SHORTLISTING SCHEDULE                                                                                                        ............... .
                                                                      sillilll ..
                                                                                                                                                                                  B B B SlIIliS
                                                                                                                                                                                           l i l l illia:
                                                                                                                                                                                                   llll


                                                LEVEL                   CAM                          I! !i 111ill       NOTES -                 1         1 d                              uJi candidate
                                               REQUIRED                                                                                          1 vn f ®l ' f
                                                                                   fili! illlllill
                                                                                                        JLU Vv
                                                                                                                                                illlllllllllllll i i i i i i i i i i i i
                                             VERY HIGH 1H iG
       .
                                               OR MEDIUf                           iiis
                                                               HIGH                                    ilHlllllli
Judgement:Focuses on problem &                                                                                        Prepare for im plementation o f crime and disorder
                                                                                                                      act
solution; identifies implications;
                                                                                                                      Industrial tribunal experience
analytical & logical approach to             VERY HIGH
                                                                                                                      Call handling integration
understand people & events; establishes                                                    V                          Selection o f staff
priorities; is creative & intuitive; finds
new patterns & interprets events in new
ways.
Self Confidence:Takes the lead; is self                                                                               Gold com m ander ■ Leeds bombing
                                                                                                                      Y orkshire end o f A intree incident
assured & positive; has drive &
                                                                                                                      O ptimistic and prepared to take initiative
initiative; self belief; persistent &        VERY HIGH
                                                                                                                      Planned and spontaneous presentations
determined t o succeed; decisive;                                       V                                             Qualified to M B A level
independent; works well under pressure.
Strategic Perspective:Has vision for                                                                                 Held every ACPO portfolio = macro vision ■
the future & has long term perspective;                                                                              Contributed to strategic direction of 2
                                             VERY HIGH                                                               Metropolitan forces
relates goals & actions to strategic aims
                                                                                                                     “Strategy at the top must be pursued energetically
o f business; understands inter*                                       V                                             and owned by all”
departmental functions; gains support &
acceptance from others in working
towards vision.                                                                                                      ........ ..................... ....................................          1




  PER STR AT/MPA/ANNEXFl/l’OD
                                                      ' LEVEL -       IlsiiltiSil;
MMiftx
                                                                      llilllliiilliilll

;i::&S!::$:S:§:$^^                                      |iilH lli§      n lu n
                                    •-••■•■■•••■•••••■•                                   Quality o f graduates = more senior com m and
   Achievement Focus:Sets ambitions;                                                      course graduates
    places demands on self & others; results                                              Policing plan targets and objectives set a n d met
    focused; calculates risk; is decisive &              VERY HIGH                        Reduction by 6 2% in public complaints ;
                                                                                          T erritorial Divisions - Performance m onitoring
   takes firm action; tackles problems as
                                                                                          Com plaints and discipline
    they arise; focuses on specific details
    critical to success in complex situations.                                            P lan n ed an d spontaneous presentations
    Com m unication: Conveys difficult                                                    Visits com m anders quarterly to review targets,
    ideas or problems in a meaningful way;                                                advises, supports an d encourages
    uses various media to reinforce                                                       Key note presentations to A CPO/APA sum m er
    message; communicates to inform;                      VERY HIGH                       conference 1997
                                                                                          Frequent media interviews
    instruct; persuade &■ encourage others
                                                                                          O pen approach, consults widely
    whilst being aware of their feelings;                                                 Co-ordinates partnerships
     considers most effective method of
     presenting information.                                                              “ Strategy must be consistent and owned by all to
     Building Teams:Encourages co­                                                        affect results”
     operative working within & across                                                    Integrated call handling
     teams; empowers others to make                       VERY HIGH                       Em pow er managers and show interest
     decisions; involves & informs people of                                              Com bined F.I. function and HQ squads to
                                                                                          im prove team
     plans.& progress; evaluates peoples’
                                                                                          Co-operation with Police Authority, LAs etc.
     capabilities.                                                                        ‘Negotiation = respecting their position”?;
     Influencing Others: Uses a variety of                                                Reduction in ill health retirements
     methods to persuade others including                                                 Consultation with police federation
      peers, colleagues, senior managers,                 VERY HIGH                       C hair o f various groups
      external contacts. & juniors; creates &
      prepares strategies to influence others,
      and establishes networks for support &
      information; understands and works
      within the culture of the organisation.




    re RSTK AT/N UW AN N K.Nl; l/I’G l )
                                                               """wv:!vl'!.|'v!''l-lvlvlvlv
                                                                                                                      Its                              ■
                                                                                   *
                                                                                                  MmmwM
                           m m m                     r*rr      M       M
                                                                                              B   B   i
                           wmw.                                                mmw
                wmm                   ■ ^ F
      Leadership: Shows clarity of thought                                                                Reduction in public complaints
                                                                                                          Gold com m end - Bradford riots 1995
      processes; leads by example; keeps a
                                                                                                                             - Leeds bombing 1997 ■
      firm grip on macro issues whilst                                                                    Led major and serial crim e investigations
      allowing development and growth;                                                                    I.T. and HM IC reports = equality
      forward looking in terms of organisation                                                            Corporate leadership of course
      structure, Force needs and performance;      VERY HIGH                                              V arious top level m anagem ent training
                                                                                                          Reducing ill health retirements
      recognises and encourages individual
                                                                                                          Led on equal opportunities policy
      and collective effort and values of
      partnerships; approachable, earns
      respect, takes the initiative and assesses
      risks.
      Vision: Creates and secures                                                                         P erformance indicator of police service =
                                                                                                          satisfied and reassured customers
      commitment to a clear vision; provides a
      balanced overview o f complex
      situations; forms coherent and broad
■sj   concepts and plans to further the long
      term aims; more than ‘here and now’;         VERY HIGH
      values environmental scanning; invests
      in the right managers; recognises social
      trends that impact on decision making




        PF.RSTRAT/MIVVANNIiXri/l’OI)
48
                                                                        APPENDIX (o



 BETTISON       Norman George


         42 years o f age with over 23 years   s e rv ic e .


         Has an MA from Oxford in Psychology and Philosophy.

        Studying in his own time, obtained a Masters Degree in Business
        Administration from Sheffield Business School.

        Has had a varied career particularly from Chief Inspector - Careers Dept -
        member o f a small enquiry team reporting to the C hief Constable on the
        Hillsborough incident - Head o f Traffic - Sheffield City Sub Division.

        Attended the SCC in 1992 and had a successful Course. Seen as a caring
        individual with good oral and written communication. Regarded as an Officer
        who could progress to the highest ranks o f the Service-

        After SCC was required to develop a iManagement Support Unit, growing to a
        Corporate Development Department.

        Appointed ACC West Yorkshire in June 1993.

        Prominent in developing strategies to reduce crime.

        His C hief Constable regards him as “outstanding” and equally strong in a
        Personnel Management field [probably his greatest strength].

       Has clarity o f vision and has shown good positive leadership in more than one
       functional role. Has shown a consistent level o f achievement in all that he has
       done.

       May seem a little serious” to some but his underlying personality is balanced
       and engaging.

       Graded by the Inspectorate as S2.




PERSTRAT/MPA/CCOCT/CCAPLIC/PGD
                                                                                     APPENDIX 7
                                  A PPO INTM EN TS C O M M ITTEE


     At a meeting o f the Appointments Committee held on Thursday, 24th September 1998 in the
     Meeting Room, 3rd Floor, West House, Mercury Court, Liverpool the following Members
     were present

                                   Elected

                                   Councillor Ms.C. Gustafson (Chairperson)
                                   Councillor D. Martin
                                   Councillor F. Prendergast
                                   Councillor Lady Doreen Jones
                                   Councillor Mrs. K. Wood

                                   M agistrate

                                   Mr. M. J. Amos J.P.
                                   Mr. K. Jackson J.P.

                                   Independent

                                   Dr. E. A. Agalamanyi (Substitute)
                                   Mr. N. Langley


     Apologies

     An apology for absence was received from Mr P Coogan.

*11. M inutes

     The minutes o f the meeting of the Committee held on the 10th August 1998 were received as
     a correct record and signed by the Chairperson.

*12. Local G overnm ent (Access to Inform ation) Act 1985

     RESOLVED That in accordance with the provisions of the Local Government Act 1972, the
     public be excluded from the meeting for the following item o f business on the grounds that it
     involves the disclosure o f exempt information as defined in Paragraph 1 o f Part 1 o f Schedule
     1 2 A to th eA ct.

*13. Applications for the Post of C hief Constable - Shortlisting

     The Clerk to the Authority tabled the assessments prepared by Her Majesty’s Inspector o f
     Constabulary and the Committee considered the report o f the Clerk in respect o f the post o f
     Chief Constable, Merseyside Police which included the applications, the Job Description,
     Person Specification and the Shortlisting Schedules prepared by the Clerk.



                                               51
RESOLVED

ri)     That the following seven applicants be shortlisted for interview for the post o f Chief
        Constable, Merseyside Police Force:-

                                N.G. Bettison
                                R. Davies
                                J.P Hamilton
                                I. Holding
                                P. R. Kemaghan
                                W. G. Nelson
                                R. S. Turnbull

(ii)    that the applicants be informed that, following the outcome o f the Panel Interviews, it
         may be the case that not all candidates progress to the formal interview stage o f the
         appointment process;

(in)     that the informal gathering be held on Sunday 11th October 1998 commencing at
         7.00pm at the Senior Officers’ Dining Room, Police Training Centre, Mather
         Avenue;

 (iv)    that the two Panel Interviews be held on Monday 12th October 1998 with a panel
         briefing commencing at 9.30 am and the panel interviews commencing at 10.00am at
         the Senior Officers’ Dining Room, Police Training Centre, Mather Avenue; and

 (v)      that the further formal interviews be held on Tuesday 13th October 1998 with a panel
          briefing commencing at 9.30 am and the formal interviews commencing at 10.00 am
          at Mercury Court, Liverpool.




          Minutes 11 to 13 received as a correct record the 13th day o f October 1998




                                  Chairperson o f the Committee


                                (The meeting closed at 5.43 pm.)
                                                                                                            APPENDIX8
                             Appointment of Chief Constable
                                   M ONDAY. 12TH OCTO BER 1998

PANEL A - M AN AGF.MFNT

1-        H um an Resources

          Given the ever changing nature o f Human Resource policies, which areas do
          you feel the Chief Constable can realistically impact upon?

          •    Culture o f the organisation
          •    Diversity o f the workforce
          •    Recruitment and retention o f a highly skilled workforce
          •    Effective communication
          •    Developing good relationships/partnerships
          •    Clarity o f aims and goals

Comments




Score [Circle as appropriate]
1 Poor
2 Less than satisfactory
3 Satisfactory
4 More than satisfactory
5 Exceptional

X        :---------------------------
Note:7Se points setout above are indicative o f the issues that may be covered by the Candidate but are got designed to be exclusive.




PERSTRT/MPA/CCOCT/QUEST/PGD                   -              5 3
                               Appointment of Chief Constable

                                     M O N D AY 12TH OCTOBER 1998


PANEL A - MANAGEMENT

2.         Empowerment

           How do you effectively balance decentralisation, and the m aintenance o f
           corporate standards?

           •     Clear concise aims/goals
           •     Clearly defined standards
           •     2 way communication
           •     Good communication/channels/processes
           •     Clarity and Cohesion amongst management group
           •     Acceptance and understanding o f empowerment
           •     Clear lines o f accountability
           •     Training for staff at all levels
           •     Review mechanisms

Comments




Score [Circle as appropriate]
1 Poor
2 Less than satisfactory
3 Satisfactory
4 More than satisfactory
5 Exceptional


 Note: The p oints set out above are indicative o f the issues that m ay be covered b y the Candidate but are iiq { designed to be exclusive.




 PERSTRT/MPA/CCOCT/QUEST/PGD                                     54
                                 Appointment of Chief Constable
                                       M ONDAY. 12TH OCTOBER 1998

  PANEL A - MANAGEMENT

  3.         Performance M anagem ent

             Performance measures and performance indicators have become very much
             part o f the management process. Whai do you see as the advantages or
             disadvantages o f this approach?

             Advantages

             •    Clear direction
             •    Clearly defined targets
             •    Good communications
       *■    •    Measure trends

             Disadvantages

             •    M ay concentrate on national rather than local issues o f concern


  Com m ents




  Score [Circle as appropriate]
  1 Poor
  2 Less than satisfactory
  3 Satisfactory
  4 More than satisfactory
! 5 Exceptional
V

 Note: Tie points set out above are indicative o f the issues that m ay be covered by the Candidate but are a m designed to be exdus.t




 PERSTRT/MPA/CCOCT/QUEST/PGD
                                                 Appointment of Chief Constable

                                                            M ONDAY. 12TII OCTO BER 1998

 PANF.T.           A     - MANAGEMENT

 4.            Management o f Change

               Describe a situation where you have managed organisational change, outlining
               your strategy, implementation plan and the key issues that you learnt from it.

               Personal answer and

               •         Clear vision/goals
               •         Clear understanding o f environment
               •         Take people w ith you ‘own the process’
               •         Emphasise opportunities not threats ‘win hearts & m inds’
         *■    •         Cost/benefit analysis
               •         Communication - open and honest
               •         Consultation - participative and genuine
               •         Be open to new ideas
               •         Underpin changes with appropriate management systems

 Com m ents:-




  Score [Circle as appropriate]
  1 Poor
  2 Less than satisfactory
  3 Satisfactory
,4 More than satisfactory
. 5 Exceptional

V    -   —    ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------                                   - .-


    Note: The points set out above are indicative o f the issues that m ay be covered by the Candidate but are ac£ designed to be exclusive.




    PERSTRT/MPA/CCOCT/QUEST/PGD                                                 -                         5 6
                               Appointment of Chief Constable
                                     MONDAY. 12TH OCTOBER 1998

 PANEL A - MANAGEMENT

 5.        Motivation

           Drawing on specific examples, how would you obtain the highest level o f
           commitment from officers and support staff?

           •     Staff should be:
                        - well directed
                        - well supported
                        - well led
                        - feel valued
           •     Commitment to vision
           •     Rewards, opportunities, praise
           •     Training and development
           •     Constructive and appreciative feedback to staff
           •     Effective communication - 2 way process

 Comments:-




 Score [Circle as appropriate]
 1 Poor
2 Less than satisfactory
3 Satisfactory
,4 More than satisfactory
 5 Exceptional


Note.The points set out above are indicative o f the issues that may be covered by the Candidate but are aal designed to be exclusive.




PERSTRT/MPA/CCOCT/QUEST/PGD
                             Appointment of Chief Constable

                                   MONDAY. 12TH OCTOBER 1998


PANEL A - MANAGEMENT

6.        Leadership

          W hat are the key elements o f ‘Leadership’ and how would you apply these to
          the role o f Chief Constable in Merseyside?

          •     Leads by example
          •     Forward thinking
          •     Developing others
          •     Good communication
          •     Role model
          •     Builds teams
          •     Clear direction
          •     Influential
          •     Supports
          •     Strategy maker
          •     Fair but firm
          •     Visible
          •     Recognition o f Achievements

Comments:-




Score [Circle as appropriate]
1 Poor
2 Less than satisfactory
3 Satisfactory
4 More than satisfactory
5 Exceptional




 Note:77te points set out above are indicative o f the issues that may be covered by the Candidate but are aQi designed to be exclusive.




 PERSTRT/MPA/CCOCT/QUEST/PGD                       *              ^ 8
                                 Appointment of Chief Constable

                                       M ONDAY. T2TH OCTOBER 1998

 PANEL A - MANAGFMF.NT

 7-         Equal Opportunities

            Developing and implementing Equal Opportunities policies are o f prominent
            importance within the Police Force. How, as C hief Constable, would you
            demonstrate your commitment?

            • Support from the top
            • Actively publicise
            • Personal commitment
            • Lead by example - set professional standards
            • Attention to detail - don’t tolerate minor incidents
            • Promote accountability and responsibility
            •    Effective communication and education to promote understanding
            •    Training and development o f both policies and individuals
            •    Review mechanisms, learn from experience and best practice

Comments:-




Score [Circle as appropriate]
1 Poor
2 Less than satisfactory
3 Satisfactory
4 More than satisfactory
5 Exceptional


Hote:The p o in ts set out above are indicative o f th ejssu es that m ay be covered by the Candidate but a rea a t designed to be exclusive.




PERSTRT/MPA/CCOCT/QUEST/PGD
                                                                 59
60
                                Appointment of Chief Constable
                                       MONDAY. I2TH OCTOBER 1998

  PANEL B - OPERATIONAL TSST JF.S


  1.         Technology

             The development o f Information Technology in the Police Service has not
             been without difficulties. Given your current experience, how can this be
             addressed?



           •      Clear objectives/vision o f strategy
           •      Awareness o f finance available
         ^ •      IT strategy to underpin and support aims o f Police Service
           •      Compatibility o f IT systems
           •      Ensure strategy is responsive to new developments
           •      M ake full use o f expert IT knowledge and experience
           •      Awareness o f national developments

 Com m ents:-




jScore [Circle as appropriate]
It Poor
12 Less than satisfactory
j3 Satisfactory
|4 More than satisfactory
!5 Exceptional


 Note: Hie points set out above are indicative o f the issues that m ay be covered by the Candidate but are && designed to be exclusive.




PERSTRT/M PA/CCOCT/QUEST/PGD                                    61
                               Appointment of Chief Constable
                                      MONDAY. 12TH OCTOBER 1998

 PANEL B - OPERATIONAL TSST FF.S

 2.         Social

            W hat are your immediate perspectives on M erseyside and w hat do you feel are
            the particular needs o f policing in such a complex urban area?

            Personal answer and

         •       Promoting Community Safety
         •       Responsive police service
         •       Effective use o f scarce resources linked to clear objectives
       _ •       Public Confidence/positive image
         •       Business confidence/to promote investment
         •       Build effective partnerships with local authorities, local communities and
                 businesses
            •    Key player in multi agency approach

 C om m ents:-




'Score [Circle as appropriate]
|l Poor
j2 Less than satisfactory
 3 Satisfactory
 4 More than satisfactory
 5. Exceptional
  V

 Notc:77ie points set out above are indicative o f the issues that m ay be covered by the C andidate but are not designed to be exclusive.




 PERSTRT/MPA/CCOCT/QUEST/PGD
                                                                    62
                                        Appointment of Chief Constable
                                                MONDAY. 12TH OCTOBER 1998

 PANEL B - OPERATIONAL ISSUES

 3.            Major Incident Policing

               Drawing on a recent example o f policing a major incident, outline how you
               addressed difficulties that occurred during the course o f this event.

               Personal answer and

               •
         Well managed strategy
               •
         Effective communication - positive use o f media
                                 - managed approach
                                 - openness
     • Good communication with Police Authority
     • Liaison with other agencies - business community
                                    - District Councils
                                    - Voluntary Sector
                                    - Community Groups
 Comments:-




IScore [Circle as appropriate]
|1 Poor
 2 Less than satisfactory
 3 Satisfactory
 4 More than satisfactory
 5.. Exceptional



 Note; The points set out above are indicative o f the issues that may be covered by the Candidate but are   designed to be exclusive.




 p e r s t r t / m p a / c c o c t /q u e s t / p g d              63
                              Appointment of Chief Constable
                                     M ONDAY. 12TH OCTOBER 1998

PANEL B - OPERATIONAL ISSUES


4.          Partnership Working

            As a C hief Constable how would you secure the commitment o f others, both
            within the organisation and beyond?

            •       Lead by example
            •       Good communications
            •       Develop trust
            •       Identify and meet personally with key players
            •       Identify key issues
        ►       •    Develop appropriate networks
            •       Relate to community personally
            •       Draw on experience in - other Authorities
                                           - own Authority
                                           - best practice
            •       Value people’s contribution

Comments:-




jScore [Circle as appropriate]
jl Poor
\2 Less than satisfactory
|3 Satisfactory
j4 More than satisfactory
p Exceptional

 Nc\te:77ie points set out above are indicative o f the issues that m a yb e covered by the Candidate but are not designed to be exclusive.




                                                                      64
 PERSTRT/MPA/CCOCT/QUEST/PGD
                               Appointment of Chief Constable
                                      MONDAY. 12TH OCTOBER 1998

 PANEL B - OPERATIONAL ISSUES


 5.         Professional S tandard s

             What do you feel is to be gained from the current proposals for the police and
            judiciary to register their membership o f societies?

            •    Part o f ‘open government’ proposals
            •    Fair and consistent approach to policing
            •    Improves relationship with the public
            •    Reinforces moral values
            •    Openness and integrity
     *•»
 Com m ents:-




jScore [Circle as appropriate]
;1 Poor
12 Less than satisfactory
|3» Satisfactory
|4. More than satisfactory
!5 ‘Exceptional


 Note: The points set out above are indicative o f the issues that may be covered by the Candidate but are not designed to be exclusive.




 PERSTRT/MPA/CCOCT/QUEST/PGD
                                                                      65
                              Appointment of Chief Constable

                                    MONDAY. 12TH OCTOBER 1998

PANEL B - OPERATIONAL ISSUES

6.         New Initiatives

           I f appointed how would you seek to implement new initiatives w ithin
           M erseyside Police and ensure that changes are welcomed by all parties?

           •    Involvement/consultation
           •    Communication
           •    Encourage ownership
           •    Encourage other parties to take lead role
           •    Provide support
           •    Promote/advertise
           •    Negotiation
           •    Flexible
           •    Honesty

Comments:-




jScore [Circle as appropriate]
[1 Poor
|2 Less than satisfactory
[3 Satisfactory
 4 More than satisfactory
 5 ’Exceptional

     V
 Note:77ie points set out above are indicative o f the issues that may be covered by the Candidate but are not designed to be exclusive.




                                                                      66
 PERSTRT/MPA/CCOCT/QUEST/PGD
                                 Appointment of Chief Constable
                                        MONDAY. 12TH OCTOBER 1998

   PANEL B - OPERATION AT TSSTreg


   7.         C om m unity

              Drawing on past experiences, when undertaking consultation w ith the
              community, how did you ensure that it was both representative and
              meaningful?

              •    Effective communication two ways
              •    Listen and hear what is being said
              •    Consult in an appropriate manner at different levels and with different
                   groups
         ►   •     M eet broad cross section o f community
             •     Value people’s contributions
             •     Encourage those who traditionally do not wish to be involved
             •     Delivering what is promised
             •     Honesty

  Com m ents:- f




[Score [Circle as appropriate]
jl Poor
\2 Less than satisfactory
IS Satisfactory
;4. More than satisfactory
[^Exceptional

 Note:The points set out above are indicative o f the issues that may be covered by the   Candidate but are m designed to be e x d a y




PERSTRT/MPA/CCOCT/QUEST/PGD                                       67
68
                                                                                                                      APPENDIX ^

                                Appointment of Chief Constable
                                     TUESDAY 13TH OCTOBER 1998


  PRESENTATION T O P ir

 Partnerships can often be ineffective, confused and limited in their capacity to deliver.

 What steps would you take as Chief Constable to ensure partnerships in Merseyside
 are credible, attract community respect and, above all, will deliver results?


 Comments:-




Score [Circle as appropriate]
1 Poor
2 Less than satisfactory
3 Satisfactory                                        -
4 More than satisfactory
^Exceptional

N ote: The points set out above a rt indicative o f the issues that may be covered by the CandHate but a rt m designed to be exclusive.




                                                                69
                                        Appointment of Chief Constable
                                              TUESDAY. 13TH OCTOBER 1998

FORMAL INTERVIEWS



    1.          How can M erseyside Police contribute to Merseyside’s corporate aim o f
                promoting employment opportunities for the region?

                •      Creating a Safer County
                •      Promote positive image/public confidence
                •      Safer cities required to encourage business into the area
                •      Community Safety
                •      Safer Merseyside Partnership
                •      Build effective partnerships with local authorities, local communities and
                       businesses
                •      Key player in multi-agency approach

    Comments:-




;Score [Circle as appropriate]
|l Poor
|2 Less than satisfactory
(3 Satisfactory
|4 More than satisfactory
;5^ Exceptional
i        ;________ ;_________________ -:--------------- ;— ;— — ---- J

    HoXc.The points se t out above are indicative o f the issues th a t may be covered by the Candidate but are qqI designed to be exclusive.




    PERSTRT/MPA/CCOCT/QUEST/PGD
                                                                         70
                                Appointment of Chief Constable
                                      TUESDAY. ITTFf OCTOBER 1998

 FORMAL INTERVIEWS


 2.         How could you secure meaningful feedback from the community to assist
            in the developmen t o f the Policing Plan?

            •   W ide range o f consultation mechanisms
            •   Draw upon expertise within Force and through partnership working
            •   Open and honest approach
            •   Good listening skills
            •   Support System to receive feedback
            •   Demonstrte effective action


 Comments




  Score [Circle as appropriate]
  1 Poor
  2 Less than satisfactory
  3 Satisfactory
  4 More than satisfactory
  5 Exceptional
'i.   ________________
fibte: The points set out above are indicative o f the issues that may be covered by the Candidate but are a sl designedto be exclusive.




PERSTRT/MPA/CCOCT/QUEST/PGD                                     71
                            Appointment of Chief Constable
                                  TU ESD A Y . 13TH O C TO B ER 1998

FORMAL INTERVIEWS


3.        Could you provide some examples to demonstrate your ability to manage
          constant and conflicting demands?

         Personal answer required.




Comments




Score [Circle as appropriate]
1 Poor
2 Less than satisfactory
2 Satisfactory
4 More than satisfactory
  Exceptional
Uate:The points set out above are indicative o f the issues that may be covered by the Candidate but are am designed to be exclusive.




PERSTRT/MPA/CCOCT/QUEST/PGD                                   72
                                                       TUESDAY. 13TH OCTOBER 1998

  FORMAL INTERVIEWS

  4.              Could you describe examples o f successful partnership working,
                  particularly in relation to the implementation o f the Crime and Disorder
                  Act?

                  Personal answer required.




  Comments:-




Score [Circle as appropriate]
1 Poor
2 Less than satisfactory
3 Satisfactory                , .
4 More than satisfactory . , - ■
5 Exceptional
-I_______________________________________ _ _____________ ____________________;



 Abte: The points set out above are indicative o f the issues that may be covered by the Candidate but are nol designed to be exclusive.




 PERSTRT/MPA/CCOCT/QUEST/PGD
                                                                                  73
                                 Appointment Of Chief Constable
                                       TUESDAY, 13TH OCTORFR joog

  FORMAT, TNTERVTHWS


  5.         If you were appointed, can you tell os what your priorities would be in the
             first month of your appointment, over and above your assimilation o f a
             fuller understanding of the Force’s command structure and operation?

             Personal answer and

             •    Understanding o f current issues in Merseyside
                  Consolidation and continuity - take reflective view o f the Force. To heln
                  build on what has already been achieved
             •    M eeting community leaders
                  Develop agenda for action
                  Vision - to plan for future on short, medium and long term basis
                         - to evolve force

 Com m ents




Score [Circle as appropriate]
1 Poor
2 Less than satisfactoiy
3 Satisfactoiy
4 More than satisfactory
^Exceptional

Note: The points set out above are indicative o f the issues that m ay be covered by the C andidate but
                                                                                                          ore no[ designed to be exclusive.




                                                                   I   4
PERSTRT/MPA/CCOCT/QUEST/PGD
                              Appointment of Chief Constable
                                    TUESDAY, 13TH OCTOBER 1998

FORMAT. INTERVIEWS


6.        In your policing career so far, what would you say is the incident that you
          are m ost proud o f and which issue would you prefer to forget?


          Personal answer required


Comments:-




Score [Circle as appropriate]
1 Poor
2 Less than satisfactory
3 Satisfactory
\ More than satisfactory
5 Exceptional
Note:77i€ points set out above are indicative o f the issues that m ay be covered by the Candidate but are not designed to be exclusive.




PERSTRT/MPA/CCOCT/QUEST/PGD
                                                                     75
                             Appointment of Chief Constable
                                    TU ESD AY , 13TH O CTOBER 1998

FORMAL INTERVIEW S



7.       You will be aware o f the debate over the ethics and values within the
         Police Service- How would you continue to sustain the integrity o f Officers
         within the service?


          •   Maintain professional standard
          •   Lead by example
          •   Professional Standards Unit
          •   Regularly monitor performance standards
          •   Review mechanism
          •   Set clear objectives
          •   Shared values
          •   Promote a culture where ethics and values are prevalent

Comments:-




Score [Circle as appropriate]
1 Poor
2 Less than satisfactoiy
3 Satisfactory               '
4 More than satisfactory
5 Exceptional
fJote:7Tie points se t out above are indicative o f the issues that may be covered by the Candidate but areoQ l designed to be exclusive.




 PERSTRT/MPA/CCOCT/QUEST/PGD
                                                                   76
                                            MERSEYSIDE                          -APPENDIX 1 0
                                            POLICE
                                            AUTHOR----




K/131/98                                                          3th October 1998

      POLICE AUTHORITY APPOINTS NEW CHIEF CONSTABLE


Merseyside Police Authority has appointed Norman Bettison as the new Chief

Constable of Merseyside Police.



Mr Bettigon will lead the Force into the next Millennium, succeeding Sir James

Sharpies who retires later this month after nine years as head of Merseyside Police.



Mr Bettison, who currently holds the post of Assistant Chief Constable of W est

Yorkshire Police, said: “/ am absolutely delighted, this feels right.




7 am very much looking forward to taking up post and one o f the first things I will be

doing is getting out and about finding out what people think and speaking to my

officers




Mr Bettison, 42, was bom in Rotherham and has spent his police career in

Yorkshire. As Assistant Chief Constable of the West Yorkshire Force he had special

responsibility for many areas including co-ordinating major crime operations

throughout the Force.

                                                                                more...




                                       77
                                          -2-


Prior to joining the W est Yorkshire Force, Mr Bettison worked for South Yorkshire

Force.



Councillor Carol Gustafson, Chairperson of Merseyside Police Authority, said: “We

had an outstanding list of candidates with all the qualities we were looking for, for the

leadership o f the Merseyside Police Force. We are sure Norman Bettison will be an

outstanding Chief Constable and we look forward to working with him in

Merseyside.”



 Mr Bettison’s start date is still to be confirmed and his appointment is subject to

 medical clearance and Home Office approval.




                                         -Ends-

 For further information contact:




 retmpatoaww^l/nawchief




   I


       V




                                         78
                                                                         APPENDIX \ I
                                IT ■M ER SEY SID E
                                       POLICE
                                S B ■A U T H O R '—



 K/132/98                                                           October 1998

              STATEMENT FROM MERSEYSIDE POLICE AUTHORITY

 Merseyside Police Authority appointed Norman Bettison as Merseyside's new Chief

 Constable after two days of interviews with several high quality candidates.




The decision to appoint Mr Bettison was a unanimous one made by the

Appointments Committee of nine members. He was an outstanding candidate and

offered the best qualities to lead the Merseyside Force into the next Millennium.




Merseyside Police Authority was aware of Mr Bettison’s operational policing

experience including his association with Hillsborough, when as Chief Inspector he

was part of South Yorkshire’s team of officers set up following the tragedy. Mr

Bettison was not involved in any Of the pre-planning or policing of the match.




Merseyside Police Authority has always recognised the sensitivity of this issue and

the feelings of the families concerned. It does stress however that Mr Bettison is an

outstanding officer and that the Authority has every confidence that he will use his

considerable abilities and experience for the benefit of the Force and the people of

Merseyside as a whole.

For further information contact:




ref: m pa/new srel/statem e
80
                                                     Press Office
           W EST YORKSHIRE                           P.O. Box 9                        APPENDIX 12 .
                                                     Wakefield

           POLICE
             M ed ia a n d P u b lic R elations
                                                     WF1 3QP

                                                     Tel: 01924 292045
                                                     Fax: 01924 292108
                                                     W tbslte : ht9^/im >w .w yponoe^)ov.uW «ypallca/




                                                            W ednesday 14 October 1998

                     STATEMENT FROM NORMAN BETTISON
                        THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

I was a Chief Inspector in the Headquarters Personnel Department of South Yorkshire
Police at the time of the Hillsborough disaster. I was not involved in any of the pre­
planning or the policing of the match itself. However, I was there as a spectator,
having bought a ticket for a seat in the South Stand, adjacent to the Leppings Lane
end. Along with thousands of other spectators I saw the tragedy unfold.

I left the ground at 3.25pm and drove to the nearest police station in Hammerton Road
to put myself on duty and help in any way that I could. Many people, who left the
football ground and were looking for friends and relatives, were arriving at the police
station and I was given the task, helped by a group of other officers, of taking details
of people who had become separated at the ground. We eventually opened a boys’
club next door to the station for people to wait I went off duty at 6am the next day.
That was the extent of my involvement on the day of the disaster.

I returned to work as normal on the Monday. A few days later I was assigned with
other officers to a unit which was set up under a Chief Superintendent and two
Superintendents. The unit was tasked with looking at what had happened on the day
of the disaster, making recommendations about the policing of the remaining football
matches at Hillsborough before the end of the season and reviewing policing
arrangements for football at Hillsborough and other grounds in South Yorkshire the
following season. The unit also liaised with and passed information to West Midlands
Police who were undertaking the formal and independent police investigation into the
disaster.

After the immediate work of the unit was complete, I was given a specific role to
monitor the public inquiry and the inquest and brief the Chief Constable on progress.

No-one who was at Hillsborough on that day, myself included, can fail to have been
touched by the tragedy. I do not share the suffering of the bereaved familiies but I do
share some of the horror of that fateful day. Those who lost loved ones at
Hillsborough will have my deepest sympathy for ever.

                                          ends




                                           81                                                           TOTAL
82
                                                                             APPENDIX 1 3
                                           MERSEYSIDE
                                           POLICE
                                           AUTHORITY


K/133/98                                                        16th October 1998

  STATEMENT FROM DAVID HENSHAW, CLERK TO MERSEYSIDE

                              POLICE AUTHORITY



“In response to considerable speculation in the press regarding information made

available to Merseyside Police Authority during the recruitment process which led to

the appointment of Norman Bettison as Chief Constable, I would like to clarify the

following points.




“At the Appointments Committee Meeting on Thursday, 24th September when the

shortlisting of candidates was undertaken, the Committee had a set of papers before

them. This included details of applicants’ careers, an assessment from Her

Majesty’s Inspector of Constabulary Dan Crompton, who was also present at the

meeting, and background papers containing guidance from the Home Office on the

appointment of Chief Constables and associated paperwork.




                                                      more...




                                      83
                                         2


“At that meeting Merseyside Police Authority members of the Appointments

Committee had material in front of them which indicated Mr Bettison’s experience,

both in South Yorkshire and West Yorkshire Police Forces. This included a specific

reference to his involvement irr the team set up within South Yorkshire Police Force

following the Hillsborough disaster. This reference was included in an assessment

of Mr Bettison by Her Majesty’s Inspector of Constabulary.




“Appointments Committee members had this material from the date of the

shortlisting, almost three weeks ago, through the process of interviews, culminating

with the offer of appointment following the final interviews on Tuesday, 13th

October.



•‘Police Authority members therefore had information in front of them during the

whole of the process from shortlisting to final appointment which indicated Mr

 Bettison’s involvement in the team set up after the Hillsborough disaster.




                                                 more...




                                       84
                                        3


“The interview process and questions and answers put to and given by candidates

are private and confidential, as in normal personnel selection procedures.

Her Majesty’s Inspector of Constabulary Dan Crompton was present throughout the

whole process, as was 1, and we were not asked at any stage, by any member of the

Appointments Committee, about this aspect of Mr Bettison's experience.




“Because this appointment is so high-ranking, the focus of interview is on the senior

command experience of officers over and above the rank of Superintendent and

candidates were specifically asked to address their application to the personal

competencies required of a Chief Constable.”




                                       -Ends-

For further information contact:




ref: mpa/newsrel/stateme2




                                       85
86
                                          MERSEYSIDE
                                          POLICE
                                          AUTHORITY




The Merseyside Police Authority Appointments committee met today to consider the
recent appointment o f the Chief Constable. A full and frank discussion was held both in
open and closed session. The Merseyside Police Authority w ill meet on the 2nd
November to consider a report from the Clerk and Her Majesty’s Inspectorate o f
Constabulary Mr Dan Crompton. In the meantime arrangements will be made for the
Chief Constable Designate to meet with all members o f the Police Authority informally.




                                     87
88
                                                                              APPENDIX 1 5




DGH/SK .                                                             20 October 1998


                                                                     David Henshaw


To: The Chairperson and Members
    o f the Merseyside Police Authority



Dear Member

POST OF CHIEF CONSTABLE

I understand that there were reports in the media yesterday that Norman Bettison w ill be
taking up his appointment as Chief Constable from 16th November next. My purpose in
writing is to make absolutely clear to you that I have not issued any statement to the press
to this effect. Indeed I have not formally agreed a start date with Mr Bettison nor have I
agreed with him his detailed terms and conditions o f appointment.

I believe that the Force has released the date to the press following informal discussions
with Mr Bettison about when he would be able to take up his appointment.

Kind regards.

Yours sincerely




DAVID HENSHAW
Clerk to the Authority




                                       89
90
                                                                     appendix i g



K/134/98                                                      22nd October 1998

    STATEMENT BY COUNCILLOR GUSTAFSON REGARDING THE

                         CHIEF CONSTABLE’S APPOINTMENT


Councillor Gustafson responds following some confusion over her interview with

Radio Merseyside, broadcast this morning.




“Following a question about the Maria Eagle statement, I would like to clarify that I

knew nothing about this statement made in the House of Commons in May.




“I would also like to clarify that Merseyside Police Authority was aware of Mr

Bettison’s operational policing experience, including his experience at Hillsborough,

through an assessment by Her Majesty’s Inspector of Constabulary, made available

at the meeting on the 24th September.”




                                        -Ends-

For further information contact:




ref: mpa/newsrel/carot




                                       91
92
                                                                                APPENDIX 17


             HER MAJESTY’S INSPECTOR OF CONSTABULARY


23 October 1998


                                   PRESS RELEASE

               APPOINTMENT OF M R NORMAN BETTISON AS
               CHIEF CONSTABLE (DESIGNATE) MERSEYSIDE


After one and ft half days o f a demanding interview proccss, Mr Bcttison was sclectcd
(with the full support o f HM Inspectorate o f Constabulary) for the post o f Chief
Constable. He is a professional police officer, a man o f integrity and his “stature”
was apparent at all stages o f the selection process.

The appointments panel o f the police authority were very clear in their view of who
should be selected and HM Inspector who attended the selection process (Mr Dan
Crompton) stoutly supports their decision.

Comments have been made about Mr Bettison “playing a key role in the post
Hillsborough events’1. This is factually incorrect and his role was peripheral. The
linkage between Mr Bettison and a small enquiry team reporting to the Chief
Constable o f South Yorkshire on the Hillsborough incident was dearly set out in the
HMI's briefing paper to the Appointments Panel. That piece o f information was
available to be raised at any time within the selection process.

Seven o f the nine members agree they had this information at their disposal.

The attempt to transfer the focus from “who was best qualified for the job” to the
shoulders o f others (on the basis o f inadequate information) does nobody any credit.

The job o f C hief Constable, Merseyside Police, carried with it many onerous
responsibilities - operational, managerial and inter-agency co-operation. The
candidates for this post were robustly tested in these areas. The considerations o f thtf
Appointments Panel were properly focused, very relative and they came to a clear
corporate decision.


HMCIC DAVID O'DOW D

NOTES FOR EDITORS:
Further media enquiries should be directed on the number above.




                                              93
94
■s


                                                                                   APPENDIX 1 8




      DGH/GK                                                              16 October 1998


                                                                          David Henshaw




     All Members o f the Police Authority




     You will have seen the press coverage regarding the appointment o f Mr Norman Bettison as
     Chief Constable by the Appointments Committee this week. I have circulated the press
     statement that was put out by the Authority as a result o f all the enquiries, together with a
     statement put out by Mr Bettison him self However, having consulted the Chair I thought it
     would be appropriate to write to you giving you some further background information.

     The Appointments Committee had at its shortlisting meeting written material which related
     to both Mr Bettisons application form and also written commentary’s from Her Majesty’s
     Inspector, Mr Dan Crompton, who specifically referred to Mr Bettison’s involvement in the
     unit which was set up by the then Chief Constable o f South Yorkshire following the
     Hillsborough Disaster. As Mr Bettison’s statement makes clear he was not involved in any
     way in the pre-planning or policing o f the actual match.

      Mr Bettison’s application focused on his senior command experience and its particular
      relevance to the competencies that the Police Authority had indicated they were looking for
      in their appointment o f a new Chief Constable for Merseyside, and as such he dealt with his
      experience gained at a Superintendent rank level and above. The Authority in its guidance
      on completing the applications forms had specifically directed candidates to demonstrate the
     'jextent to which they met the competencies required at a senior command level. Nonetheless
      ^he Authority was aware at the shortlisting stage onwards o f Mr Bettison’s involvement
      directly through the commentary provided by the HML



                                               95
2



So far as I am aware the issue o f M r Bettison’s involvement in this post disaster team was
not raised at any stage in either the panel interviews, formal interview s or indeed in all
exchanges between candidates and Members o f the Appointments Com m ittee. Indeed if it
had been raised both the HMI and m yself have since agreed that we w ould have probably
given the advice that involvement in such a team at a relatively low level rank w as not on its
own a material consideration to be taken into account by the A ppointm ents Committee.
However, one can’t answer this question because it would have to be seen in the context
within which any such question was raised.

The HM Fs commentary was with all the papers Members had from the date o f shortlisting
up to the final appointment, a period o f almost three weeks. The reference m ay have been
something that had been read and discarded or indeed forgotten, but the m aterial fact is that
the M erseyside Police Authority as a body had the information, particularly through the
written commentary provided by the HMI, that M r Bettison had had this involvem ent in the
post disaster team.

The decision by the Appointments Committee was unanimous and indeed the C hair has
authorised m e to say that as Mr Bettison was the candidate w ho cam e top in everybody’s
marking on the final day, he was demonstrably the best candidate.

I hope the above is helpful but if you have any further queries please do not hesitate to
contact me.

Kind regards




DAVID HENSHAW
Clerk to the Authority




                                        96
M E R SE YSID E PO LICE                              Form 1(U                                   APPENDIX 19

Ref:            104                                                      F ile N o :

Dept:           O ccu p a tio n a l H ea lth U nit                       S ta tio n :   M a th er A ve n u e

F rom :         D r I AH M ED . O H P h ysicia n                         E x t:         8755

To:                                    M PA                             D a te:         19 /1 0 /9 8




SU B JE C T :                 M R N G B E T T IS O N - C H IE F C O N S T A B L E

The above named gentleman was seen in the Occupational Health Unit on 14.10.98. He is
medicallyf it to take up the post o f ChiefConstable.




D r I AHM ED
Occupational H ealth Physician
98
                                                                           APPENDIX 2 0




M r M Hodson                                                 BY FAX
HOME OFFICE
Police Personnel and Training Unit
50 Queen A nne’s Gate
London
SW 1H 9A T                                                   1 September 1998




Dear M r H odson

Further to your telephone conversation with                      earlier today, I am now
able to forward the details o f the seven applications received by Friday 28 August
1998. I can confirm that no further applications have been received today.
                                                                               s

I would be grateful if you could put the applications forward for approval by the
Secretary o f State. The shortlisting meeting will be held on Thursday 24 September
1998.


Yours sincerely




Assistant Personnel Officer




                                           99
M ER SEYSIDE POLICE - C H IEF CONSTABLE A PPLIC A N TS




           NAME                 FORCE                 RANK
 1   NORM AN BETTISON      WEST YORKSHIRE       ASSISTANT CHIEF
                                                CONSTABLE .

 2   ROBERT DAVIES         THAMES VALLEY        ASSISTANT CHIEF
                                                CONSTABLE AND
                                                ASSISTANT CHIEF
                                                CONSTABLE
                                                (DESIGNATE)

 3   JOHN HAMILTON         FIFE                 CHIEF CONSTABLE

 4    IAN HOLDING          CHESHIRE             DEPUTY CHIEF
                                                CONSTABLE

 5    PAUL KERNAGHAN       NORTH YORKSHIRE      ASSISTANT CHIEF
                                                CONSTABLE
                                                (DESIGNATE)'

 6    W ILLIAM NELSON      HAMPSHIRE            DEPUTY CHIEF
                                                CONSTABLE

 7    ROBERT TURNBULL      CLEVELAND            DEPUTY CHIEF
                                                CONSTABLE




                                  100
           H     ome          O f f ic e
           Police Personnel and Training U nit
           50 Q ueen A nne's Gate, London SW1H 9AT
           Switchboard: 0171 273 4000 Fax: 2501 Direct Line: 0171 273 3242

                                                                                     O u r reference:
 Ms^_________
Merseyside Police A u th o rity
                                                                                     Y o u r reference:
P O Box 21
M unicipal Buildings
                                                                                     D ate:                £2 September 1998
A rchw ay Road
                                                                            -    -   U T P /^ S D E P T,
H u y to n , Knowsley                                                                         v-ENT)
Merseyside L36 9Y U                                                 -1   ‘‘~ s      V 'J . O
                                                                                SEP 1998


D ear Ms

A P P O IN T M E N T O F C H IE F C O N ST A B L E

W ith reference to y o u r letter of 1 September, I am pleased to confirm that the Secretary o f State is
prepared to approve any one o f the seven candidates.

I should be grateful, if in due course, you would let me know the name of the successful candidate
together w ith the com m encem ent date of the appointm ent.

I should also be grateful if you w ould send me a record of the name, num ber, gender, race and age of
(1) people applying for each chief officer post, (2) of those shortlisted and (3) of those selected as&
requested in H om e Office C ircular 52/96, using the enclosed form.




                                                      Yours sincerely




                                               101
G:\APPROV2.DOC
                                                                                 TS




                                                                                      1998
           HOME OFFICE

           50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
           Direct Line 0171 273 3242 Fax 2501



Mrs                                                          Y our referen ce:
Merseyside Police Authority
PO B ox 21                                                   O u r referen ce:
Municipal Buildings
Archway Road                                                 D a te:                   22 October 1998
Huyton, Knowsley
Merseyside
L36 9YU


Dear Mrs

APPOINTM ENT OF CHIEF CONSTABLE

Thank you for your letter o f 19 October about the appointment o f a new C hief Constable for
M erseyside Police.

I am pleased to convey the Secretary o f State’s formal approval to the appointment o f
M r Norman Bettison, at present an A ssistant C hief Constable w ith W est Yorkshire.

I should be grateful if you would let m e know when M r B ettison’s commencement date is in
due course.




                                                     Yours sincerely




                                                     Police Personnel and Training Unit




                                           102
G:\OldFiles\APROVMiN.DOC
                                                                                                    APPENDR 2
                                                 M ersey sid e P olice
                                                                                        C hief Constable’s
                                                                                        Office
                                                                                        P.O. Box 59       :
                                                                                        LIVERPOOL
                                                                                        L69 1JD

                                                                                        Teir   0151 777 8010
                                                              h 2 1 OCT 1398
                                                                                        Fax:   0151 777 8020
  Paul A cres Q.P.M.,
  Acting C hief Constable
                                                             I M p a

  Our Ref:                      CC/PL                                                   26* October 1998
  Your Ref:                     GAC/LH




                                              Disclosure o f Confidential Document to
                                                          Liverpool Echo

 Thank you for your letter o f 21st October 1998.

 I understand that the H.M .I.C. assessment you refer to was (understandably) not made
 available to m em bers o f the force but was distributed to relevant members o f the Police
 Authority by A uthority Staff.

 Any breach o f confidentiality would not, I believe, entail criminal conduct and in those
 circumstances, m y immediate view is that a police enquiry would be inappropriate.

 Perhaps you w ould contact m e if we need to discuss any aspect o f the issue further.




D. G. Henshaw Esq.,
ClerkSto the A uthority
M erseyside Police Authority
M ercury Court

H:\CW tf O xaubfe-j ° « ^ O W C o « ^ W L « TO\CWU4vwi)ool«hoM1<>9».J«o




                                                                          103
                                                             21 O ctober 1998




Mr. P. Acres,
Acting C hief Constable,
Merseyside Police,
Police Headquarters,
Canning Place,
Liverpool,
L69 1JD.




Dear Mr Acres,

Disclosure of C onfidential D ocum ent to Liverpool Echo

I am writing to ask for your assistance on behalf o f the Appointments Committee. The
Appointments Committee at their meeting on 19th October 1998, expressed concern about
the disclosure o f confidential information (HMIC assessment relating to M r Bettison) to
the Liverpool Echo.

As you will be aware, an extract from this assessment appeared on the front page o f the
late edition o f the Liverpool Echo on Friday 16th October 1998.

The Chairperson and Appointments Committee have asked that M erseyside Police
conduct an investigation into this leak in view o f the seriousness o f the matter.

I would be grateful if you could keep me advised in relation to this matter.

Yours sincerely,




D. G. Henshaw
Clerk to the Authority




Gc/ltrs/acres2

                                       104
