                                                                                                                              MERSEYSIDE
                                                                                                                              POLICE
David G. Henshaw   B.A.,   m .s o c .s c L ,   F.i.Mgt., C lerk to th e A u th o rity                                         AUTHORITY
                                                                                        P,       O .       B O X          1 0 1 A       W E S T       H O U S E

                                                                                        M E R C U R Y               C O U R T     T I T H E B A R N    STREET

                                                                                        L    I   V     E   R    P    O    O   L           L   6   9     2   N   U

                                                                                        TEL:     0151-236                4748      FAX:    0151-236         4527



OU R REF:      AB                                                                       DATE:              17   September, 1998
Y O U R REF:                                                                            W H E N T EL EP H ON IN G PLEASE C O N T A C T :


                                                                                                           Mr                         Ext.




        TO:    The Chairperson and Members
               of the Appointments Committee


                                                            PT.V.ASE         NOTE TIME OF MEETING


        Dear Sir/Madam

        A meeting of the Appointments Committee will be held on Thursday 24th Septem ber
        1998 in the Meeting Room, 3rd Floor, Mercury Court, Tithebarn Street, Liverpool
        commencing at 5.00 p.m .

        Members will be aware that the Home Office Guidelines on Selection Procedures for Chief
        Officer Appointments have been previously circulated. Should an additional copy be required,
        please do not hesitate to contact       1 Head of Legal and Administration on Extension
        2449.

        An agenda for the meeting is enclosed.

        Yours faithfully




        D G Henshaw
        Clerk to the Authority
M EM BERSHIP OF THE APPOINTMENTS COM M ITTEE


ELECTED MEMBERS

Councillor Ms C Gustafson (Chairperson)
Councillor D Martin
Councillor F. Prendergast
Councillor Lady Doreen Jones
Councillor Ms K Wood

MAGISTRATES

Mr M J Amos JP
Mr K Jackson JP

INDEPENDENT

Mr P Coogan
Mr N. Langley
                          MERSEYSIDE POLICE AUTHORITY

               APPOINTM ENTS COM M ITTEE - 24th SEPTEM BER 1998


                                        AGENDA


                                        PART ONE


Apologies

1.       M inutes

         To receive as a correct record the minutes of the meeting of the Committee held
         the 10th August 1998.                               (Report No 1, Page 1)


2.       Anv O ther Item(s) W hich The Chairperson Deems To Be O f An Urgent
         Nature.




comms/agnds/appt/200798
                                         PART TWO


 Under Section 100A(4) o f the Local Government A ct 1972, the public may be excluded
from the meeting fo r the follow ing items o f business on the grounds that they involve the
 likely disclosure o f exempt information as defined in the undermentioned paragraphs) o f
 Part 1 o f Schedule 12A to the Act:-

                                                                                     Exempt
                                                                                     under
                                                                                     Para(s)

3.       Annlications for the Post of Chief Constable - Shortlisting
                                                                                 \

          Applications in respect of the post of Chief Constable are attached,
          together with the Job Description, Person Specification, Personal
          Competences, the Shortlisting Schedules prepared by the Clerk and
          blank copies for Members’ personal use.
                                                        (Report No 3, Page 3)           1

4.       Any Other Item(s) Which The Chairperson Deems To
         Be Of An Urgent Nature.




 comms/agnds/appt/200798
                     MERSEYSIDE POLICE AUTHORITY


                        APPOINTMENTS COMMITTEE


At a meeting o f the Appointments Committee held on Monday 10th August 1998 in
the Meeting Room, 3rd Floor, West House, Mercury Court, Liverpool, the following
Members were present:-

                                 Elected

                                 Ms. C. Gustafson (Chairperson to the Committee)
                                 D. Martin
                                 F. Prendergast
                                 Lady Doreen Jones

                                 Magistrate

                                 Mr. M. J. Amos J.P.
                                 Mr. K. Jackson J.P.

                                  Independent

                                  Mr N. Langley


       Apologies

       Apologies for absence were received on behalf o f Councillor Mrs. K. Wood
       and Mr P. Coogan.

 8     Minutes

        The minutes o f the meeting of the Committee held on the 20th July 1998 were
        received as a correct record and signed by the Chairperson.

 9     Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985

        RESOLVED That under the provisions of Section 100 A (4) of the Local
        Government Act 1972, the public be excluded from the meeting for the
        following item o f business on the grounds that it involves the likely disclosure
        o f exempt information as defined in Paragraph 1 of Part 1 of Schedule 12A to
        the Act.

 10    Industrial Tribunal Proceedings: Mr J Willis -v- M. P. A.

        The Committee considered the report of the Clerk on the findings of the
        Industrial Tribunal in the case of Mr J. Willis -v- Merseyside Police Authority.


 comms/appts/mins/100898
                                                                           I
                        Applications for Chief Constable

                                                             NOT FOB PUBUCAflON tff
                                  Shortlisting               VIRTUE OF PARAGRAPHS)
                                                                       OF PART I OF
                                                              SCHEDULE 1ZA OF THE
                                                               LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Page                         5    Job Description                   ACT 1972

Page                         7    Person Specification and
                                  Personal Competences

Page                        13    List of Applicants

                                  Applicants

Page                        15    Bettison N G

Page                        27    Davies R

Page                        43    Hamilton J.P

Page                        57    Holding I

Page                        69    Kernaghan P R

Page                        83    Nelson W G

Page                        97    Turnbull R S

Page                        111   Shortlisting Schedule

Page                        143   Blank matrices to assist with Members’
                                  own assessment of candidates




cdential/gc/notes/short 1
                                       3
4
                                         JOB DESCRIPTION


 Post Title                   :   Chief Constable

 Accountable to               :   The Police Authority for Merseyside Police Force
                                  as defined within the Police Act 1996

 Responsible fpr          :        [i]     The direction and control o f the Merseyside Police
                                           Force in accordance with the Police Act 1996, in
                                           order to provide Merseyside with an effective and
                                           efficient police service.

                                  [ii]    The fulfilment o f all statutory and legal obligations
                                          o f the office o f Chief Constable.




Aims of the Job:

1.      To work with the Police Authority and the Force to set the strategic direction of
        policing in Merseyside.

2.      To act as the high profile leader o f the Force by communicating a consistent vision
        o f what must be achieved.

3.     To lead the chief officers o f the Force in ensuring the performance o f the Force by:

               reading and influencing the external and internal environments affecting the
               Force;

               the development and implementation o f strategies to further the policing of
               Merseyside. In achieving this you will collectively have to gain support for
               the Force;

               the process o f Force planning, implementation o f plans and the control of
               the planning process; and

               evaluating and improving performance.

4.     To create and implement a planning framework which has due regard to the local
       policing plan issued by the Police Authority.

5.     To ensure that all o f the resources o f the Force are used in a planned way so that
       effectiveness and efficiency result.

6.     to harness the full potential o f staff towards the aims o f the Force by creating an
        atmosphere in which people are enabled to give of their best.



RECRUITMENT/CE/CCJD/PGD                          5
7.     To represent the image and interests o f the Force both at a local and national level.

8.     To ensure that the Force’s organisation develops to meet the changing demands of
       policing.

9.     To actively encourage and support the involvement o f other agencies and the
       public at large to work with the Force to fulfil the aims o f the policing plan.

10.    To ensure the provision o f professional advice to the Police Authority so that its
       members are able to fulfil their functions.




 RECRUITMENT/CE/CCJD/PGD                        6
                           MERSEYSIDE POLICE AUTHORITY

                                CHIEF CONSTABLE



PERSON SPECIFICATION

Personal Competences


Personal competences are the key skills used by effective senior managers to make
decisions and achieve results. The personal competences most likely to lead to effective
performance are specified in each element o f the Senior Management Standards.

Effective senior managers in any organisation need to be able to draw on a repertoire o f
nine personal competences. These are listed along with the level required for the post o f
Chief Constable:

       judgement                     [Very High]
       self confidence               [Very High]
        strategic perspective        [Very High]
        achievement focus            [Very High]
        communication                [Very High]
       building teams                [Very High]
        influencing others           [Very High]
        leadership                   [Very High]
        vision                       [Very High]


Each o f these competences can be observed through the key behaviours demonstrated by
senior managers, as outlined in the following 5 pages.




 RECRUITMENT/CE/CCTO/PGD
                                          7
Judgement

Kev behaviours

An effective senior manager

       identifies the most important issues in a complex situation
       identifies im p lic a t io n s , consequences or causal relationships in a situation
       uses a range o f ideas to explain the actions, needs and motives o f others
       focuses on facts, problems and solutions when handling an emotional situation
       uses instinct and intuition to assess situations and people
       identifies new patterns and interprets events in new ways

Description
                                                                                       I
This competence concerns using a range o f skills to evaluate situations and people, and to
develop plans and approaches for action.

Effective managers use analytical and logical approaches to understand people and events
and to establish priorities and connections. They also use creative and intuitive approaches
to assess situations and problems and to produce solutions.

Effective managers may demonstrate different profiles within this competence - some being
more analytical and logical, others more creative and intuitive - or they may be strong in all
aspects.

 Self Confidence

Kev behaviours

 An effective senior manager

           acts in an assured and unhesitating manner when faced with a challenge
           takes the leading role in initiating action and making decisions
           m ain tain s beliefs, commitment and effort in spite o f set-backs or opposition


 Description

 This competence is about acting with self assurance, and displaying drive and initiative,
 even in difficult situations.

 Managers with this competence are likely to have faith in their o w n judgement, believe they
 will succeed in their endeavours, and persist in this belief even though they may encounter
 initial difficulties or the opposition o f others.

  Self confident managers will usually feel comfortable about taking the initiative in making
  decisions and about taking an independent course o f action when they feel it is appropriate.




  RECRUTTMENT/CE/CCJD/PGD
                                                   8
Determination to succeed, arising out o f self-belief, is also an aspect o f this competence.
Managers with a high degree o f this competence will be better able to work under pressure
and cope with stress. They will be able to maintain their drive and energy, and to present
themselves in a wide range o f situations as positive and self assured.

Strategic Perspective

Kev behaviours

An effective senior manager

       works towards a vision o f the future based on a strategic perspective
       acts with good understanding o f how different parts, needs or functions o f the
       organisation and its environment fit together
       clearly relates goals and actions to the strategic aims o f the business '
       takes opportunities when they arise to achieve longer term aims or needs.

Description

This competence concerns the manager being able to place immediate goals and activities in
a strategic context. This involves seeing how one area o f activity is affected by and affects
other parts o f the organisation or its environment.

The competence involves taking a longer term perspective, considering what will happen
several years hence, and establishing a vision o f the future.

An important part o f the competence lies in managers setting out their vision o f the future
to others in such a way as to gain acceptance and support.


Achievement Focus

Kev behaviours

An effective senior manager

        sets high quality goals that are demanding o f self and others
        sets objectives and priorities in uncertain and complex situations
        tackles problems or takes advantage o f opportunities as they arise
        calculates risks and takes decisive action
        focuses personal attention on specific details that are critical to the success o f a key
        event

Description

Managers with this competence are geared towards achieving results and they will set
ambitious goals and objectives for themselves and others. They will also deal with
problems as they arise, and take advantage o f any emerging opportunities. Recognising
and evaluating the risks that may lie ahead, and then taking firm action, is an aspect o f this
competence.

RECRUTTMENT/CE/CCJD/PGD
Com m unication

Kev behaviours

An effective senior manager

       conveys difficult ideas and problems in a way that aids understanding
       recognises and responds to the needs and feelings o f others

Description

This competence concerns communicating clearly with others. It may be used in a wide
range o f circumstances, from formal presentations to day-to-day meetings. A feature of
managers with this competence is that they carefully consider what message they wish to
communicate and then decide how best to do so. This may involve thorough planning o f a
presentation, the use o f different media to reinforce a message, or even the establishment of
systems to ensure good communication within the department or organisation.

Effective managers use this competence to achieve results. They communicate to inform,
instruct, persuade and encourage others to communicate with them. Managers who are
particularly competent in this area exhibit conviction and belief in what they have to say,
which is closely linked to the self confidence competence.

Building Teams

Kev behaviours

An effective senior manager

        keeps others informed about plans and progress
        builds a desire to work together and builds co-operation within a team
        builds ownership o f controversial decisions by involving others in the decision­
        making process
        evaluates people’s capabilities to do the job and take action

 Description

 This competence concerns working effectively with others at the same level or a more
 junior level within the organisation. The manager may use the key behaviours in the
 context o f a loose team or a coalition o f peers from other parts o f the organisation and/or
  in the context o f an immediate team o f direct reports.

 The first two behaviours are about encouraging co-operative working. Depending on the
 circumstances, this may be achieved either formally or informally, and the team may be
 well-defined and well-established or a loose group o f senior managers who do not
 necessarily see themselves as a “team”.

 The third behaviour is an aspect o f empowerment, where the senior manager involves
 others in the process o f making difficult decisions, and takes time to enable others to
 explore the problem and arrive at, or contribute towards, solutions.

  RECRUITMENT/CE/CC JD/PGD                     1 0
The final behaviour is about evaluating the capabilities o f the people who report to the
senior manager.


Influencing Others

Kev behaviours

An effective senior manager

        uses a variety o f means to influence others
        creates and prepares strategies for influencing others
        understands the culture o f the organisation and acts to work within it or influence it
        develops and uses networks to trade information, support or other resources
                                                                                  I
Description

This competence concerns the manager being able to persuade others to provide support
and other resources. It is a competence that is used in dealing with peers and other
colleagues, more senior managers, people outside the organisation - including customers
and suppliers - and others within the organisation who may be in more junior positions.

Managers with this competence are likely to think ahead to situations where they envisage
the need to influence others, and to plan their approach, taking into account the likely
reactions o f other parties.


Leadership

Kev behaviours

An effective senior manager

         shows clarity o f thought processes
         leads by example
         keeps a firm grip on macro issues whilst allowing other managers to develop and
         grow
         is forward looking in terms o f organisation structure, Force needs and performance
         recognises and encourages individual and collective effort and the value of
         ‘partnerships’

Description

 Is visible, approachable and earns respect, takes the initiative in decision making and sets
 objectives and priorities clearly; maintains a quality outcome and acts decisively having
 assessed the risks.




 RECRUITMENT/CE/CCJD/PGD                  11
                                             -5-

Vision

Kev behaviours

An effective senior manager

         does not settle for the ‘here’ and ‘now’
         recognises the value o f environmental scanning
         ensures that strategy, policies and practices are aimed at the longer term
         investment in police/public service —not ‘short-termism’
         recognises that social trends will impact on decision making i.e., external police
         service delivery
         invests in the right people, particularly at management level              ,

Description

Creates and secures commitment to a clear vision and provides a balanced overview o f
complex situations; is able to form coherent and broadly based concepts and plans to
further the long-term aims o f the organisation.




  RECRUITMENT/CE/CCJD/PGD                      12
                      CHIEF CONSTABLE APPLICANTS




            NAME                    FORCE              RANK



    NORMAN BETTISON          WEST YORKSHIRE   ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE
1

                                              ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE
    ROBERT DAVIES            THAMES VALLEY    AND ASSISTANT CHIEF
2
                                              CONSTABLE [DESIGNATE]


    JOHN HAMILTON            FIFE             CHIEF CONSTABLE
3


    IAN HOLDING              CHESHIRE         DEPUTY CHIEF CONSTABLE
4


    PAUL KERNAGHAN           NORTH            ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE
5
                             YORKSHIRE        [DESIGNATE]


    WILLIAM NELSON           HAMPSHIRE        DEPUTY CHIEF CONSTABLE
6



    ROBERT TURNBULL          CLEVELAND        DEPUTY CHIEF CONSTABLE
7




    PERSTRAT/MPA/CCOCT/PGD

                                    13
     \




14
                                                                            Ni Q *^e(±isc^

                                                                         PO Box 9
         WEST YORKSHIRE                                                  Laburnum Road


         POLICE    Force Headquarters
                                                                         Wakefield
                                                                         WF1 3QP
                                                                         Tel: (01924)292113
                                                                         Fax: (01924) 292180



Your ref. HOP[SS]GC/HES
 Our ref. NGB/RB

12 August 1998



Mr David G Henshaw, B.A., M.Soc.Sci., F.I.Mgt
Clerk to Merseyside Police Authority
PO Box 101 A, West House
Mercury Court
Tithebarn Street
Liverpool L69 2NU




Application for the Post o f Chief Constable - Merseyside Police

Thank you for the comprehensive Candidate Information Pack which was sent to me
earlier this week. I found it very helpful. I have completed the application form and
the equal opportunities monitoring form, and these are enclosed.

I have noted the relevant dates for shortlisting and interview, and can confirm that I
am available on those dates. I also notice your offer of informal discussions about
the post, and I should like to consider that offer after the shortlisting procedure.




                                               15
                             Assistant Chief Constable Norman Bettison
                                    Divisional Operations (West)
16
                                                                                                                     MERSEYSIDE
                                                                                                                     POLICE
D avid G. H enshaw b.a., M.soc.sci.. F.i.Mgt.. C lerk to th e A u th o rity
                                                                                                                     AUTHORITY
                                                                               P .       O .     B O X          I 0    I   A     W E S T       H O U S E

                                                                               M E R C U R Y             C O U R T         T I T H E B A R N    STREET

                                                                               L     I   V   E   R   P    O    O   L               L   6   9     2 N U

                                                                               TEL:      0151-236             4 748         FAX:    0151-236       4527



OUR REF:        HOP[SS]GC/JHES                                                 DATE:             3 1 st j u ly 1 9 9 8

YOUR REF:                                                                      W H E N T E L EP H ON I N G PLEASE C O N T A C T :


                                                                      Gaynor Coldrick, Head o f Personnel - 0151 443 3584



                                                                APPLICATION FORM

                                                 Application for the Post of C hief Constable

                Your careful completion of this form will assist the Authority in giving full consideration
                to your application. All information will be treated in strict confidence.

                Please complete the form in typescript to facilitate photocopying and return under
                confidential cover to:

                The Clerk to the Authority, Merseyside Police Authority, PO Box 101 A, West House,
                Mercury Court, Tithebam Street, Liverpool L69 2NU

                1.         PERSONAL DETAILS

                Surname                                                              Forename[s]
                                 BETTISON                                                                      NORMAN GEORGE
                Address

                                 HUDDERSFIELD


                Postcode         HD5    8Xp


                Home Tel. No                                                         Business Tel. No.
                                                                                                                           01924 292113
                Are you related to a Member o f the Merseyside Police Authority, or a serving police
                officer or a member of the Merseyside Police Support Staff?

                                                                                                                               X ^ S /N O
                If yes, please give details


                G/MPA/ACC/MPAAPPI714.11,97/JHes



                                                                              17
                                                                       K)       C\
                                                                                     ■* *




2.      EDUCATION


Secondary School                      From     To     Numbers o f qualifications
                                                      with dates and grades
                                                      [subjects not required]
SO UTH G RO VE SCHOOL                   1967   1972        O’ Levels
ROTHERHAM                                                  :SEs (I




College/University/Correspondence     From     To     Qualifications gained with
Course [state if full or part time]                   dates and grades



U N IVER SITY OF OXFORD                 1983   1986          BA Degree
Q UEENS COLLEGE                                         Psychology & Philosophy
Full Tim e                                              Later converted to MA


HALLAM U N IVER SITY                    1988   1991     Master of Business
BUSINESS SCHOOL                                         Administration Degree
Part Tim e




G/MPA/ACC/MPAAPPL/14.11.97/JHes

                                        18
                                                                             fO   - Q .<Se<ctvsc-n




 3       TRAINING


 Courses attended [with dates and any qualifications obtained]


 Listed below are the principal, and most relevant, training courses:


  1996      Top Management Programme, with the Cabinet Office

 1995       Management of Disaster and Civil Emergency Course, Bramshill

 1992       Strategic Command Course, Bramshill

 1991       Intermediate Command Course, Bramshill




Name and type o f membership o f professional bodies [with dates admitted]




G/MPA/ACC/MPAAPPL/14.11.97/JHes


                                              19
                                                                   fv> ~Q . 3 e f c f A o-v



4.       PRESENT EMPLOYMENT


Force name and address                        Date commenced   1   May 1 9 9 3

     W est Yorkshire Police
     PO Box 9
                                              Current salary
     Laburnum Road
     W AKEFIELD
     W F1 3QP




Position held with brief outline o f duties


ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE (DIVISIONAL OPERATIONS)




G/MPA/ACC/MPAAPPL/l 4.11.97/JHes


                                         20
5.    DETAILS OF PREVIOUS EMPLOYMENT [MOST RECENT FIRST]
      INCLUDING POLICE SERVICE

Employer:
             W est Yorkshire Police

Address:
             PO Box 9
             Laburnum Road
             W AKEFIELD
Post Code:   W R 3Q p                                 Tel. No:
                                                                  01924 292113

Job Title,        several portfolios, including ACC - Management & Information Support, ACC
             Personnel and ACC Operations Support


Date Appointed: ^ Ma y   1993                          Salary:
                                                                                 t

Reason for Leaving:




Employer:
             South Yorkshire Police


Address:
             Snig Hill
             SHEFFIELD


Post Code:                                           Tel. No:     0114 220 2020
             S3 8 LY

Job Title:
             Chief Superintendent
             Corporate Development

Date Appointed:        Apri| -| 9 9 2 . May 1993      Salary:


Reason for Leaving:
                       Promotion




G/MPA/ACC/MPAAPPL/14.11.97/JHes


                                               21
                                                                                     Kb -G \CSeHri sen
                                                                                          *     *   X




5.   DETAILS OF PREVIOUS EMPLOYMENT [CONT] INCLUDING POLICE
     SERVICE

Employer.    g 0(J^ Yorkshire Police


Address:     g njg Hj„
             SHEFFIELD


PostCode:    S3   8 LY                                    Tel. No:   0114 220 2020

Job Title:
             Superintendent
             Divisional Commander

                                                                                 \
Date Appointed:                                            Salary:
                         January 1991 - April 1992

Reason for Leaving:

                         Promotion




Employer:    South Yorkshire Police


Address:      Snig Hill
              SHEFFIELD


Post Code:    S3 8 LY                                     Tel. No:   0114 220 2020

Job Title:    Superintendent
              Traffic Division


Date Appointed:          October 1989 * January 1991       Salary:


Reason for Leaving:
                          Development




G/MPA/ACC/MPAAPPL/14.11.97/JHes



                                                     22
6.      RELEVANT EXPERIENCE/INFORMATION



Please include details o f previous experience with particular reference to its relevance to
the post being applied for.
I have directly addressed the nine competences in the person specification with examples of
recent, relevant experience.

JUDGEMENT

The experience of having made successful decisions in the past gives me an added self
assurance when resolving current, difficult, situations. My record is consistent. I have the ability
to set issues in a wide context and thereby reach sound conclusions. My decisions to defend
two high profile Industrial Tribunal cases, giving lengthy evidence, personally, on Force policies
and culture, were entirely vindicated by the results. In between these cases, I authorised a
settlement of £5,000 in a less contentious case to reduce the potential for unnecessary and
negative publicity.

 I am particularly satisfied with my track record in assessing and selecting staff. I have been
 personally involved in all promotions of Chief Inspectors and Superintendents for the last five
 years. The quality of our managers is reflected in the changed culture and improved
 performance of the Force, and in the numbers of recent Strategic Command Course graduates.

 SELF CONFIDENCE

 I enjoy seeing my ideas and decisions turned into successful outcomes. The root of self
 confidence lies in an optimistic outlook and the preparedness to take the initiative. I am strong
 in both of these areas.

 I have the proven ability to bring order out of chaos, tested to the full as Gold Commander
 following the Leeds bombing last year. Later I led the Yorkshire side of the investigation which
 was linked with the Aintree incident. The frequent planned and spontaneous presentations that I
 deliver on behalf of the Force demand a different kind of confidence but no matter what the
 pressure, I present myself as positive and self assured.

 STRATEGIC PERSPECTIVE

 I have held every portfolio at ACPO rank. This has enabled m e to develop a strategic view of
 policing on a broad canvas.

 I have made a significant contribution to the strategic development of two large metropolitan
 police forces, where my skills have been tested. I have learned, in the process, that the strategy
 at the top of an organisation must be consistent, pursued energetically, and owned by the whole
 organisation, in order to bring about effective change. Without action and commitment,
 strategies are mere words.

 ACHIEVEMENT FOCUS

 I have developed, in my current post, the process of performance review. At the beginning of
 the planning year I take the Police Authority Policing Plan and meet with each of my
 Superintendents, and their management teams, at their Division to agree local objectives,
 performance targets and devolved financial plans. I ensure that the aggregated targets meet
 Police Authority and community expectations. I then visit Commanders each quarter to review
 the performance and financial position, offering advice, support and, above all, encouragement.
 The results are outstanding.


G/MPA/ACC/MPAAPPL/14. U .97/JHes



                                               23
6.         RELEVANT EXPERIENCE/INFORMATION [Continuation sheet]


 There are three key elements to this approach. Firstly, I select the right managers who share an
 achievement focus; secondly, I empower them through a devolved regime; thirdly, I am clear
 about what is required and show an interest in the outcomes. In such an environment, constant
 improvement and success becomes the norm.

 Further evidence of my achievement focus is drawn from my tim e as ACC responsible for
 Complaints and Discipline, I had a determination that public complaints of incivility and
 confrontational assault could be reduced. Applying the principles above, particularly monitoring
 outcomes, has led to a 62% reduction in public complaints in these areas. W hat gets led, gets
 managed.

 COMMUNICATION

 Police forces are particularly difficult organisations in which to communicate successfully owing
 to the many widespread sites of operation and shift working. I have an open approach. I give
 people early indication of issues, consult widely and provide whatever information an individual
 has a right to know.

 Success lies in considering what another person or body will need to know, or will want to have a
 say in. I work to m eet those needs. A key group that I always consider in this way is the Police
 Authority, who want early information and the opportunity to contribute. I believe that a
 consistent approach, along these lines, is crucial to a successful partnership.

 My written and verbal skills will be assessed in the competition. I am experienced in using a
 variety of media to get my message across. Events have ranged from a keynote presentation to
 the ACPO/APA Summer Conference last year on the subject of drugs strategies, to frequent
 appearances on behalf of the Force, and occasionally the Service, in television and radio
 interviews.

 BUILDING TEAMS

 I realise how effectiveness can be achieved through teamwork and maximise every opportunity.
 Inside the organisation I have demonstrated this in many ways. In my previous portfolio area, I
 combined the Force Intelligence function with the HQ Squads, getting rid of the unhelpful
 demarcations between the different groups. There is now a virtuous cycle of intelligence driven,
 targeted operations which deliver better intelligence, with excellent results.

  More recently, I was dissatisfied with the quality of service provided to the public through our
  area control rooms. I have now integrated the whole call handling process across switchboard,
  control room and divisions with significant and positive impact on the public attitude surveys.

  W herever I have worked, I have been able to build integrated and motivated teams, creating a
  shared focus and joint endeavour.

  Beyond the Force, the Police Authority are key members of the policing team. Co-operation,
  openness and shared information, achieves results. The construction of the annual policing plan
  must be a joint enterprise, and I am committed to working in this way.

     Externally, the teamwork that is possible in true partnership with other agencies has to be
     maximised. My current work with Local Authorities in establishing the Responsible Authorities,
     under the Crime and Disorder Act, is rewarding and promises great benefits for the communities
  we jointly serve.




G/MP A/ACC/MPAAPPL/l 4. U ,97/JHes



                                              24
 6.        RELEVANT EXPERIENCE/INFORMATION [Continuation sheet]




  INFLUENCING OTHERS

  I have developed my negotiating skills over many years. Building on a solid foundation of trust
  and open communication, I believe that successful negotiation is about understanding where the
  other person is ‘coming from’ and respecting their position. It is often necessary to look for a
  means of meeting anothers needs whilst pursuing, in a determined way, the desired goals. An
  example of this approach is in the fundamental change that I brought about in the area of ill-
  health retirements. On taking over the personnel portfolio, ill-health retirements accounted for
  82% of all leavers (today it is 24% ). I identified quickly that it was often a motivational issue
  rather than a health issue. I saw every individual, personally, as soon as a senior manager had
  a hint of an ill-health retirement ‘plan’. My focus was on reducing the numbers leaving the
  organisation, but the success was due, firstly, to influencing the individuals to consider the
  benefits of a post which matched their state of health; secondly, in convincing the Police
  Federation of not only the organisational, but also the personal benefits in retaining experienced
  officers; and, ultimately, raising the consciousness of the whole organisation that ill-health
  retirement was no longer a matter of personal choice. The cultural change that I achieved still
  holds good today.

  LEADERSHIP

  My leadership skills have been regularly tested in the operational environment. I was Gold
  Level Commander throughout the Bradford riots in 1995, attending the scene following the first
  skirmish. I established, and led, the Gold command room throughout the violent weekend that
  followed. Similarly, I was Gold Level Commander in dealing with the aftermath of the Leeds
  bomb last year. I have led that investigation and many other major and serial criminal
  investigations undertaken by the Force.

  Leadership is equally crucial inside the organisation. My commitment to reducing ill-health
  retirements has resulted in savings of between five and seven million pounds per year over the
  last three years. My drive to see equality of treatment and opportunity as non-negotiable, and
  the introduction of initiatives to sustain it, have been acknowledged in Industrial Tribunal reports
  and HMIC Inspections.

  Leadership is tested by the extraordinary, rather than by the routine. It is at these critical times
  that everyone looks to 'the boss’. In these situations, whether operational or organisational, my
  decisions have rarely followed the easiest option, but they have consistently delivered success.

  VISION

  The key public satisfaction levels in W est Yorkshire, expressed through the most recent
  surveys, hover around the 90% figure. This does not yet fulfil our potential as a police force.

  The simple and clear vision to which I am totally committed is that we may not be able to
  prevent or detect every crime, but we are capable, always, of leaving the person, who turns to
  us for help, satisfied and reassured. This is the ultimate performance indicator of the police
  service.

  The key task for a Chief Constable is building the team that will deliver this vision, working in
  partnership with the policy authority, to provide the service the people of Merseyside deserve. I
  know what is required and am committed to making it happen.




G/MPA/ACC/MPAAPPL/14.11.97/JHes




                                                25
                                                                                                 -«




7.        REFEREES


Please give names, addresses and occupations o f two persons willing to give you a
reference, one o f which must be your current employer.


,                     Mr           QPM                           Councillor
1. Name:                                        2. Name:

      Address:                                     Address:

             W est Yorkshire Police                      W est Yorkshire Police Authority
             PO Box 9                                    Town Hall
             Laburnum Road                               W A KEFIELD
             W AKEFIELD                                  W F1 2H Q              >
             W F1 3QP


      Relationship:                                 Relationship:
                      Chief Constable                            Chairman




10.       DATES NOT AVAILABLE FOR INTERVIEW [IF ANY]




Canvassing either directly or indirectly will disqualify a candidate from appointment.

DECLARATION

I declare that to the best o f my knowledge and belief, all statements, contained in this form
are correct and I understand that should I conceal any material fact, I will, if engaged, be
liable to the termination o f my appointment.

I agree that the information contained herein should be treated in the strictest confidence.



                                                      D ate         12A ugu^1998
Signed

G/MPA/ACC/MPAAPPL/l 4.11.97/JHes


                                           26
                                                                                                                   ""




                                                                                                                        *».*»«

      MERSEYSIDE POLICE AUTHORITY                                                             WMi=i:
                                                                                                                  immmmmm m m m
                                                                              ......... ..............
      CHIEF CONSTABLE
                                                                              . DATE:                  •   —--~
      SHORTLISTING SCHEDULE
                                                                                                ./♦                               :



                                                                                 CAN 1
        PERSONAL COMPETENCIES                     R L W lR F Ii ill!          llllllill
                                                                               HIGH MEDIUM | LOW
                                                                 iiitW HIGH
   Judgement:Focuses on problem &
   solution; identifies implications;
   analytical & logical approach to                  VERY HIGH
   understand people & events; establishes
   priorities; is creative & intuitive; finds
CO new patterns & interprets events in new
   ways.
   Self Confidence:Takes the lead; is self
   assured & positive; has drive &
   initiative; self belief; persistent &             VERY HIGH
   determined to succeed; decisive;
   indeoendent;
        ~           works well under■■■■*pressure.
                  ?---------                  ... ..
   Strategic Perspective.Has vision for
   the future & has long term perspective;
   relates goals & actions to strategic aims VERY HIGH
    of business; understands inter­
    departmental functions; gains support &
    acceptance from others in working
    towards vision.




       PERSTRAT/MPA/CCOCT/SCHEDULE/PGD
                                                                               CANDIDATE        NOTES - to include extent to which candidate
                                               REQUIRED                                          appeals to have level of experience required
   PERSONAL COMPETENCIES
                                             VERY H IG H , HIGH   I l S i i l P HIGH   MEDIUM           [see gtudanc<s on completion]
                                               OR MEDIUM            HIGH
Achievement Focus:Sets ambitions;
places demands on self & others; results
focused; calculates risk; is decisive &      VERY HIGH
takes firm action; tackles problems as
they arise; focuses on specific details
critical to success in complex situations.
Communication: Conveys difficult
ideas or problems in a meaningful way;
uses various media to reinforce
 message; communicates to inform;            VERY HIGH
 instruct; persuade & encourage others
 whilst being aware of their feelings;
 considers most effective method of
 nresentine information.
 Building Teams:Encourages co­
 operative working within & across
 teams; empowers others to make              VERY HIGH
 decisions; involves & informs people of
  plans & progress; evaluates peoples’
  ranabilities
  Influencing Others: Uses a variety of
  methods to persuade others including
  peers, colleagues, senior managers,        VERY HIGH
  external contacts & juniors; creates &
  prepares strategies to influence others,
  and establishes networks for support &
  information; understands and works
  within the culture of the organisation.




   PERSTRAT/MPA/CCOCT/SCHEDULE/PGD
                                                                   .
                                                                          mm MDATL                        ' NOTES - to include extant to which candidate
                                                                                                             appears to have Ieve
                                                                                                                                l fo c p        reciuired
                                                                              ....... ....... i ii if)\\J
                                                                                                     liis
                                                                               MEDIUM                               [see guidance  on completion]
                                             ^   E    E    k       HIGH                 .......... ■ ■
      Leadership: Shows clarity of thought
      processes; leads by example; keeps a
      firm grip on macro issues whilst
      allowing development and growth;
      forward looking in terms of organisation
      structure, Force needs and performance; VERY HIGH
      recognises and encourages individual
      and collective effort and values of
      partnerships; approachable, earns
      respect, takes the initiative and assesses
       risks
       Vision: Creates and secures
       commitment to a clear vision; provides a
145




       balanced overview of complex
       situations; forms coherent and broad
       concepts and plans to further the long
       term aims; more than ‘here and now’;      VERY HIGH
       values environmental scanning; invests
       in the right managers; recognises social
       trends that impact on decision making ___________________




         PERSTRAT/M PA/CCOCT/SCHEDULE/PG D
