14-DCT~:39S3   43506           PROM        e.C.P.fl.                              TO            3315123S45a?     P. 01




               - ............................................... POBSS(9
               WEST YORKSHKfi                                                                         W akefield

               POLICEforce HmaouRfrmm
                                                                                                      » r
                                              F A X ' C O V E R . S.H.EET


T<* I                                                                      FROM: ACC NORMAN JETTISON
PHONE;                                                                     PHONE: 01924 292113

FAX: 0151 23810*8                                                          FAX:        01924 292180

LOCATION: Merseyside Police Authority                                      LOCATION: HEADQUARTERS

RE: Attached tetter                                                        Number of pages including this one:

                                                                           DATE: 14 October, 1998




                                                            MESSAGE


Pleas® find attached a copy of a tetter Mr BetSsori has written to Councillor Gytfafeon, Chair
of MersaysWe Police Authority, together with a copy of the press release. I should be
obliged if you would arrange ter a courier to delwer the letter and press releasa to all 17
members of the Police Authority this afternoon. If you have problems tn making this happen,
please contact ACC Mr Stephenson’s office at Merseyside Polks? Headquarters and he will
arrange for a motorcyclist to deliver it around ail members.

Thank you.
                                                                                       P0 8o>t9
           WEST YORKSHIRE                                                              laburnum Road
                                                                                       Wakefield
                                                                                       WF.t 3QP
                                                                                       Tel: (01924) 2S2113
                      Force Headquarters                                               Fax:(01924)292180




ACC/NGB/RB                                                      p r iv a t e a n d c o n f id e n t ia l

15 October 1998



Councillor C Gustafson
Chair
Merseyside Police Authority
PO Box 101A, West House
Mercury Court
Liverpool L69 2NU


    ^                         ,
Proposal to meet with the Hillsborough Families Group

I think it would be best for all concerned if I were to meet with Maria Eagle and her
constituents and clients who represent the bereaved families of Hillsborough. I have
made this offer in the attached letter.

It is important that you know of my proposal, but if you can limit the circulation o f this
information then we might have more chance of a private meeting, rather than a
meeting in the full glare of the Liverpool Echo spotlight. I have copied tie same
correspondence to the Clerk, and have made a similar request

If I can do anything else to help with your current 'pressures’ then do let me know.
Look on the bright side - things must only get bitter!




                               Assistant Chief ConstaM# W rran M s o n
                                      HvisionaiOfseiWtonsiVtaO
                                                                     TO Box 9
          WEST YORKSHIRE                                             laburnum fioatf


          POLICE    Force Headquarters
                                                                     Wakefield
                                                                     WF1 3QP
                                                                     Tel: (01924) 292113
                                                                     F a r (01824)292180



ACC/NGB/RB

15 October 1998


Maria Eagle, MR
Unit House
Speke Boulevard
Liverpool L24 9HZ



When I applied to join Merseyside Police, there was nothing in my previous career
that precluded me from doing so with an absolutely clear conscience. I had a desire
to lead a Police Force which has a proud tradition and a reputation for robustness
and professionalism. I thought I could make a difference because of my huge
experience of policing urban environments and my policing philosophy, which can
be summarised as based on local delivery in partrteifship. th is seems to be
precisely what the communities o f Merseyside are looking for.

I feet it a great honour to have been selected, and I look forward to serving the
people of Merseyside for some time to come. I have no reason to come to
Merseyside other than with my head held high and with a determination to enhance
policing in the region.

I am, nevertheless, aware o f the depth of grief and anger felt by those bereaved in
the Hillsborough disaster, and I know how much of that anger is focused upon South
Yorkshire Police in general, and two or three senior officers In particular. I am
prepared to answer questions o f detail about my actions on 15 April 1089 and in the
weeks and months that followed that fateful day. I would like the opportunity to meet
with you and representatives of the families, privately, as soon as this can be
arranged. I know that I will be called upon to deal with questions in the media, but,
in the long term, I think that the people who deserve answers are your constituents
and clients rather than the world at large. For the world at large, it will be another
headline in the evening newspaper,

I have written to you assuming that you are in a position to assist in arranging such
a meeting. If you would like to pass this task on to someone else, then please do
so. The venue would be your choice. In order to ensure intimacy rather than
inquisition, I would prefer there to be no more than 20 representatives. I also think
that we could do more business without press oversight.




                            Ass&taot Chief Constable Human Season
Page 2
Maria Eagle, MP
15 October 1998




if tie families think that this would be a good idea, then would you please have
someone contact my secretary (» 01924 292113) to suggest a time and venue. For
me, I am prepared to clear any time in my diary (including evenings and weekend) in
week commencing 9 November. ! do hope that we can meet

I have copied this letter to only two people, the Chair and the Clerk to tie Police
Authority. I have asked them to maintain the confidentiality of our correspondence.

I look forward to meeting you. Notwithstanding the press commentary this week, I
am really excited about moving to live and work in Merseyside. I do agree with the
final paragraph of the Daily Post editorial today “Mr Bettison’s .... experience of the
Hillsborough disaster should reinforce his empathy with Merseyside and its people
.... not weaken it." I do not share the suffering of the bereaved families, but I do
share the horror of 15 April 1989, and I have a better understanding than most
about the trauma of the inquiry and inquest processes that followed. I hope i am
given a chance to show this.




N G BETTISON
Assistant Chief Constable
