                                        MERSEYSIDE
                                        FOUCE
                                        A m H O R im




 K/138/98                                                    9th November 1998

                   POLICE AUTHORITY MEETING - 2nd NOVEMBER

                               Further information



 Merseyside’s newly appointed Chief Constable Noriman Bfttison met informally with

 members of Merseyside Police Authority on Monday, 2nd November. During that

meeting Members were given the opportunity to ask Mr Bettison questions. A note of

those questions and answers is now being made available to the press (please see

attached).



It is accompanied by a note of the informal meeting, originally released to the media

on Tuesday, 3rd November.



                                      -Ends-
For further information contact:
Barham Spicer
Tel: 0151443 3534
24hr: 01399 717455
ref: m paftewsrelftettto)
NOTE OF THE INFORMAL MEETING BET,VEEN MERSEYSIDE POLICE
AUTHORITY AND NORMAN BETJISON - 2ND NOVEMBEE 1998

The Chair introduced Mr Norman Bettison tc Members of the Police Authority and
indicated that Mr Bettison wished to make a statement to the Authority following
which, if he were agreeable, there would be an opportunity for Members to ask
questions. Members of the Authority then irroduced themselves to Mr Bettison,

      I would like to make a statement, I am determined to say some things today
      and want to give everyone an opportunity to ask questions at any level, t
      have never sought to hide my involvement in Hillsborough, it is right and
      proper that the Merseyside Police Authority is the first body to have the
      opportunity to hear my answers.

      The Hillsborough disaster was a devastating event, the after shocks continue
      and for me this is just one of those aftershocks. The relatives who were
     bereaved and the predominantly young people injured during that day have
     my sympathy today, have had for nine and a half yeafs and, as stated in my
     press statement on 14th October, will have my sympathy forever, I cannot
     imagine anything more horrific than the anguish felt by those who lost sons
     and daughters, loved ones or a friend during the disaster. They were after all
     simply attending a football match.

      I alsp understand the dismay and anger in some quarters that no single
     individual has been personally held to account. I was a South Yorkshire
     Police Officer at that time. I was at the match as a spectator and saw the
     tragedy unfold. I later sat through most of the public inquiry and saw how
     devastating that process was for the bereaved that attended on a daily basis.

      It is however unfair and unjustifiable for any residual anger to be turned onto
     me, I come to Merseyside with my head held high, with nothing to be
     ashamed of, I have never Wed to hide rhy links with the Hillsborough tragedy
     It is a peripheral fink almost a decade ago, Attempts to link me with
     inappropriate behaviour are irresponsible and ultimately will fail.

    On the day I saw the tragedy unfold along with 55,000 others. I was helpless
    to predict or prevent theEtragedy. As Soon as I became aware of its extent
    my first thought was to do whatever i could to help, im m ediately put myself
    on duty and spent twelve hours receiving those who had become separated
    from loved ones. Some of the reports I took were later linked to those who
    died. The vast majority, fortunately, had just been separated. I had nothing
    to do with the arrangements for the temporary mortuary situated
    approximately one mile away.

    A few days later, after West Midlands Police had been asked to undertake the
    independent police inquiry and, I think, after Lord Justice Taylor had been
    asked to convene a public inquiry I was tasked by my Deputy Chief
    Constable, as a relatively junior officer, to work with a unit formed to liaise
    with West Midlands Police. This was the biggest disaster seen in South
    Yorkshire, it was also probably the biggest disaster West Midlands Police
    had had to deal with, T |e number of Officers that could be allocated to work
    on the case were never going to be enough to furnish the requirements of the
   Taylor Inquiry. West Midlands Force -seded to use .South Yorkshire Police
   and lots of other agencies jjn d bodies :o assist wit4.documentation.
   The team acted as a sort of mail roc~ The team had other terms of
   reference - to try and make sense of .'.Hat happened on the day. It also
   reviewed arrangements for policing f a remaining football matches in South
  Yorkshire that season. They looked s: policies, operational orders, and
  practices for all major sporting events .'n the following season. My work
  contributed to only a small part of thejigsaw. As an example of what I did I
  recovered and reviewed and compared police operation orders for semi-final
  football matches at Hillsborough in the past - approximately 10 to 12. These
 tasks were given to me. I reviewed tre orders to see the changes that had
 been made over the years to policies the policing tactics and to try and see
 how much they had moved away fro,~ tried and trusted practices. That work
 took a few days and was then handec over to West Midlands on completion -
 This is an example of the type of w o k I undertook.

 I was not engaged in black propaganda and historical revisionism. This is the
 rhetoric of those who seek to underrr,;Re my appointment. I did not produce,
agree or set the strategy for lawyers. I have never attempted to shift blame
onto the shoulders of Liverpool supporters. I believe Lord Justice Taylor got it
about right. There were many factors in April 1989 that contributed to the
tragedy, but there was most certainly a failure of police control. Let’s make
no bones about it - South Yorkshire Police were responsible for that.

 There is a myth that South Yorkshire Police never shouldered any blame. |
 want to put this right - not as ah apologist for South Yorkshire Police, but to
 put to bed the myth. Chief Constable Peter Wright who was formerly Deputy
 Chief Constable here on Merseyside accepted full and total blame on the 4th
August 1989, expressed his heartfelt sorrow and offered his resignation to the
 South Yorkshire Police Authority which was turned down. That acceptance of
 blame and expression of regret and sorrow has been repeated on many many
occasions by his Successor Chief Constable Richard Wells. All of the public
pronouncements are recorded in Chapters of the recent Lord Justice Stuart-
Srmth's report which investigated ail the allegations made by the bereaved
families and all of those subsequently raised in the Jimmy McGovern drama
'Hillsborough’. Furthermore, South Yorkshire Police have never contested
liability in any civil cteimQferought by families, Up to the end o f 1997 £13.25 m
in damages and costs have been awarded. This dolfe not include monies
paid to Police Officers which awards were contested.

So where does all this leave me? Criticism of my appointment can be traced
exclusively to comments made in the House of Commons in May of this year.
I was unaware that I had been named in the House - under parliamentary
privilege. I was unaware of the allegations that I was a "black propagandist"
and that I was probably still at it in early 1998. The allegations are utter
nonsense. It is 3 weeks since my appointment, why has no-one in the press
thought to ask why allegations made under Parliamentary privilege have not
been repeated in public and why is there no evidenee to support the
allegations made in May. The allegations made under Parliamentary privilege
and being reported in the press are simply not true. The furore has failed to
show I ever acted improperly, it has however turned the spotlight on the
appointments process. 7 feel that I and the Panel have nothing to be
  embarrassed atopy! Speaking as sc~«one on the receiving end of 2 days
 rigorous and robust questioning the ':erview proce^sJelt professional and
 thorough. You w ire, f Understand, ^anirnous in the view that I was the best
 person to do the job of leading Merss?side Police into the next millennium. In
 the light of the press coverage I ima; -e that some of you are asking why
 Hillsborough did not come up during re process.

 I have never tried to hide my associsrcns. The application form and
 accompanying tetter were very clear ra t candidates should refer to their
 experience in specifically addressing the 9 personal competences as directed
 by the information provided. Candidates were asked to restrict their
 supporting evidenee to three pages c<“Jy.

 i understand that one or two candidates did provide full service records - as
 appendices - despite the instructions I suspected that the criteria on which
 candidates were judged, at shortlisting would be the recent and relevant
 evidence of the 9 competences. I approached the application on this basis. I
 therefore used evidence exclusively from my ACPO experience. I had almost
 6 years and 4 portfolio areas on which to draw. My struggle was
 discriminating what to leave out. It never occurred to me to talk about junior
 experience. If I had I might have talked about a job exchange with the
 Metropolitan Police or policing the independence elections in Zimbabwe. I
focused legitimately as recommended in Home Office guidance and
encouraged by Merseyside’S application procedures, on the competences
expected of a Chief Constable. 1concentrated on telling the Panel of my
command of major incidents, leadership of major and serial crime
investigations from recent experience and how crucial partnership working
was and how I had been active in partnership working in the recent past.
Merseyside is after all a byword for partnerships. I believed these were things
that may set me apart from other candidates, The work that I did in the two or
three months immediately following the Hillsborough disaster would not have
been significant in addressing competences for Chief Constable.

In any event I knew that my link with Hillsborough was available to members
through an HMIC report. The North East HMIC, Bill Taylor, believes in letting
candidates know of their HMIC assessment, in September I received a copy
of a two page HMIC report on me. I saw in it a reference to Hillsborough and
had no worries about this whatsoever. I was perfectf? at ease, it seemed
highly unlikely that the Hillsborough incident would Come up as part of a
formal and equitable interview process that was focused on the competences.
I thought it might come up informally at the pre-interview dinner on the
Sunday evening. I was perfectly at ease with this and continue to be at ease
to talk to anybody about it


references available to the Police Authority. 1had no knowledge Whatsoever
of alligations made in the House of Commons In May, When raised on the
night after interviews my first instinct was to get a response to the families as I
knew that the comments that were being reported would cause them distress.
I wrote asking fora meeting at the earliest opportunity indicating that I was
prepared to move anything in my diary. The letter-was posted on 15th
October, I am still hopeful the families will agree to meet We to discuss the

                                     3
speculation around my appointment. This opportunity could not have come
soon enough for frte, it is right that fce Police Authority, the body to which I
am accountable is the first to question me on thatpart of my past which has
attracted such loos} media interest. It has been a long three weeks. All I
waht now fs to answer any questions that remain and move on to provide a
policing service to tie 1.4 million peccle of Merseyside that they have a right
to expect and deserve,
NOTE OF THE POLICE AUTHORITY MEMBERS QUESTIONS AND THE
RESPONSES OF NORMAN BETTISON DURING THEIR INFORMAL MEETING ON
2ND NOVEMBER 1998



Chair:   Would any Member like to ask Mr Eattlson any questions?

FP:      Question 6 on the Interview panel 13 October asked about the incident
         you would most like to forget (Page handed to NB) I cannot understand how
         your Hillsborough experience could not have been touched on in your
         answer.

NB:      The 15 April 1989 never leaves my mind, although toe experience, unlike
          that of the bereaved, has diluted over time. I believed then, and I believe
          now, that the world separates into two categories; those who experienced
          Hillsborough directly or Indirectly through fie consequences here on
          Merseyside, and the second category are those who don’t have that
         experience. You need to be in the first category to fully appreciate the horror
         of the day. It stays with me.

         Now, how did I interpret the question that you refer to? I considered it to
         relate to my proudest achievement and my most embarrassing incident as a
         Police Officer. I did not interpret it to mean the most traumatic. My pride
         relates to those achievements that I covered in my answer, such as
         successfully tackling discriminatory behaviour. The embarrassing moment
         that flashed in my mind was that fall on my first day in uniform. Nothing about
         Hillsborough embarrasses me I didn’t think of Hillsborough when the
         question was posed. I still believe it to be tangential. Humour was an
         approach that I adopted to that part of the question.

FP:      I find it hard to believe that a major catastrophe was not the issue you would
         most wish to forget. _                    ‘    •

DM:      You said that you wrote to the families' representa%ves as soon as you
         became aware of the allegations raised about you. Who did you write to?
N8:      Maria Eagle, who claimed she was speaking on behalf of the families.

DM:      ME does not represent them, only perhaps in the House of Commons. Did
         you not think of writing to Trevor Hicks?

NB:      No, ME claimed, and the Liverpool Echo carried a story, that she
         represented the families. It also said tile same in Hansard. It was a means of
         getting my message to the families using her as a conduit.

                                          5
 As soon as I received a message ssout the media coverage, I knew how the
 families would interpret it. I wantec an honest broker. If I have misjudged
 ME’s real status, then I plead Yorksnire ignorance.

 You have covered your completion of the application form in your statement.
 I can't get my head around your answer to question 6. When you say you
 were ready to answer questions, especially at the dinner, as it was
 uppermost in your mind, why did yeu not raise it?

 It was not uppermost in my mind. I; was not a large feature in planning for
 the interview, However, the substantive question is, why did I not raise it?
 Candidates turning up for interview, you must surely understand, are looking
 to follow the lead of the selection panel. I would not go along and try and set
 my own agenda. I was prepared to answer any questions that I was posed; I
 did not go away from the interview thinking “Phew!,Hillsborough wasn’t
 raised". ”*

 But, in hindsight, wouldn't it have been better for you to raise it?

• With hindsight, it would have been better if we had all known of ME’s
  comments inthe House of Commons. Then I would have been prepared to
  address it head on.

 In your preparation for the interview, you must have considered the
 Merseyside background. Did you not consider your role in policing football
 matches might help you, given that this is a football mad city?

 Chief Constables may be soccer mad as fans, but they don’t police football
 matches. My Hillsborough experience equipped me for one role that I had as
 Superintendent in Hammerton Road Division in 1991. This Division had the
 responsibility for policing the Hillsborough ground, I took up that job after the
 disaster. It equipped me Wonderfully well for that job, but offered me nothing
 coming to you as a prospective Chief Constable.

As a result of what I liam ed from my work followira the Hillsborough
disaster, I was able to draw up a teaming guide forfootball match
commanders, I think it was a 30 point plan. I submitted this to the national
knowledge bank on policing football matches, but 1left all that behind me
long ago. Chief Constables don't sort out policies for policing football
matches,

I had a question, but it has already been answered at least three times, In a
very professional iwanrter, if I might say so.

Papers have been supplied by HFSG which show your name on a report 15
months after the disaster, {Paper handed to NB)
NB:     I was aware of this, because it was published irrfull in the Daily Post a
        couple of weeks ago, but without s-y background. My recollection is that
        when I was given the task I was a Superintendent in Traffic. I had been given
        a mandate by the Chief Constable on taking up the post, to change the
        Traffic Division root and branch. T~st job took up all of my time and energy.
        That was my day job from October 1989 onwards. If you ask anyone who '
        was in Traffic Division at that time, xiey will confirm how hands on I was.
        Indeed, the whole of the Unit had csbanded a long time before then. Chief
        Superintendent Wain and his colleagues had all gone back to their day jobs
        before even I did. I stayed on after June 1089 simply to listen to the evidence
        presented before Lord Justice Tay'cr at the public Inquiry.

          Anyway, i remember taking a call from Terry Wain, who was then Divisional
          Commander at Rotherham. This is the way that hierarchical police
          organisations work. The Deputy Chief Constable had had a meeting with
          lawyers who were preparing a case for the contributions hearing. I wilt say
         more about the contributions procedure later. The Deputy gave Terry Wain a
         few jobs to do. Terry Wain, a Chief Superintendent, rang me and gave me
         the jobs to do. Being a Superintendent who was busy with his day lob, I gave
      .. the tasks to a Detective Inspector. I simply responded to the Deputy Chief
         Constable when all the tasks had been completed. The numbered
         paragraphs relate directly to the tasks. I did not have a day to day
         involvement with Hillsborough events at this time. No-one did, apart from
         one Constable who had been retained to keep the archive and to answer
         queries that were coming in from all sources.

       Now let me tell you what the document is all about. It is not about South
       Yorkshire Police attempting to deflect blame on to the fens. It is not about
       contesting liability. By December 1989, the South Yorkshire Police lawyers
       had submitted a letter of acceptance of liability (n any civil proceedings owing
       to the failure of Police control that was criticised by Taylor. The South
       Yorkshire Police lawyers sought contributions to these claims from other
       parties who were criticised in the Taylor Inquiry - namely, Sheffield
       Wednesday Football Club and Sheffield City Council. If they had felled to get
       contributions, then tMUnsurers representing SouthYorkshire Police had to
       pay all claims themselves. I can tell you that at the contributions hearing
       before a Judge in the High Court in the summer of 1990, contributions were
       settled.

FP.    The next document I’d like you to have a look at is South Yorkshire PoBc©
       document 19/1. It is dated January 1991. You are still On the circulation list.
       How does this fit in with your claim that you had only done 2 months or so?
       (Document handed to NB)



                                         7
 NB:        Ah. I couldn’t ever work out why ME referred to fne as Superintendent
            Bettisori in the House of Commons. I was a Chief Inspector when I was
            doing work following the Hillsborough disaster. I now see that the people on
            this distribution list are the people ramed in ME’s statement to the House. It
            now makes sense.

            There was one PC left in charge of the administration of the Hillsborough
            inquiry PC Greenaway was in charge of archive material. He responded to
            correspondence under the direction of his boss, Chief Superintendent
            Mountain. Why am 1on his distribution list? I attended most, if not all, of the
           Taylor Inquiry, I believe that Peter Wright came to trust my analysis of the
           evidence that was put to the Inquiry, to such an extent that before the Inquiry
           reported he had already come to the view that South Yorkshire Police would
           accept their share of the blame. The inquest Issues which are subject of this
           report were not a part of my daily work. I was a bu§y Superintendent
           commanding a Division in Sheffield at that time. This was a matter of a single
           liaison Constable letting other interested Officers know what was happening,
           I believe factual accounts of the inquest proceedings. 1used to read them
           and, for the most part, throw them in the bin.

WW:        Has anyone ever brought these documents to your attention?

NB:        No. No-one has ever brought them to my attention. It is eight or nine years
           since Hillsborough has been a part of my professional or daily life. These
           documents are pulled from an archive, perhaps from the twelve boxes of
           evidence that the Lord Justice Stuart Smith Inquiry placed in the House of
           Commons.

SF:        Some might pull rabbits out of hats, although some of them will be wrong.
           Are there arty others?

NB;        [ don’t know of any other rabbits, although the archive in the House of
           Commons library is vast. Some people, however, will produce things as
           rabbits that are really, only shadows.
                                 -4k
(At this point the Clerk circulated the Maria Eagle letter referred to in NB’s statement.)


KW;       Have you had a response to the letter of 15 October?

NB;       I reply fully knowing that this is a closed session. ME’s office has phoned
           mine to intimate that she is prepared to meet me.

WW:       In what capacity are you meeting her?

NB;        1am meeting her as Assistant Chief Constable, West Yorkshire Police, not
                                         8
       as the Chief Constable atMerseys ce. I aium eqttof-her as somebody who
       intends to be around Merseyside fcr some time & come, and ! want to lay
       some ghosts to rest before I arrive

       I believe the greatest likelihood for successful reconciliation between me and
       the families will be through a private meeting, and I hope that that can
       happen.

DM:    ! still can't get my head around your failure to address Hillsborough, Does it
       raise questions of your judgement?
NB;    No, As a candidate I was responding to the MPA agenda. Surely you can
       understand that. I followed the recruitment procedure as requested.
       Hillsborough was not in the forefront of my mind. It had nothing to do with
       my being a successful Chief Constable, it has been focused on in hindsight
       rather than accepting the reality of the interview process as it was
       undertaken,                •                          '•

DM:    I disagree, I can’t get my head around it
NB:   ■ I cannot make it clearer than I have. I knew and was aware of the depth of
        feeling, grief and anger about Hillsborough, but I was not aware until 13
        October, after I was appointed, that any of this was focused on me
        personally.

      How do I see myseif resolving the situation? There are 1.4 million people on
      Merseyside. Ill bet 90% of them couldn't care less, and will not know, who
      the Chief Constable is in 12 months from now! I think I have a tot to
      contribute to partnership working, My credibility will be based on the Force
      crime figures, on community safety partnerships that are working in 12
      months from now, on the extent to which people are safe in their homes ahd
      streets, I will not be judged on three weeks' unfortunate headlines, But there
      are a core group of people, the families and the support group, I desperately
      need to meet with them to deal with their concerns,
DM:   I hav© got to put tfus Question. Since your appointment, have you ever
      thought of standing down? Is this question inappropriate?
NB:   I will answer Councillor Martin’s question. I thought it was put in a very clever
      way. He is not asking me to stand down, he is simply asking me whether I
      have ever thought about it. Yes, I thought about it. But the more this has
      gone on, the more resolute I have become. I have resigned my position at
      West Yorkshire, my future is in Merseyside. I am your Chief Constable
      Designate and with your good wishes I will start that task on 16 November.

      I will also say this, and it has probably got something to do with the reason I

                                             9

                           ■s=
             became a Police Officer in the firs: place. I anfprepared to stand ud and hP
             si^oH ro ubl *WOn,t mn home arc hide b8hind my mother's skirts at the first

 EAA:       What we have heard today is tha: -ere has been an acceptance of
            responsibility in the past by South Yorkshire Police, by the Local Authority
            ifid by the football club. This needs to be made public.

 Key to individuals referred to in this note:

EAA    - Dr E A Agalamanyi
SF    - Councillor S Fouikes
Chair - Councillor C Gustafson
GH    - Mr G Hill
DM    - Councillor D Martin
FP    ■* Councillor F Prendergasf •                           ”
WW - Councillor W Weightman
KW - Councillor Mrs K Wood
Clerk - D G Henshaw
NB    n.Norman Bettison, Chief Constable Designate
ME    - Maria Eagle MP


(Note, The following Members of the Police Authority were present during the above
meeting but are not referred to in the notes;

           Mr M J Amos JP                   Mr P Burke
           Mr P Coogan                      Mr A Cowman JP
           Mr D Crompton, HMIC              Mr K Jackson JP
           Lady Doreen Jones •              Mr N Langley
           Councillor M E Rimnrcer)
