                                                         Pres* Office
             WESJ YORKS:                                 P.O. So* 9
                                                         WaktMd
                                                         WFI3QP
                                                         Tel: 01954 232045
                                                         Pax: 01924 291101
               Media and Public Relations




                                                             W ednesday 14 October 1993

                       STATEMENT FROM NORMAN B ETTSO N
                          THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

(w as a Chief Inspector in the Headquarters Personnel Department of South Yorksh.re
Ponce at the time of the Hillsborough disaster. I was not involved in any of the pre­
planning or {he policing o f the match itself. However, I was there as a spectator,
having bought a ticket for a seat in the South Stand, adjacent to the Leppings Lane
end. Along with thousands of other spectators I saw t ie tragedy unfold.

I left the ground at 3.25pm and drove to the nearest police station in Hammerton Read
to put myself on duty and help in any way that I couid. Many people, who left the
football ground and were locking for friends and relatives, were arriving at the police
station and I was given the task, helped by a group of other officers, of taking details
of people who had become separated at the ground. W e eventually opened a boys’
club next door to the station for people to wart. I went off duty at 6am the next day.
That was the extent of my involvement on the day of th e disaster.

I returned to work as norms! on the Monday. A few days later I was assigned with
other officers to a unit which was set up under a C hief Superintendent and two
Superintendents, The unit was tasked with looking at what had happened on the day
of the disaster, waking recommendations about the policing of the r e m a in in g football
matches at Hillsborough before the end of the season and reviewing policing
arrangements for football at Hillsborough and other grounds in South Yorkshire the
following Season, The unit also liaised with and passed information to W est Midlands
Police who were undertaking the formal and independent police investigation into the
disaster.

After the immediate work o f the unit was complete, I was given a specific role to
monitor tie public inquiry and the inquest and brief the Chief Constable on progress.

NtwsrWi Who was at Hillsborough on Wat day, myself Included, can fail to have been
touched by the tragedy. I do not share the suffering o f the bereaved familites but I do
sh ai* some o f the horror o f that fateful day. Those who lost loved ones at
Hillsborough will have my deepest sympathy for ever.

                                          ends
