                            APPOINTMENTS COMMITTEE


At a Special Meeting o f the Appointments Committee held on Monday, the 19th October
1998 in the Meeting Room, West House, Mercury Court, Liverpool, the following
Members were present:-

                                Elected

                                Cllr. Ms. C. Gustafson (Chairperson o f the Committee)
                                Cllr Lady Doreen Jones
                                Cllr. D. Martin
                                Cllr. F. Prendergast
                                Cllr. Mrs. K. Wood

                                Magistrate

                                Mr. M. J. Amos J.P.
                                Mr. K. Jackson J.P.

                                Independent

                                Dr. E. A. Agalamanyi (substitute)
                                Mr. N. Langley

       By Invitation

       Councillors S. Foulkes, Mrs M. E. Rimmer and W. Weightman and Messrs.
       P. Coogan, G. F. Hill and A. Cowman JP.

16.     Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985

       The Committee considered, in the light o f significant public and media interest in
       the appointment o f the Chief Constable (Designate) which the Committee had
       made on the 13th October 1998, the provisions o f the Local Government (Access
       To Information) Act 1985.

        RESOLVED That the meeting be held in two parts, to consider, as follows:-

        a)      in public, the recruitment process for the post o f Chief Constable and
                subsequent media coverage from Tuesday, the 13th October 1998 to the
                19th October 1998 and in accordance with Standing Order 10, the
                Committee expressly permitted that part o f the proceedings to be recorded;
                and

        b)      in private, pursuant to Paragraph 1 o f Part 1 o f Schedule 12A o f the Local
                Government Act 1972, specific personal information about the candidates
                for the post o f C hief Constable.




S:\COMMJTTEE SECTJON\M]NUTES\APPOINTMENTS CTTEE\1998-99\191098.DOC
17.     Post of Chief Constable - Recruitment

        The Committee considered the verbal report o f the Clerk and the Her Majesty’s
        Inspectorate o f Constabulary and discussed the recruitment process and
        subsequent media reporting o f the appointment o f the Chief Constable
        (Designate).

        RESOLVED That the reports be noted and the meeting stand adjourned for a
        short time.

18.     Local Government (Access To Information) Act 1985

        RESOLVED That under the provisions o f Section 100A (4) o f the Local
        Government Act 1972, the public be excluded from the meeting for the following
        item o f business on the grounds that it involves the likely disclosure o f Exempt
        information as defined in Paragraph 1 and 12 o f Part 1 o f Schedule 12A to the
        Act.

19.     Appointment of Chief Constable (Designate)

        The Committee considered the verbal reports o f the Clerk and Her Majesty’s
        Inspectorate o f Constabulary and discussed a number o f personnel related issues
        in respect o f the background to the appointment o f Chief Constable (Designate).

        RESOLVED

        (i)     That the Clerk submit a further report, on the decision making process
                leading to the appointment o f the Chief Constable and the issues raised by
                Members at this meeting and the Her Majesty’s Inpectorate o f
                Constabulary be requested to attend the meeting;

        (ii)    that in the meantime arrangements be made for M r Bettison to be invited
                to meet informally with Members o f the Authority; and

        (iii)   that the Clerk be requested to write to the Merseyside Police asking them
                to investigate the apparent leak to the media o f confidential information.




       Minutes 16 to 19 received as a correct record the 21st day o f December 1998




                                    Chairperson o f the Committee

                                    (the meeting closed at 2.55 p.m.)




S:\COMMITTEESECTION\MlNUTES\APPOlNTMENTSCTTEE\1998-99\191098.DOC
