                                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                 Raf;
       Front! Police Constable 931 Greenway                      Station/Dept: Hillsborough inqa,
       To:   Please see distribution; list                       Data:       17 Ja n u a ry 1991


             SUBJECT;    SUMMARY OF INQUEST 16,1.91



              The following witnesses gave evidence at the Inquest.

             Superintendent Roger Marshall     Police Officer (South Yorkshire Police)
             Trsvor Hicks                      Liverpool Supporter
             Paul Hand                         Liverpool Supporter
             Shaun Michael Fortune             Liverpool Supporter
             Jeffrey Rex                       Liverpool Supporter

             Superintendent   Marshall   continued giving evidence under       cross-
             Sxattination by Mr Isaacs, for Chief Superintendent Buctosnfield.     He
             askeS: questions     relating   to   crowd   behaviour,  C.C.T.V.    and
             cdMMiBications with Ground Control*    Mr Hale asked questions relating
             to kortt Justice Taylor’s recommendations, behaviour of fans, using
             barriers and cordons and iWoimted Officers to control and direct crowds
             and their effect* The Coronet concluded by asking questions relating
             to crowd figures and the effect delaying kick-off would have on fans
             outside ►

             Trevor Hicks, with his wife Jennifer and daughters Victoria and Sarah,
             travelled to Sheffield by private motor car, arriving at 1.40p». They
             were in possession of aateh tickets,         Victoria and Sarah died in the
             tragedy. They entered the Leppings Lane end of the ground at l»50pn.
             Trevor, Victoria and Sarah went through the tunnel into Pen 3,
             Jennifer went into the North Stand.          He then went into Pen 1.     He
             described the conditions as they developed in Pen 3 and the fans
             taecotaiHg dis-tresssed and agitated. He mentioned his attempts to attract
             the attention of two Police Officers who were on the steps leading t<S
             the Ground Control box at separate times, without success.                He
             described goiftf onto the pitch via Gate 1 and finding the bodies of his
             two: daughters aasl the stedical assistance given to them* He positively
                            the £irs:t Police Officer he saw as Superintendent Greenwood.
             He               to jaake this identification after seeing that. Qffi^r in
             the ::e<srridor outside the chamber being usei by the U » d JuStic* T&jrlor
             Inijjiiuy"*>n.,30 May 1989.

             Mr iSisf^cs addressed the Coroner in the .absence: of the Jflry m to the
                         loss of control over w i t n e s s in relation to restricting:,
             thein to what they saw and heard and not what they thought and their
             opinions. The Coroner accepted these comments.

             Paul Hand travelled to Sheffield     private motor car, arriving .at. 12
             .noon. After visiting ;Uesn**d premises, he went to. the tappings, i*™. '
             end. of the ground, arriving at         Ha enteral the ground through a.
             turnstile and went through the tunnel -into Pan        He described the
             conditions in the pen as they deteriorated.    He mentioned seeing two
             giris in front of him. One was supporting the other, who had fainted.
             After a massive surge,; he lost sight of the two girls.     These girls
             were Victoria and Sarah Hicks who died in the tragedy.

Omit
  2.

  SUMMARY OF INQUEST 16.1.91



  Shaun Fortune travelled to Sheffield from Bristol by coach, arriving at
  1.30pm. He attended immediately at the ground, which Sfc         by fi&e
  turnstile at the Leppings Lane end of the ground, at l»35p». He w n l
  through the tinnel and into Pen 3* He described the conditions in that
  pen as they deteriorated.   He mentioned seeing two girls in: front of
  M», one in a distressed condition. After an almighty surge, he lost
  sight of the two girls. These girls were Victoria and Sarah Hicks.

  Jeffrey Rex travelled to Sheffield from Bristol by coach, the same
  coach as Shaun Fortune.      His evidence was virtuaiir iSenti*;*! to
  Fortune’s in every respect, including identifying the Hicks' girls.

  It was noticable that the evidence of Hand:, FortBrtis and Rex iwogretsed.
  rapidly, taking forty minutes to complete. The Bearing* m X m normally
  concludes around 4,00pa, over-ran to 5-20pm.        Eo^tuiie and Bex had
  travelled from Bristol in one vehicle and the Coroner allowed them both
  to give evidence in order that they could both return to Bristol
  together, eliminating transport difficulties.

  Mr Manning, for Superintendent Murray, addressed the Cor«ner».      Si
  advised the Coroner that he felt from 4.QOpm justice. not |een <!«Sfte>
  he felt under pressure not to ask questionsv




cSPol l e e CmiSTdBXe 93
                        r
  Distribution:


  The: Cfcsfe# Cons table
  The Deputy Chief Constable
  Chief Superintendent Wain
  Chief Superindertt Mountain - Management Services
  Superintendent Jettison
  Detective Chief Inspector Brooke
