                                APPOINTMENTS COMMITTEE


    At a meeting of the Appointments Committee held on Thursday, 24th September 1998 in the
    Meeting Room, 3rd Floor, West House, Mercury Court, Liverpool the following Members
    were present:-

                                  Elected

                                  Councillor Ms.C. Gustafson (Chairperson)
                                  Councillor D. Martin
                                  Councillor F. Prendergast
                                  Councillor Lady Doreen Jones
                                  Councillor Mrs. K. Wood

                                 Magistrate

                                 Mr. M. J. Amos J.P.
                                 Mr. K. Jackson J.P.

                                 Independent

                                 Dr. E. A. Agalamanyi (Substitute)
                                 Mr. N. Langley


    Apologies

    An apology for absence was received from Mr P Coogan.

11. Minutes

    The minutes of the meeting of the Committee held on the 1Oth August 1998 were received as
    a correct record and signed by the Chairperson.

12. Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985

    RESOLVED That in accordance with the provisions of the Local Government Act 1972, the
    public be excluded from the meeting for the following item of business on the grounds that it
    involves the disclosure of exempt information as defined in Paragraph 1 of Part 1 of Schedule
    12A to the Act.

13. Applications for the Post of Chief Constable - Shortlisting

   The Clerk to the Authority tabled the assessments prepared by Her Majesty’s Inspector of
   Constabulary and the Committee considered the report of the Clerk in respect of the post of
   Chief Constable, Merseyside Police which included the applications, the Job Description,
   Person Specification and the Shortlisting Schedules prepared by the Clerk.
RESOLVED

(i)     That the following seven applicants be shortlisted for interview for the post of Chief
        Constable, Merseyside Police Force:-

                               N.G. Bettison
                               R. Davies
                               J.P Hamilton
                               I. Holding
                               P. R. Kemaghan
                               W. G. Nelson
                               R. S. Turnbull

(ii)    that the applicants be informed that, following the outcome of the Panel Interviews, it
         may be the case that not all candidates progress to the formal interview stage of the
         appointment process;

(iii)   that the informal gathering be held on Sunday 11 th October 1998 commencing at
         7.00pm at the Senior Officers’ Dining Room, Police Training Centre, Mather
         Avenue;

(iv)    that the two Panel Interviews be held on Monday 12th October 1998 with a panel
         briefing commencing at 9.30 am and the panel interviews commencing at 10.00am at
         the Senior Officers’ Dining Room, Police Training Centre, Mather Avenue; and

(v)     that the further formal interviews be held on Tuesday 13th October 1998 with a panel
         briefing commencing at 9.30 am and the formal interviews commencing at 10.00 am
         at Mercury Court, Liverpool.




        Minutes 11 to 13 received as a correct record the 21st day of December 1998




                                Chairperson of the Committee


                             (The meeting closed at 5.43 pm.)
