                                                                             PHOTOCOPY OF
                                                                               ARCHIVED
                                                                              DOCUMENT

                                                                       BOX NO:



      1 Virginia Street, London E19XP. Telephone: 01-782-4000. Telex: 262135



20 April, 1989.




Thank you for writing.

We have received a heavy postbag from readers complaining
about publication of the harrowing pictures from Hillsborough.

Other newspapers have received similar complaints and you may
know that the Press Council is also investigating the matter.

Our response is to apologise for upsetting readers but not
for publishing the pictures.

The photographs were not published to sell newspapers nor for
the sake of sensation.

The decision to publish was taken after the most careful consideration
and we defend it on the grounds that no words could adequately
convey the horror of the situation.

Mrs. Jennifer Hicks, the mother of two sisters who died in the
crush, has defended the use of such pictures as an acceptable
way of arousing public opinion and hopefully leading to steps
being taken to ensure such a dreadful tragedy never happens again.

 I would just add that the Holocaust is kept fresh in the minds
 of many precisely because of the appalling photographs which
 recorded this dark chapter in history for posterity and as a
 memorial to those who perished.

 Statistics may fade. Moments of horror frozen by photography endure and
 remain a constant reminder of human frailty. If-their publication
 leads to resolve in the heart of anyone to exercise vigilance where
 the public safety is concerned then our decision will be vindicated.

 I hope that the above does help to explain our position even if you
 still do not feel that we have justified publication.

 Please be assured that The Sun will accept and publish the findings
 of the Press Council on this difficult issue.

 Yours sincerely,




 William Newman
 MANAGING'EDITOR



Registered Office: News Group Newspapers Ltd., P.O. Box 495, Virginia Street, London E1 9XY
                              Registered No. 679215 England
