    PHOTOCOPY OF
      ARCHIVED
     DOCUMENT                         /   ^    '\   WrllJ
BOX NO: Q W b '-O -                            ) ( H     ] h       i
                              I

               1 Virginia Street, London E1 9XP. Telephone: 01-782-4000. Telex: 262135
       28 April, 1989




       Thank you for taking the trouble to write to us.

       In fact we have received many letters from Liverpool regarding
       our follow up story to the Hillsborough tragedy.

       We are sorry that, possibly clouded by grief, many have not
       understood that it is The Sun's duty as a newspaper to publish
       information, however hurtful and unpalatable it may be at the time.

       On reflection, we accept the way in which the article was displayed
       could have given cause for offence. For that we apologise. For
       the substance we do not.

       We cannot possibly apologise for facts and to do so would be an
       abdication of our responsibility to a wider public beyond the city
       of Liverpool.

       If the price of a free press is a boycott of our newspaper, then
       it is a price we will have to pay.

       The Sun has been singled out - not for the first time - although
       identical reports to ours were published in The Times, Daily Express
       and Daily Star.

       It is only by revealing the full truth that we can try to make sure
       that such a terrible tragedy never happens again.

       Then 95 innocent men, women and children will not have died in vain.

       Our heartfelt sympathy is with the families of the dead and injured.
       That is why we have already raised tens of thousands of pounds for
       the appeal fund.

       You may know that the Press Council is also investigating the matter.
       Please be assured that The Sun will accept and publish their findings
       on this difficult issue.

       Yours sincerely,




       William Newman
       MANAGING EDITOR




       Registered Office: News Group Newspapers Ltd., P.O. Box 495, Virginia Street, London E1 9XY
                                     Registered No. 679215 England
