 Hillsborough

Angry police hit back yesterday (tues ) at Uverpoolfans who hampered life saving
attempts after the. Hillsborough horror:

They spake oatfor thefirst time after being stung by savage criticism o f their
actions and claims that the Merseysidefans were blameless.

The shocked bobbies revealed how they were kicked andpunched as they gave
victims the kiss of life.

And others were horrified to see Liverpoolfans urinating on policemen and victims
as theyfought to haul them oat of the killer crush*

Said one senior officer who was in the battle to save lives;* We are as sorry and
shocked as anyone about these tragic deaths but to paint all the Liverpoolfans as,
lilly whites is wrong,

 ‘As we struggled in appalling conditions to save iives}fans standingfurther up the
terrace were openly urinating on us and the bodies of the dead

*As policemen on the pitch tried to save lives they were hampered by other
Liverpoolfans running and kicking andpunching them. *

Another officer said: ’ One colleague a few yards away gave up trying to revive an
injured lad realising he was dead Immediately he was attacked by his mate who ,
threw punches,

*The officer did not retaliate although he was dazed. He simply went on to help the
  *A.«anotheryoung officer gave the kiss of life and heart massage he was abused
  and then given a savage kick by another lout. *

  A third Ikofflcer added; *Even when it became apparent we were dealing with a                  ur -*4|
  tragic situation police were harassed as they tried to get an with thejob of saving
  lives and helping victims.
 »              t   ‘


 'We know a lot of questions will be asked about the opening of the gates - a
 decision taken because it wasfeared lives were at risk outside the ground.

 ‘Thefact remains that had the Liverpoolfans then entered the ground in an
 orderly and civilised manner the crushing which led to the deaths would not have
 happened*



 And the officer claimed an appeal to delay the kick off to allowfans to enter the
 ground was turned down.
                                                                                            #•
 He said:' The answer was that the players hud already come out so the match had
 to start on time. A h i o f usfelt that simply wasn '(good enough,

 Ends.


Hillsborough
Whites Sheffield 18/4/89.
                        fti ‘ '
Pocket. J


A policeman who helped the injured and the dying spoke of Liverpool supporters
picking the pockets of victims before they were carried mvay.

He said: ’ There was a lot of pilfering going on while the bid to save lives was
taking place.

‘Personal possessions were missing as well as cash and other articles.                  r




 'People were picking up coins which hadfallen from victim's pockets as they lay on
thefloor. It was a sickening spectacle ’


more..
  One Itigh ranking officer said: ’ Some of them were like animals, they weirs drunk
  and violent and their actions were vile \

 Another senior policeman said:3Nobody dare say anything about the behaviour of
                                                                                        f
 some supportersfor fear of being accused of being insensitive,

  Bui thefact is, some of my officers went through a double hell - a disaster and the
 fury of drunkenfans impeding rescue attempts.
                                                                                            1
                                    \
 And South Yorkshire ChiefAmbulance Officer Don Page revealed one
 ambulanceman needed hospital treatment after being attacked as he treated an
 injuredfan.

 Other ambulancemen had to fend to injuries in other parts of the ground - caused
 by fans fighting.

 Residents in, Wadsley Lanejust yardsfrom the ground told HowLiverpool
 supporters arrived drunk and boisterous carrying beer and lager.

 South Yorkshire Policefederation secretaryt Paul Middup mid:* I am sick of
 hearing of how good the crowd were. Some arrived tanked up and the situation
faced by officers trying to control them was terrifying.



iPeople were diving under the bellies of the police horses m d between their kgs
and the only people who would do that are either mental or have been drinking
heavily. ’

He added: ’ I heard all those terrible accounts o f the behaviour of a number offans
but it must be stressed that it was a small element who behaved so terribly,'               m
Ends.
Add Hillsborough Disaster

Patnick 1,

Last night, Sheffield Tory MP, Irvine Patnick, backed uppottce claims that
Liverpoolfans attacked and urinated on them as they tended the injured and dying.

He Haul:' I spoke to many policemen in the makeshift mortuary aftmvards. They
told me they were hampered, harassed, punched, kicked and urinated on by
Liverpoolfans.

 7 have kept quiet about this because I did not want to inflame a delicate situation.
Hut it isafact that these are the stories they told me and they had no reason to tie. I
>ww>the bruising on their bodies and the state they were in and there is no doubt in
my mind it is true.

 'All this happened to them and yet they carried on doing theirjob trying to save
lives and now they are being blamed,

(One important question that must be answered is what part alcoholplayed in this
whole tragic business*,

Ends.
