    36th Annual Report of
    THE PRESS COUNCIL

                    1989




THE PRESS AND
   THE PEOPLE
Contents




Chapter 1 - Chairman’s Foreword                  ....................... 7
Chapter 2 - The Cases in Figures                 ..................... 11
Chapter 3 - Outline of Council Adjudications                       . 16
             Allegations of in a c c u ra c y ............... 16
             Objections to c o m m e n t..........133
             The right to p u b lis h ................ 157
             Matters of taste            ......................... 161
             The selection of n e w s ............. 171
             Letters to the e d it o r ................ 184
             Declarations of principle                 . . . .        192
             Methods of gathering news . . . 203
             Advertisements and competitions 219
Chapter       4 - Difficult Decisions               ................. 223
Chapter     5 - Reporting Rape                         ..............240
Chapter      6 - Colour and C o n d u c t.........243
Chapter        7 - Council Code                   ...................245
Chapter       8 - Review C o m m itte e .......... 248
Chapter 9 - Privacy, Payment and Finance                         . 320
Chapter 10 - How to Present a Complaint                      . . 327
Chapter    11 - Parliament and the Press. . . .                       331
Chapter    12 - Readers’ Representatives. . . .                       340
Chapter    13 - Articles of Constitution                 ............343
             Index of Cases by Numbers                        . . 350
             Subject Index            ................................353
             I n d e x .........................................359
Chapter 4                                   Difficult Decisions



PICTURES OF GRIEF
AND TRAGEDY

  In a year marked by tragedy editors and the Press Council faced
familiar difficult problems of ethics and taste about how the press
should cover disaster, death and grief.
  The Council launched three inquiries into such issues on its own
initiative as well as dealing with individual complaints in other
cases, many of them about picture coverage.


THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
Background
  Britain’s worst football crowd disaster happened on Saturday, 15
April 1989 when 95 people were killed or fatally injured, many of
them crushed to death, at Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield, at the
FA Cup semi-fmal between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.
  There was massive press and broadcasting coverage of the tragedy
that evening and for the next two days, and extensive coverage for
the rest of that week of the aftermath of the tragedy and public con­
cern about the explanation of it and possible responsibility for it.
  On Monday 17 April the government announced that there would
be a public inquiry into the disaster by Lord Justice Taylor and two
assessors. The same day the Press Council announced that it would
hold a general inquiry into photographic coverage of the tragedy
by the press. The decision followed widespread and serious public
criticism of the publication of pictures of spectators trapped, in­
jured and dead, and of the alleged conduct of some photographers
and other journalists. This criticism and direct complaint to the
Council continued to grow. By 19 May the Council had received
349 written complaints from a total of 3651 signatories. Among
them they named 35 newspapers and included 56 general com-

                                                             page 223
plaints about the behaviour or contents of the media which did not
name specific newspapers.
  The complaints went beyond criticism of photographic coverage
of the tragedy, and the Council broadened the scope of its inquiry
to embrace all press coverage.
  As well as complaints from individual members of the public,
some of them relatives or friends of the dead or injured but others
unconnected with the tragedy, the Council received complaints
from many Members of Parliament on their own behalf or on behalf
of constituents. Among organisations which complained to the
Council were The Football Association, Liverpool City Council
Hillsborough Working Party, Sheffield Methodist District Synod,
and the Clergy Disaster Team of the Oldham Division of Greater
Manchester Police.
  On 28 June the Home Office passed to the Council a petition
from the Merseyside Area Student Organisation with some 7000
signatories protesting at one aspect of press coverage, an article in
The Sun. The petition had been forwarded to the Home Office by
Lord Justice Taylor’s inquiry. Lord Justice Taylor also ordered the
West Midlands Police to make available to the Council all evidence
given to his inquiry which concerned the conduct or coverage of
the press. The Council is grateful.
 Newspapers specifically identified in complaints to the Council
were:
 The Daily Express, Daily Mail, Daily Mirror, Daily Star, The Daily
Telegraph, The Guardian, The Independent, The Sun, The Times,
Today, The Mail on Sunday, News o f the World, The Observer, The
People, Sunday Express, Sunday Mirror, The Sunday Telegraph, The
Sunday Times, The Evening Standard, Bedfordshire on Sunday, The
Coventry Evening Telegraph, Daily Record, Glasgow, East Anglian
Daily Times, Evening News, Edinburgh, Evening Echo, Basildon,
Glasgow Herald, The Northern Echo, Darlington, Evening Herald,
Plymouth, The Scotsman, Shropshire Star, The Sunday Post, Evening
Advertiser, Swindon, Wales on Sunday, Western Daily Press, Bristol,
and the Yorkshire Post.
   In each case the editor was told of the complaint to enable him
 or her to reply directly to the complainant, but all national news­
 paper editors and editors of some regional newspapers which were
 not referred to specifically in complaints were asked by the Council

 page 224
for views on their own and other newspapers’ approach to picture
coverage of the tragedy and their general views on press coverage
of disasters. The great majority responded, often in considerable
and helpful detail, for which the Council is grateful.
  Although the Council studied and considered separately the pic­
ture coverage of all national newspapers and many regional news­
papers, including all listed above, it decided as it was conducting
a general inquiry not to make separate findings on each or to ident­
ify the photographic coverage of individual newspapers except as
examples to indicate types of photographs on which it intends to
comment.

General principles
  It is the job of newspapers to report news including tragedy and
horror and sometimes to awaken public conscience or determina­
tion that tragedy shall not be repeated. There cannot be a comfort­
able or pleasing way of doing that when those near to the events
will be under deep grief or emotional stress.
  The Council accepts the assurance of many editors that they con­
sidered carefully how far it was right to publish photographs which
might serve a public interest by arousing concern and focussing
determination to avoid a similar tragedy but would also distress sur­
vivors and the families and friends of those who were killed and
were likely to be offensive to other readers. The decision was hard
in very many cases: in most of them the Council believes editors
were justified in publishing the pictures they did.
  The Council considered carefully, as it has done before, whether
colour reproduction made such a difference to the impact of pic­
tures that it might have been justifiable to publish some of them in
black and white but was tasteless or offensive to do so in colour.
It decided that in the case of these pictures and the circumstances
of this tragedy there was no ethical distinction to be drawn between
colour and monochrome reproduction.
  Similarly, it concluded that no distinction was warranted by
whether a particular picture was published on Page 1 or on an in­
side page.
  The Council decided that no distinction could properly be drawn
in this instance between newspapers which used certain pictures on
the day of the disaster, the next day in the Sunday newspapers, or

                                                             page 225
on any of the following days, though these were distinctions cogently
argued by some editors.

Specific complaints
  M ore than thirty national and regional newspapers published
broad pictures, taken from a distance, showing a large section of
the crowd through the high steel fence, the front row crushed
against it, many of them recognisable and in attitudes of distress,
pain and fear. Inevitably such pictures will have distressed many
who saw them: there was no means of telling how many of those
shown died or were seriously injured. Nevertheless the Council be­
lieves that publication of these pictures was justifiable. They were
horrific; they portrayed an horrific event. They reported the event
accurately and brought home vividly the danger of a dense crowd
under pressure packed behind an immovable fence. These photo­
graphs showed the horror of the tragedy without isolating in close-
up individuals who were facing death or serious injury. The serious
public interest was served by their publication, which was within the
discretion of editors despite the added distress it would cause.
  In the Press Council’s view the same cannot be said of a smaller
number of photographs which it has seen published in a few news­
papers. In these the focus was on a single individual or very small
group crushed against the fence, sometimes with features cruelly
distorted by its steel mesh. They showed graphically the terror and
in some cases the torture of the persons concerned in images of
which the mind cannot rid itself. Although it can be argued the pub­
lic interest would be served by their emphasis on the danger of
crowd and fence, in the Council’s view in these pictures the intru­
sion into personal agony and grief was too gross to be justifiable.
The Press Council concludes that these were pictures which editors
ought to have chosen not to publish, particularly as most news­
papers had available the general pictures which the Council believes
they were justified in using. In those circumstances to use intrusive
pictures of individuals as well as or instead of the general pictures
was to accentuate unacceptably intrusion into grief.
  A third category of picture widely published showed single, often
clearly identifiable, individuals lying on the ground, being treated,
or being carried away. In some cases they appeared to be dead, in
some the caption implied that they were dead. Newspapers are free
to show the injured being treated and it is right that they should,

page 226
but editors should approach the possibility of picturing the dead
with great care.
  There are rare occasions when a newspaper may justify publishing
an identifiable picture of a fatal casualty of an accident or incident
but this has to be judged on the circumstances of each case. Despite
the public nature of this disaster, there was no such justification
here for publishing individual pictures of men or women who were
known or thought to be dead or dying. Their use was insensitive
and the decision of some editors to publish them was an error of
judgment.
  It was thoughtless of a few newspapers, some of them the subject
of separate complaint, to identify stories about the disaster by the
use of a stylised logo echoing a published picture of a fatal casualty.
These victims may have been identifiable to family or friends: in any
event to use such a picture for such a purpose was to trivialise
death.

Conduct of photographers
  Decisions about which pictures to publish lie with editors and
have been the subject of much criticism in public comment and
complaint to the Council, but there has been widespread criticism,
too, about the alleged conduct of photographers on the scene.
  These allegations cause the Council concern and should cause
newspapers concern, but they have been in general terms only. The
Council has received no evidence that enables it to identify any par­
ticular photographer or journalist or the representatives of any par­
ticular newspaper as behaving improperly.
  There is, however, clear evidence that to people involved in the
disaster the behaviour of some photographers at the scene ap­
peared unhelpful or insensitive. There was serious public concern
and anger at the impression that photographers were concentrating
on obtaining close-up pictures of those in danger and distress even
at the risk of hampering rescue work. It is understandable that this
should have been the perception but the role of a press photo­
grapher at any incident however tragic is to take pictures of it, not
to take part in it - just as the role of a reporter is to write about
what he sees, not to become caught up in the event.
 This could not relieve a journalist from the humane duty of ren­
dering aid to someone in serious peril if he were able to do so and

                                                               page 227
no one else could. Nor would any journalist argue that it should
relieve him of that obligation, but that is not usually the position at
major disasters of this type.
  There the duty of the journalists on the scene is to record the
event without impeding rescue efforts, but they and their editors
also have another responsibility. They should be aware of the
danger that photographers going about their proper work of taking
pictures of the injured, dead or distressed may appear callous or
insensitive to those involved and by doing so add to their distress.
  The duty of editors in the instructions they give and of photogra­
phers in the way they behave generally in covering major disasters
is to exercise the maximum possible care and understanding for the
feelings of all those involved.

On TRUTH
   An article which gave particular offence to readers, including the
7,000 who signed the Merseyside Area Student Organisation’s pe­
tition, occupied the front page of The Sun on 19 April four days
after the tragedy, headlined THE TRUTH. Its subsidiary headline
alleged “Some fans picked the pockets of victims. Some fans uri­
nated on the brave cops. Some fans beat up PC giving kiss of life.”
The article and its headline provoked many protests to the Press
Council, some with multiple signatures, that it was offensive, dis­
tressing and insensitive. Appearing as a news story, it reported seri­
ous allegations about the behaviour of Liverpool fans by a named
Member of Parliament; by policemen, one of them named and three
anonymous; a named nearby resident, and an unnamed neighbour.
  Although it said the named policeman stressed that only a small
minority of Liverpool fans behaved “so badly”, the article was
generally one-sided, offering no other counter to the allegations it
included. Whether or not any of these allegations can be sustained,
the article Was unbalanced and its general effect misleading. The
headline TH E TRUTH was insensitive, provocative and unwar­
ranted. The Sun's own ombudsman declared that the article should
not have been published in the form in which it appeared. The Press
Council condemns its publication.
  Although The Sun’s article attracted particular criticism similar
allegations were reported, sometimes with a lack of sensitivity, in
other newspapers.

page 228
Comment articles
  Three examples of another type of article which were the subject
of specific criticism to the Council were those by Edward Pearce
and Auberon Waugh in The Sunday Times and The Sunday Tele­
graph respectively, and by Richard Littlejohn of the Evening Stand­
ard. All three were clearly comment articles giving the writer’s own
\iew of the events to which they referred. The Council has said as
a point of principle that columnists and observers are free to com­
ment on affairs and newspapers free to publish their comments,
making clear that this is what they are.
  The freedom to comment embraces publication of deliberately
challenging and provocative views, but editors should weigh care­
fully how far to exercise that freedom in the face of deep tragedy
when it may appear distasteful. National tragedy or disaster is not
an occasion for writers to exercise gratuitous provocation, but it was
within the discretion of the editors of the three newspapers to pub­
lish the columnists’ articles they did.

Cartoons
  Three cartoons which gave offence to some readers were drawn
to the Council’s attention. They were drawings by Gaskill in Today
comparing the price of stadium safety with the cost of a star player;
Mahood in the Daily Mail showing the FA Cup running over with
woe; and a black picture by Garland in The Independent of a goal
net torn in skull-like holes.
 Cartoons are not always intended to amuse or to poke fun. Artists
have often used them to make a sharp or bitter point and the Press
Council accepts that they were free to do so on this occasion.
                               *   *   *   *


  In the course of the Council’s inquiry it was greatly assisted by
many of the letters from members of the public. It was also helped
by the ready response of editors in explaining the decisions they
made. The Council will consider whether it would be useful to pub­
lish some of these in a record of the inquiry. (AA17193).


 SIOUX CITY AIR CRASH
   It was wrong of The People to print coloured pictures of the dead
 in the wreckage of the Sioux City air crash, the Council said.

                                                              page 229
  It announced the result of its special inquiry into the publication
of pictures on 23 July which provoked a total of more than 140 com­
plaints to the Council and to the paper itself.
      Finding: The Press Council has repeatedly emphasised the
    difficult decision editors have to take when they are able to print
    pictures which illustrate an important news event effectively but
    are horrific and may shock, distress or offend general readers as
    well as those directly concerned.
      Some of the coloured pictures published by The People of
    wreckage, survivors and bodies from the crashed airliner at Sioux
    City were horrific, distressing and offensive in the extreme. They
    were headlined “Horror of flight 232...the pictures television
    couldn’t show”.
      Their publication provoked over 40 written complaints to the
    Press Council and well over 100 letters of protest and complaint
    sent directly to the editor, Ms Wendy Henry.
      Attending a hearing by its complaints committee, Ms Henry has
    told the Press Council she discussed whether to publish the
    pictures with her deputy and assistant editors. Most o f those
    consulted thought they should not be used. She decided to publish
    them because although other reports hailed flight 232 as a miracle
    when 186 people survived, 109 people had been killed. Ms Henry
    believed the crash was caused by the system failing, and that, she
    has said, “must mean negligence”. She thought that if airlines
    realised they might get harsh coverage if their planes fell out of
    the sky it might make them more vigilant.
       The Press Council cannot accept that these considerations
     justified publication of these pictures in the way they were used.
       They were published without any text alleging or implying that
     any organisation or person was responsible, or throwing light on
     the cause of the crash, or indicating lessons which might be
     learned from it.
       Publication of such horrific and offensive photographs of the
     dead was insensitive. It was not justified by any serious public
     interest, and was an error of judgment by The People.
       The Press Council notes that the editor has been surprised at
     the volume of criticism of her decision from many quarters,
     particularly from readers of her paper. It welcomes her indication

 page 230
    that had she foreseen this consequence she would probably have
    taken a different decision. (AA17582).


PICTURE OF HANGED HOSTAGE
  A picture of an American hostage hanged in the Lebanon brought
home forcefully the barbarity of the terrorists’ conduct, the Council
said, exonerating editors from criticism for publishing it.
 A pro-Iranian group calling themselves the Organisation for the
Oppressed of the Earth said they had hanged American Marine
Lieutenant-Colonel William Higgins following the capture of
Sheikh Obeid, the Hezbollah chieftain, by the Israelis the previous
week.
  The group released a 30-second videotape of a man hanging from
a noose and the Council held an inquiry after a still from this video
was published in some national newspapers.
      Finding: It was not improper for newspapers to publish the
    picture of a man who had apparently been hanged and was
    reported to be Lieut-Colonel William Higgins, the US Marine
    who had been held as a hostage in the Lebanon.
      Though the picture was distasteful and distressing and would
    offend many readers, its publication was justifiable in the public
    interest. Reproduced in several British newspapers including the
    Daily Mirror, The Independent, the Daily Star, The Sun, and Today,
    and in the Economist, the picture was also published by American
    newspapers and magazines. It had been taken from a short 'vide­
    otape released by a terrorist group calling itself the Organisation
    for the Oppressed of the Earth which claims to have hanged Col
    Higgins.
     The Council received four complaints about the publication.
    Two were against The Sun and two against the Daily Mirror. The
    Council decided to conduct its own inquiry into the general
    publication of the picture in the British press.
      It is satisfied that editors considered carefully before deciding
    to publish the photograph. The videotape from which it was taken
    had already been seen by Mrs Higgins to try to determine whether
    the man shown was indeed her husband. Newspaper reproduc­
    tion was unlikely, therefore, to add significantly to her distress,

                                                               page 231
    but it may well have been particularly distressing to the families
    and friends of other hostages.
      The Press Council regrets this, but it has no doubt that editors
    were entitled to decide to publish the picture to bring home
    forcefully to readers the barbarity of the terrorists’ conduct.
    (AA17613).

Lockerbie pictures justified
  Time International was justified in publishing photographs of
bodies of victims of the Lockerbie air disaster, the Council decided.
  Mrs Joan Tovey, Brogdale Farmhouse, Brogdale Road, Ospringe,
Kent, complained that the magazine published needlessly explicit
pictures of the bodies of two victims of an air disaster in a manner
likely to cause further distress to relatives and friends of the victims.
 The story was illustrated by two colour pictures, captioned “One
body, still strapped to an airplane seat, is lowered from a rooftop,
   while another is covered”.
  Mrs Tovey complained to the Council that such graphic details
were unnecessary to bring home the depth of the tragedy. They
added nothing to the story and could cause considerable distress
to relatives of the victims.
  Ms Gloria Hammond from Time in New York told the com­
plainant all journalists reporting human suffering wished to soften
the reality, but their business was to bring that reality to readers.
 Mr William Mader, the London bureau chief, said several British
publications carried similar pictures.
 Mrs Tovey said that as the magazine circulated widely among the
American armed forces it would be more likely than British news­
papers to cause offence.
      Adjudication: The Press Council has frequently reminded edi­
    tors that they should exercise extreme care in deciding whether
    to publish pictures of disaster or tragedy which may intrude into
    grief, add unjustifiably to the emotional stress of those affected,
    or offend readers at large.
      Such decisions are difficult to make. In this case the Council is
    satisfied that they were properly weighed and that the editor was
    justified in publishing these pictures, as other newspapers and
    media did, to illustrate the awful nature of the tragedy.

page 232
      T he com plaint against Time International is re je c te d .
    (AA16783).

Entitled to report horror
  Newspapers were entitled to report the horror of the Clapham rail
disaster, the Council decided.
  It rejected two complaints, the first by Mr E. Fuller, 34 Wetheral
Drive, Stanmore, Middlesex, who alleged that The Sun irresponsibly
published a report of the Clapham train disaster which included of­
fensive and unnecessary macabre details of injuries.
  In a second, similar complaint, Mr Eugene Zdrojewski, Cross­
roads Cottage, Frogham Hill, Frogham, Fordingbridge, Hampshire,
added that publication of details of injuries was unsympathetic to
the feelings of the victims and their families.
  Headlined “SIGNAL FAULT KILLS 41”, the story began on the
front page and spread over nine pages inside.
 Mr Fuller complained to the Council that he had never seen such
an insensitive piece of reporting. He knew of a woman with a three
month old child who was widowed in the accident and was not told
until eight o’ clock on the morning the story appeared.
  Mr Zdrojewski told the editor, Mr Kelvin MacKenzie, that he
found the macabre references to various states of mutilation un­
necessary and offensive. He enclosed the signatures of 25 people
who supported his complaint.
 Mr Kenneth Donlan, then managing editor, told him such infor­
mation was often unwelcome but there were occasions when The
Sun believed it permissible. Clapham was such a time.
  Mr Zdrojewski said he believed the reporting added to the vic­
tims’ families’ burden, and complained to the Council.
  Mr Donlan said the whole tragedy was offensive and macabre.
The injuries they felt obliged to describe gave no names or leads
to identify the victims.
  He said the message from the team of reporters who covered the
crash was that if the doctors and medical services gave out details
of injuries it was surely the press’s duty to report them.
     Adjudication: Some readers may have been offended and many
    must have been disturbed by the dreadful details in The Sun’s

                                                            page 233
    report of the Clapham train disaster but the accident itself was
    dreadful.
      It is the role of a newspaper to report, and this newspaper was
    entitled to report the disaster graphically as it did, giving details
    of the kind of injuries sustained, and bringing home to readers the
    horror of the event. Casualties whose injuries were described
    were not identified in the paper, and there is no evidence that the
    paper or its staff were unsympathetic to those bereaved or dis­
    tressed by the tragedy.
      The complaint against The Sun is rejected. (Z16733).

Machete attack picture
 An identifiable picture of a man killed in a machete attack should
not have been published, the Council ruled.
  It upheld a complaint by Mr John T. Haines, 25 Queensway, Law-
ford, Manningtree, Essex, that Today unjustifiably published an
identifiable photograph of the victim of an attack by a machete
gang, which was likely to cause distress to relatives.
 The colour picture of the unnamed victim was captioned “FIELD
OF DEATH: police in protective clothing examine the body of the
company director who was m urdered for defying the machete
gang”.
  Mr Haines complained that publication was unethical because of
the suffering it must have caused to relatives.
  The then managing editor, Ms Jane Reed, said they felt it wrong
to sanitize the news where deaths were avoidable, politically moti­
vated or where to do so would hide the true and horrific nature of
terrorism.
 She said the majority of such decisions, taken in the heat of the
moment, were the right ones. In retrospect she believed they were
wrong in this case, and apologised on the newspaper’s behalf.
 Mr Haines said at least the newspaper could print the apology.
The Council asked the dead man’s son, Mr Darren P. Hurburgh,
58 Penworthan Road, South Croydon, Surrey, for his comment.
 Mr Hurburgh said he was glad to learn that somebody actually
cared about the feelings and matters in connection with the news
and not just the amount of papers it would sell. He had not seen

page 234
the horrific pictures, and could see now why the matter was not
brought to his attention.
 He did not feel it good enough for the newspaper to apologise.
They assumed a quick apology would suffice, but it would not.
      Adjudication: The dreadful picture of the identifiable body of
    a man killed when he was attacked by a machete gang should not
    have been published. It was clearly likely to add to the distress of
    his family and it added nothing to the account of the crime which
    could have justified the intrusion into privacy and grief of its
    publication.
      The Press Council welcomes the editor’s recognition in retro­
    spect that the decision to publish in this case was wrong.
      The complaint against Today is upheld. (Z16764).

Pros and cons of Clapham picture
  The editor of Today considered carefully the pros and cons of
publishing a colour picture of a dead victim of the Clapham rail
disaster, the Council decided.
  It rejected a complaint by Mr John T. Haines, 25 Queensway,
Lawford, Manningtree, Essex, that Today unjustifiably published an
identifiable photograph of a woman victim of a train crash at Cla­
pham which was likely to cause distress to relatives.
 The picture was captioned “LAST JOURNEY: she was smartly
dressed for her trip to London. Now she lies lifeless on bare
wooden slats among the mangled debris of her commuter carriage”.
  Mr Haines complained that the publication was abhorrent and
distasteful, and suggested that any relative of the dead woman
would have recognised her and been caused great distress.
 The paper later carried letters from four readers criticising the
publication of the photograph, and one who congratulated the
photographers for bringing home the full horror of the tragedy.
  The then managing editor, Ms Jane Reed, told Mr Haines the pic­
ture was taken by one of the emergency services and distributed to
the media. It conveyed dramatically the pointless loss of life in a
tragedy which many felt could have been avoided.
 It was largely public pressure that made authorities improve the
poor standards of service that contributed to tragedies such as this,

                                                               page 235
she said. Anything that increased public awareness was a weapon
in that fight.
  Mr Haines told the Council publication of a picture which was
easily identifiable was a gross intrusion into the family’s grief.
  The editorial manager of Today, Mr John Honeywell, said the de­
cision to use the picture was not taken lightly. The editor and his
senior colleagues felt it portrayed in a single image the pointless
loss of life.
       Adjudication: Decisions whether to use particular pictures of
     the victims of disaster are always difficult for editors. A photo­
     graph of an individual victim of a tragedy in which many are killed,
     injured or trapped may bring home the horror of the event to
     readers where words fail to do so. Publication, therefore, may
     increase public determination that steps be taken to avoid a
     repetition of the accident. At the same time publication of such a
     picture maybe felt to add unnecessarily to the pain or grief of an
     identifiable victim’s relatives and friends.
       The Press Council is satisfied that the editor considered care­
     fully the arguments for and against publishing this colour picture
     which had been taken by the emergency services and issued to the
     press.
      In those circumstances the Press Council does not fmd that it
    was wrong of the paper to publish the photograph. The complaint
    against Today is rejected. (Z16740).

Trapped driver picture
  It was within an editor’s discretion to publish a picture showing
the face of a driver trapped in a wrecked car, the Council decided,
  It rejected a complaint by Mr and Mrs K. Barker, Portobello
Street, Hull, that the Hull Daily Mail published a photograph of him
trapped in a vehicle, which caused anxiety to his wife, friends and
relatives.
  The front page picture was the largest of four under the headline
‘CITY CRASH CHAOS’. It was captioned “Firemen fight to free
a trapped driver from the wreckage”.
  Mr and Mrs Barker’s solicitors, Messrs Rollit, Farrell and Blan-
don, King William House, Market Place, Hull, complained to the
editor, Mr M.G. Wood, that the picture caused enormous distress
to Mrs Barker who was still suffering from shock when she saw it.

page 236
Using it without her consent was either thoughtless or an attempt
to sensationalise the accident by showing the most horrific scenes,
they said. They sought a public apology.
  Mr Wood replied that the rescue and treatment of accident vic­
tims was paid for by public funds, and he believed the paper had
a right and duty to show how it was spent. Its aim was to confront
people with the shocking reality of road accidents, but he apo­
logised for any distress to Mrs Barker.
 When the solicitors complained to the Council they said Mr and
Mrs Barker had a photograph showing the firemen freeing him in
which he was unidentifiable which would have been more appro­
priate to use.
      Adjudication: It is regrettable that publication of a newspaper
    picture of a crash victim should add to his or her family’s distress,
    but the Press Council does not find that it was improper of the
    Hull Daily Mail to publish this photograph of firemen trying to
    free the trapped driver.
      The picture, while dramatic, did not focus on horrific detail and
    Mrs Barker was aware of her husband’s accident before it was
    published. There was no obligation on the newspaper to seek her
    permission before publishing it. Its use to illustrate an important
    local news story was well within the editor’s discretion.
      The complaint against the H ull Daily M ail is rejected.
    (AA16991).

Moment of grief
 It was within an editor’s discretion to publish a photograph of a
couple in a moment of grief after the inquest on their son, the
Council ruled.
  It did not uphold a complaint by Mr and Mrs Roy Hoad, 27 Vi-
vary Road, Taunton, Somerset, that the Somerset County Gazette
improperly intruded on their privacy by publishing their photo­
graphs with a report of the inquest.
  The report said bank clerk Karen Drake sobbed as a Taunton in­
quest heard how her boyfriend, Adrian Hoad, electrocuted himself
in front of her.
 The report was accompanied by two pictures - one of Miss Drake
and the other of Mr and Mrs Hoad.

                                                                 page 237
   Mr Hoad complained that it was insensitive and i n h n m a n to take
 the picture without their knowledge and consent and to use it with
 the report. Trying to cope with and continue some semblance of
 everyday life after such a terrible tragedy to their son was agonizing
 enough without the additional trauma of such callous press cover­
 age, he said.
   The editor, Mr John Hancock, said inquests by their very nature
 were intrusions into private grief. The media were the public’s rep­
 resentatives and guardians of the public interest.
  He said one of the most poignant and telling themes to emerge
from the inquest was evidence given by the Hoads that Adrian was
by nature a happy young man. This was relevant to the inquest
where an open verdict was recorded, supporting their assertion that
he would not have attempted suicide. The pictures portrayed the
people whose evidence was central to the outcome of the hearing,
he said.
  Mr Hancock said the picture of them was accepted from a freel­
ance and published in good faith on the assumption that the people
involved were well aware of the photographer’s presence. He said
further inquiries had established that the picture was “snatched” as
the Hoads were emerging from a shop some time after the inquest
hearing. The newspaper had a clear policy not to publish pictures
taken in such circumstances and would not have published it had
they been aware of them.
  Mr Hoad commented that he was not called to the inquest and
his wife’s statement was merely a formality since she was not in their
son’s house when the incident leading to his death occurred.
  Mr Hancock said that the photographer had never given them the
slightest cause to doubt his integrity.
       Adjudication: The photograph taken of Mr and Mrs Hoad
    following the inquest on the tragic death of their son portrayed
    them at a time of deep grief. The editor has told the Press Council
    that had he known that the picture had been taken without their
    consent as they emerged from a tea-shop, he would not have used
    it. Nevertheless, the Press Council believes it was within his
    discretion to decide to do so.
      Generally it is not possible nor would it be desirable to say that
    people may not be photographed in a public place like a street
    unless they give permission. Similarly it would not be right to say

page 238
that photographs may not be published in newspapers without the
consent of their subjects.
   The Press Council says in its Declaration of Principle on Privacy
that it expects news and pictures to be obtained with sympathy
and discretion. In this case the Council does not regard publica­
tion of their photograph, distressing as it was to Mr and Mrs
Hoad, as an invasion of their privacy. Its publication does not
therefore require the justification of being seriously in the public
interest to be acceptable.
  The complaint against the Somerset County Gazette is not up­
held. (AA17358).




                                                         page 239
         THE PRESS CO UNCIL
No. 1 Salisbury Square, London EC4Y 8AE
