                                                Christine Gausden MCIOB




8th April 1993


Dear
Please find enclosed the final FSADC minutes and financial analysis to complete your
records.
For your further information, I met with                rf the DNH, 6th April 1993,
whereupon it was concluded that she would report back to the football authorities that
to provide an a technical advisory service would require the employment of a specialist
person for three days per week, minimum.

However, I spoke with Adrian Titcombe this morning who stated that
           view had reverted once more and that he had concluded should the FA deem
that such a service was required then the FA alone could pay, the FL saw no
requirement as such.
I am presently speaking with a number of commercial organisations with regard to my
own future, nothing definite has occurred as yet but I am reasonably optimistic. I have
spoken with       also, she is very cheerful but we both very much miss the mental
stimulation aenvea from a working environment. That said, I have been chairing
meetings on behalf of the Institue of Building which has been fairly demanding.

    [6pe you ha^Bshad aj stress free Easter,
■w r m r o e i n r - p r p K ;




Christine Gaastfen MCI OB
           THE FOOTBALL STADIA ADVISORY DESIGN COUNCIL
                  MINUTES OF A MEETING HELD ON
                   MONDAY, 15TH FEBRUARY 1993
                WINCHESTER HOUSE, LONDON NW1 5RA


           Present:          D G M Roberts (Chairman)
                             Professor L Maunder


                             Dr. C Nicholson
           In Attendance            Ms C Gausden (Executive Officer)


2 4 .0 1          Apologies for Absence

                  There were no apologies for absence.

2 4 .0 2          Minutes of Previous Meeting

                  The minutes of the 23rd meeting, 4th January 1993, were signed by
                  the Chairman.
2 4 .0 3          Matters Arising
                  The Chairman confirmed that final accounts for the year 91/92 were in
                  hand with Baker Tilley and that he had requested that a final account be
                  prepared to date 31st March 1993.
                  The Chairman reported that he was in receipt of correspondence from
                                  Reference honoraria. Action reference this item to be
                  undertaken 29th March 1993 as necessary.
                  The Chairman reported that the Football Association had confirmed that
                  funding of the FSADC would continue to 31st March 1993.
                  The Executive Officer reported that payment was still outstanding from
                  the Football Trust specific to the balance of monies spent with reference
                  to the 2 no. publications pertinent to spectators with disabilities.
                                                                              ACTION CG

                      The urgency of the forthcoming FSADC technical guideline reference
                      terraces was stated.       Confirmed availability for the Recman
                      Exhibition, March '93.
                                                                               ACTION

                      Confirmation of space to host an FSADC stand at the ICE Conference,
                      March '93, was stated as outstanding.
                                                                              ACTION CG

                      The agenda and arrangements reference spectators for the FSADC
                      hosted seminars at Recman were confirmed byl           IAll action
                      items herein to be undertaken by Blenheim.
                      Stated that the Football League were 'backing' these seminars
           in name.
                     stated that the request to the FT for financial sponsorship of
           guidelines and seminars would be reviewed by the Trust, March '93.

2 4 .0 4   Chairman's Remarks

           The Chairman confirmed that he had met with                   of the
           Department of National Heritage regarding the cessation of FSADC
           activities.

2 4 .0 5   Financial Report
           The Executive Officer tabled the financial report, comprising income and
           expenditure to date, and a detailed analysis thereof, together with a
           statement as to the current financial status of the FSADC. Copies
           attached.
           All fixed future expenditure to 31st March 1993 had been included
           herein; details of all outstanding known income and expenditure to occur
           in advance of 31st March 1993 were also included for further
           information.

2 4 .0 6   Guidelines
           The Executive Officer reported that sales were excellent specific to
           'Designing for Spectators with Disabilities'.
                    bonfirmed that the Stadia Handbook was to be revised and
           would be available at Recman.
                                                                       ACTION

           It was reported that the FSADC technical guideline specific to terraces
           would be published to launch at Recman.
                   confirmed expenditure specific to                services as
           £1,968.93 to date.        stated that                  nvolvement herein
           was shortly to cease.
                      earned as to the implications of overexpenditure herein.

                    xmfirmed that draft text would be despatched to Messrs.
           Maunder and Nicholson.
                                                                       ACTION

           The publication of a summary of FSADC services prior to the cessation
           of the Council was discussed. The requirement for a public notice/press
           statement was noted as of necessity and priority.
                                                              ACTION D G M R /Q

           A factual summary for presentation to the FA and FL, as funding
           authorities, was agreed.
                                                                  ACTION DGMR
2 4 .0 7   Liaison
           All items reference liaison have been reported elsewhere in the context
           of these minutes.

2 4 .0 8   Research

           Professor Maunder stated that he would confirm to the Lord Chief
           Justice the cessation of the Council, mention would be made herein with
           regard to the lack of resources available to pursue research activities.
                                                                    ACTION LM

2 4 .0 9   Meetings and Seminars
           All items reference meetings and seminars have been reported elsewhere
           in the context of these minutes.

2 4 .1 0   A .O .B .
           The Chairman outlined in brief those issues as discussed with Ms
           Stewart of the DNH, the need for continuity of FSADC services and
           activities had been stressed and names of suggested personnel, specific
           to future developments, confirmed.
           Copywright of publications and data was discussed in brief, a letter
           from                    was tabled in conjunction with this issue.

           The Chairman confirmed that the FSADC was to host a luncheon, 29th
           March 1993, by way of thanks to all contributors of FSADC activities,
           most specifically those working party members who had given much
           time at minimal cost.
                                                                    ACTION CG

2 4 .1 1   Final Meeting

           The final meeting will be 1000 -1200 hours, Monday, 29th March
           1993, Winchester House, NW1 5RA.




                                  Chairman


                                  Date
           THE FOOTBALL STADIA ADVISORY DESIGN COUNCIL
                  MINUTES OF A MEETING HELD ON
                     MONDAY, 29th MARCH 1993
                WINCHESTER HOUSE, LONDON NW1 5RA


           Present:          D G M Roberts (Chairman)

                             Dr. C Nicholson

           In Attendance            Ms C Gausden (Executive Officer)


2 5 .0 1          Apologies for Absence

                  Apologies for absence were received from Professor Maunder.

2 5 .0 2          Minutes of Previous Meeting

                  The minutes of the 24th meeting, 15th February 1993, were signed by
                  the Chairman.

2 5 .0 3          Matters Arising

                  The Chairman reported that he was in receipt of no further
                  correspondence frorr                    eference honoraria. No action
                  reference this item was therefore necessary.

2 5 .0 4          Chairman's Remarks

                  The Chairman reported that a letter had been received from
                  expressing her gratitude for the charitable donations further to the loss
                  of her husband.
                  The Chairman reported that a letter had been received from)
                        jxpressing her gratitude with regard to the cheque in the sum of
                  £670.00.
                                                             •

                  The Chairman confirmed that                     of the Department of
                  National Heritage, had written to all Council members, also all architects
                  and engineers from the working parties, with regard to the cessation of
                  the FSADC.
                  The Chairman reported that no response had been forthcoming to
                  Council members from Mr Graham Kelly, of the Football Association,
                  with regard to the premature termination of their appointments.

                      It was confirmed that this meeting would be followed by an Architects'
                      Working Party meeting, 1200 hours, and a luncheon, 1230 for 1300
                      hours.

2 5 .0 5              Financial Report

                  The Executive Officer tabled the financial report, comprising income and
                  expenditure to date, and a detailed analysis thereof, together with a
                  statement as to the current financial status of the FSADC. Copies
                  attached.
            It was confirmed that            had received a cheque in the sum of
            £670.00 gross.
            It was agreed that the bank mandate be altered, with effect from 31st
            March 1993, to permit the Chairman, as sole signatory, to pay all
            outstanding creditors post this date. The Chairman undertook to fulfill
            this task for a period of c. 1 month.
                                                                  ACTION DGMR

            It was confirmed that accounts would be prepared to 31st March 1993.
                                                                      ACTION CG

2 5 .0 6    G uidelines

                       Confirmed that the Stadia Handbook had been revised and was
            be available for Recman.
            It was reported that the FSADC technical guideline specific to terraces
            was published and launched at Recman.
            The publication of a letter from the Chairman, presenting a summary of
            FSADC services prior to cessation, was confirmed, for distribution
            together with the publicity leaflet reference terraces.
            The Chairman expressed his thanks to all members of the Terraces
            Working Party.

2 5 .0 7    Liaison

            The Chairman reported that he had entertained           bnd
           ___________o lunch.
            All other items reference liaison have been reported elsewhere in the
            context of these minutes.

2 5 .0 8    Research

            Dr Nicholson tabled a leaflet summarizing HSE research findings
            entitled 'Managing Crowd Safety in Public Venues', published via HSE
            and available @ £60.00. It was latterly confirmed that expenditure in the
            region of £120,000.00 had been incurred in the production of this
            document.

2 5 .0 9    Meetings and Seminars

            Dr Nicholson reported reference the ICE conference pertaining to crowd
            safety, several interesting papers had been presented, abstracts of which
            are available.
            M e s s r s R e p o r t e d reference the FSADC seminars at
            Recman, speakers had been excellent, however, the venue had been
            poorly chosen, continual noise immediately adjacent had severely
            disrupted procedings, numerous complaints had been received further to
            the latter, also reference the quality and venue of refreshments.
2 5 .1 0   A.O.B.
           It was confirmed that Professor Maunder would reimburse the FSADC
           reference expenses paid in advance for this meeting.
                                                                     ACTION LM

           It was confirmed that all publications were to be despatched to the
           Sports Council for future sale.
           It was confirmed that all FSADC files, cabinets and the database were to
           be despatched to the Sports Council.

           It was confirmed that the Sports Council was to act as custodian of all
           information for the interim.
           It was agreed that the FSADC would bear all costs incurred in the
           transfer of the aforementioned.
           It was confirmed that the Executive Officer be permitted to purchase the
           word processor.
                    Reported that he had attended a meeting, 26th March 1993, in
           his capacity as Chief Architect to the Sports Council, together with
           representatives from the DNH, the Football Association, the Football
           League, the Football Licensing Authority and the Football Trust,
           wherein the the possible future requirement for technical advice was
           discussed.
           It was agreed that the following payments be made :
           £500.00 to          in recognition of his services as Chairman to the
           working party reference designing for spectators with disabilities,
           £400.00 to          fn recognition erf his representation of the
           FSADC at various seminars,

           £1,000.00 to the Executive Officer in recognition of services to the
           Council.
           The Chairman expressed his deep thanks to all Council members and the
           Executive Officer for their loyalty, hard work and support




                                  Chairman


                                  D ate........
                                      FOOTBALL STADIA

                                 ADVISORY DESIGN COUNCIL

                            MINUTES OF THE INAUGURAL MEETING

                                held at 16 Lancaster Gate

                                on Friday 31st August 1990




Present:         Mr D G M Roberts (Chairman)
                 Prof L Maunder



                 D r C E Nicholson

In attendance FL

                 FA     -     Mr A R Titcombe


An apology for absence was received from Mr R H G Kelly.


1. Chairman’s Introductory Remarks

      (a) The Chairman welcomed to the inaugural meeting both the members of
           the Council and representatives of the parent bodies.

      (b) It was agreed that the Council’s objectives should be to

            - assist clubs to meet their legal obligations, upgrade their facilities
               and achieve* their aspirations in a cost effective and timely way.

            - work with local authorities in developing consistency in standards
              required for safety certificates.

            - gain the confidence of clubs and local authorities.

            - identify priorities.


      Recommendations would be in two categories

      (i) ‘essential’ to safety and comfort (hopefully to become mandatory
             through the FLA), and

     (ii) ‘desirable’ in order to improve facilities

      (c) The Chairman’s actions to date were noted.
2. Terms of Reference                                                                                           ACTION


      The proposed terms of reference for the Council (see Annex 1) were accepted
      and it was agreed that they mirrored those expressed by Lord Justice
      Taylor’s Working Party.

      The Advisory Design Council would endeavour to sift through the enormous
      amount of documentation available and identify what was essential. This
      would be welcomed by Football League clubs who sought a degree of uniformity
      which currently did not exist. However, the effects of the Council’s work
      may take some time to work through the system to produce positive results.

      It was agreed that the title of ‘Advisory Design Council’ was not entirely
      appropriate and needed to be more specific. The amendment to ‘Football
      Stadia Advisory Design Council’ was approved.


3. Review of the Current Position

      The Council considered the current situation (as summarised in Annex 2) with
      regard to

      - legislation

      - design guidelines

      - club obligations in relation to all seater stadia

      - relevant British and Foreign documents.

      It was agreed that details of additions should be submitted to the
      Chairman or the Secretariat. It was pointed out that there were a number                                   ALL
      of ongoing initiatives which might also be relevant.

      A revised version of Annex 2 will then be issued.


4. Football Association and Football League Servicing of the Council

      It was reported that the Football League Commercial Department would
      shortly be moving into new premises off the Edgware Road and space had been                                 AS
      reserved for the Council. It would also be possible for secretarial and
      clerical support to be provided.

      Designs would be sought for a Council letterhead.                                                          ART


5. Additional Support

      The employment of a graduate research assistant had originally been
      contemplated but it was now agreed that two positions would be more
      appropriate. The person undertaking bibliographical research would need
      experience and a trained librarian would fit the bill better. The
      appointment need only be for three or four months, possibly on secondment.
      The interpretation of regulatory documents could not be expected in the time
      available.

      T h e a p p o i n t m e n t of a full-time a d m i n i st r a t o r to be based in the Football L.eague
      office would be req ui red in du e course. A technical b a c k g r o u n d was necessary
      a n d a weH-defined job specification s hou ld be draw n up.                                              DG.MR
                                                                                                       ACTION
      The Council considered the co-option of experts in additional disciplines as
      and when necessary along with possible approaches to the organisations that                       DGMR
      might wish to make contributions. It was agreed that the Chairman should meet
      meet as many as possible of the latter.


6. Liaison with other bodies

      (a) The Chairman hoped that The Football Association and The Football League
          would be represented at meetings of the Council whenever it was deemed
          appropriate.

      (b) It was agreed that it was essential that there was a flow of information
           between the Council and organisations such as the FLA, the Football Trust,
           and the Sports Council.

      (c) It was reported that a standing body had been set up consisting of
           representatives of the Department of the Environment, the Home Office,
           The Football Association and The Football League and it was hoped that the
           FSADC might be considered for future inclusion.

      (d) It was suggested that in due course, other professional bodies like RIBA,
           ISE etc should be contacted and that the Council might in due course                        DGMR
           consider calling a forum for an exchange of views on related subjects.

      (e) The importance of maintaining contacts with a number of the bodies such as
          the local authority associations and the FSA was recognised.                                 DGMR

      (f) The Football Association and The Football League indicated they had no
           objection to the exchange of documents with other organisations.

      (g) The Football League were asked whether the Council might be provided with
           details of the recent survey of clubs’ plans with regard to their stadia.

      (h) A fuller list of bodies with whom liaison should be established will be                      DGMR
          prepared.


7. Literature and Correspondence

      (a) A list of correspondence received by the Chairman was noted.

      (b) It was agreed that at some stage a list might be compiled of companies
           offering help. This would give factual information only (e.g.
           qualifications of senior staff, past and present appointments etc) and
           not comment on capabilities.


8. Visits to Grounds

      (a) It was agreed that every opportunity should be taken to visit stadia in the
          UK and abroad, and that this should not be limited to football grounds.
          However, these visits should be coordinated and the features to be noted
          should be clearly identified. A list indicating clubs displaying good and
           bad characteristics would be helpful.

      (b) T h e F o otba ll League would write to clubs in tr o d u c in g th e m e m b e rs o f the
          Council a n d would be ha ppy to a rra n g e m atch tickets as re q u ire d .
      (c) The Football Association would be writing to UEFA and FIFA regarding the
           Council and enquiring whether there was any documentation on stadia design, ART
           although none was known to exist.

      (d) Although group visits to grounds were recognised to be difficult, it might
          be possible to hold meetings of the ADC at a stadium, and incorporate
          an inspection.


9. Technical aspects to be considered

      (a) A list of technical aspects to be considered was received.

      (b) The merits and demerits of the ‘Green Guide’ were discussed and it was
          regretted that there was not more time available for the submission of
          comment on the revised draft. It was agreed that it was still unspecific
          in many aspects.

      (c) The Chairman invited members to let him have any comments on the revised
           draft so that they might be incorporated in a joint FA/FL response to the
           Home Office.
      (d) It was agreed that seminars for stadium managers might be beneficial in
           due course.


10. Code of Conduct
     It was agreed that a code of conduct modelled on that produced by the Department
     of Environment for local councillors should be introduced so that the              DGMR
     Council would be seen to be impartial.


11. ADC’s Procedures

      (a) Monthly meeting were deemed appropriate initially.

      (b) Each member agreed to undertake a particular task for the next meeting of
          the Council.


12. Means for Promulgation of ADC’s Recommendations

      (a) There was a brief discussion of the means to be used in due course to
           disseminate findings and recommendations.

      (b) The members indicated a number of forthcoming seminars and conventions
          which might welcome ADC input, in particular the Stadia ‘90 Exhibition
          organised by The Football League, and the RIBA/SC Seminar at which the
          Chairman would be speaking.

13. Budget and Funding
    The Chairman undertook to draw up a budget and business plan which he would
    then discuss with The Football Association and The Football League.                  DGMR
FUTURE MEETINGS

 (a) It was agreed that it was desirable to draw up a programme of meetings for
      the next six to twelve months, and dates would be canvassed.

 (b) The next meeting was fixed for Tuesday 9 October 1990 at Selhurst Park
     if possible.
ANNEX 1



                     TERMS OF REFERENCE OF THE ADVISORY DESIGN COUNCIL




       a)    To initiate and marshall research into the improvement and design
              of football stadia and to disseminate regularly such information and
              expertise;

      b)     to provide an authoritative source of knowledge for all those
              involved in the design and construction of stadia,

both in relation to the refurbishment of existing stadia as well as the provision
of new ones.


ACTIVITIES

In order to carry out the above terms of reference, it is envisaged that die Advisory
Design Council will carry out the following activities:

      a)     to identify and commission research,
      b)     to acquire and store best practice both relating to the UK.
      c)     to disseminate information by:

                i) prompting meetings,
              ii) issuing guidance notes,
            iii) developing databases for access by clubs and by professionals
                     working on behalf of clubs,

      d)      to provide courses
      e)      to consider qualifications for the provision of goods and services
              and to provide accreditation,
      f)      to prepare business plans for the Advisory Design Council for
              consideration by The Football Association and The Football League.
ANNEX 3

                                  REVIEW OF CURRENT POSITION

A.   LEGISLATION

i)   U.K.

     Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
     Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985
     Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987
     Football Spectators Act 1989


B.   EXISTING GUIDELINES FOR DESIGN etc

     "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds" (the "Green Guide") issued by HO/SO - and
     now being revised, see letter attached.
     "Handbook" of Sport and Recreational Building Design", published (1981) by the
     Sports Council
     "Design Criteria for Safe Comfortable and Large Sports Facilities" produced
     by the Comitato Olimpico Nazionale Italiano (CONI)


C.   FUTURE OBLIGATIONS OF CLUBS

            1993 - Elimination of Standing at UEFA matches.

            1994 - E limination of Standing at Division 1 and 2 matches.

            1999 - Elimination of Standing at Division 3 and 4 matches.


D.   OTHER RELEVANT UK DOCUMENTS

            HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER - Lord Justice Taylor’s Reports,
            January 1990.

            BRADFORD DISASTER - Mr Justice Popplewell’s Report, January 1986.

            CROWD SAFETY - Memorandum by FA on Safety of Spectators and Control of
            Crowds at Football Matches.


E.   OTHER RELEVANT DOCUMENTS

     "Order & Security in the Stadia" (3rd Edition, 1985) issued by UEFA.
                                   PA/PL                  30th March 1990



                           Advisory Design Council



1.   "To conduct and marshall research ... to disseminate regularly such
      information and expertise ..."                        Report Rec. 5

     "To provide an authorative source of knowledge for all those involved
     in the design and construction of stadia"             TWP Rec. 2

2.   Activities*

     (i)   to identify and commission research,
     (ii) to acquire and store best practice, U.K. and international,
     (iii) to disseminate information by
            (a)   prompting meetings,
            (b)   issuing guidance notes,
            (c)   developing data bases for access by clubs,
     (iv) to provide short courses,
     (v)   to consider qualifications, accreditation
     (vi) to prepare business plans for ADC.

3.   Structure/nature:

     (i)   independant,
     (ii) high professional standing,
     (iii) membership of up to 10 including structural engineering,
           architecture, electrical engineering, communication technology,
           certifying authorities, crowd psychologist, lawyer, management,
           clubs/FA/FL, police, Sports Council, permanent secretariat.
     (iv) meetings 4/5 annually.

4.   Funding;

     (i)     own revenue streams
     (ii)    club subscriptions
     (iii)   Football Trust
     (iv)    launch aid from FA/FL/Sports Council.
                                                                16th March 1992


                            The Future of FSAfiP



 These notes are based on the discussions that took place at FSADC and at the
 FA meeting at Lancaster Gate on 5th March, 1992.

 1.     Since its launch, the FSADC has worked closcly to the remit o f the
        Taylor Report. Its contributions to date are listed in the summary of
        the meeting between                              and FSADC on 28th
        February. It has been undcd equally by the FA and the FL. The FL
        has taken a full part in the meetings o f the FSADC, but the FA did not
        wish to do so.

2-                 has reported that the FA and the FT support the activities
       o f FSADC, but he believes that FSADC should be integrated more
       closely with the FA*s plans for the future.

3.     In discussion, the requirements of providing advice and information on
       the one hand (as presently carried out by FSADC), and operational
       control on the other (as proposed in the FA plan) have been clarified.
       The majority opinion has been that these two broad functions should
       be carried out by separate bodies.

4.     I f that view is accepted and FSADC remains a separate body, the
       question of how it should be related to football’s governing authorities
       bccomes the central issue. The answer must account for (i) the funding
       o f FSADC, (ii) the relation o f FSADC to the funding bodies, (iii)
       expansion o f the work o f FSADC, and (iv) the membership of
       FSADC.

      On the other requirement, the parallel question is how operational
      control (project management, cost analysis and quality control) should
      be exercised, and to what extent it should be centralized. Such control
      carries with it heavy financial responsibilities. The matter is clearly
      for the funding bodies to decide.

      Whatever that decision may be, consideration should be given to a
      deliberative body, made up o f representatives from all the football
      authorities. Its terms o f reference would call for carcful definition.
      It could not, for example, usurp the responsibilities o f statutory bodies.
      It could, however, provide coordination, make recommendations on
      general polices, and receive reports from FSADC and others. The
      composition o f the meeting at Lancaster Gate serves as a valuable
      starting-point.
7.     F or FSADC to continue as a separate entity - whether or not it reports
        to a deliberative body as suggested - its membership should be
       extended to include representatives o f the funding bodies, and
       independent individuals familiar with the requirements o f the end-
       users, the Clubs.    It would also be desirable to strengthen the
       secretariat.

8.     I f the FA and the F T are taken to be the principal funding bodies of
       FSADC and o f an agreed form o f ISI, the funding arrangements can
       be represented very simply:



                              Le ^             tJ
                                           4 w         _______

                I
           I 5 X ,
     C O M u U 2 U ft&
                                                       jrsAtoo)
       The organisational structure is similar. If a deliberative body is set up,
       the arrangement could take the form




      FA tF T             I CD                          B o d u (

                                           —    -n r       —
                              ' ♦ ’""■■I
                                                Tf s A*>c*I
                                               >MT '             1


              C O M id C o u iu




      where, in view o f the expected financial scale o f ISI and consultants,
      there would be direct accountability to the funding bodies. The FA
      and FT, as envisaged, would be represented on the deliberative body
      and so would receive reports from FSADC by that route.

      The downstream components o f ISI and consultants would be for the
      funding bodies to decide. The downstream components o f FSADC
      should be outlined in our final proposal, togeiher with any
      communication links with ISI.




                                                    L. Maunder
                                       FOOTBALL STADIA
                                       ADVISORY DESIGN
                                           COUNCIL
A FINAL REPORT FROM THE CHAIRMAN
As you will now be aware from previous correspondence and articles in the press, the Football Stadia Advisory Design
Council is to cease operations as of March 31 s t 1 9 9 3 . This follows the decision by the Football League and the Football
Association to end the Council’s funding. Although the Department of National Heritage has decided to establish a new
committee under Departmental chairmanship, with Terms of Reference not dissimilar to those of the FSADC, we have
been given to understand that there are currently no plans or resources for this committee to fund or operate a daily
advisory service such as has been offered by the Council’s Executive Officer, Christine Gausden, or to create a pro­
gramme of research and development.

I very much regret the cessation of our advisory service, which I know from your comments and letters of appreciation,
many of you have found useful and efficient. Rest assured that individual Council members will be doing their utmost to
persuade the Department of National Heritage that some kind of successor service should be established in the future,
although this may take some months.

We are, however, delighted that the Sports Council has agreed to take on the distribution and sale of all FSADC publica­
tions, including our final design guideline on Terraces. A leaflet accompanying this letter provides information about this
publication and details of how to obtain copies. I must stress that the Sports Council is not at present in a position to
answer any technical enquiries about this or indeed any of our publications, although specific enquiries about the
Terraces guidleline may be addressed, in the first instance, to the Football Licensing Authority.

The Council has received many enquiries about our ongoing research, particularly concerning the provision of toilet facili­
ties at football stadia. Publication of this guideline had been scheduled for May, following on from draft proposals cur­
rently being considered by the British Standards Institution. With the closure of the FSADC office, work on this publica­
tion has had to be terminated. Again, I regret the disappointment and inconvenience I know this will cause. I should also
point out that any copies of the draft publication on toilets which remain in circulation should not be used as the basis
for practical decisions without fully consulting the relevant professional advisers and local authorities.

It may be of interest to note that the subject of toilets was perhaps the single topic on which the FSADC received the
most technical enquiries. In the two and half years during which the Council operated, the following subject areas made
up the majority of enquiries:

         ■ Toilet facilities          ■ Turnstile manufacturers             ■ PA Systems               ■ Sightlines
         ■ Seat manufacturers         ■ Crush barrier testing               ■ Temporary structures     ■    Floodlighting
                   ■ Facilities for spectators with disabilities   ■ Ground criteria (FIFA, UEFA, FL etc)
                   ■ Interpretation of the Green Guide             ■ Specialist consultants (from FSADC database)


Apart from handling a large number of enquiries referred to the Council by the various football bodies, the FSADC dealt
with requests for technical information from a wide range of individuals, organisations and public bodies, including 75
Premier League and Football League clubs, either directly or through their professional advisers.

Information was also regularly provided to suppliers, manufacturers, consultants, designers, foreign sporting bodies,
professional institutions, local authorities, politicians, research bodies and many students who have expressed a close
interest in the subject of stadia design. If their enthusiasm can be suitably nurtured and encouraged then this country
should truly be able to boast a number of exciting and talented designers and experts in future years.
Although a major part of the FSADC’s day-to-day work was taken up by its advisory service, the Council was known more
widely for its research and publications. These publications remain, I believe, achievements of which English football
should be proud. The Bibliography of Stadium References was the first of its kind anywhere in the world and has appar­
ently proved an invaluable reference for its users. So too has the FSADC’s Digest of Stadia Criteria, the first time all the
various criteria and standards laid down by the various football authorities have been put together, analysed and
explained in one document. Had the FSADC remained in operation, both these documents were to have been regularly
updated in the future.

Early on in its existence the FSADC published its recommendations on seating - still the most important issue facing
most Premier League and First Division clubs - while the Council’s pioneering research on the needs of spectators with
disabilities was a vital first step in overcoming many of the challenges raised by changes to the Building Regulations
made in 1 9 9 2 . For this research the FSADC was pleased to have worked closely with the Sir Norman Chester Centre for
Football Research, a relationship which many feel could have yielded much practical and relevant knowledge to assist
with future design work. The Council was extremely grateful to the Football Trust for funding the research on facilities for
spectators with disabilities.


The FSADC was also able to gain considerable recognition for its work. The Royal Institute of British Architects recognised
the FSADC's Architects’ Working Party as an approved group. FIFA acknowledged the efforts and spirit of the FSADC on a
number of occasions, as did the Institutions of Civil Engineers and Structural Engineers. The Council of Europe commend­
ed our report on temporary structures. Increasingly, FSADC recommendations have been incorporated into the plans for
new schemes, including the Manchester Olympic bid and the new stadium developments for Kirklees and Sunderland,
and im plem ented at several ongoing projects for clubs such as Arsenal, Liverpool, M anchester United, Millwall,
Wolverhampton Wanderers, Nottingham Forest and Notts County.


Clearly however, there remains much work to be done. The Government’s decision to allow standing accommodation at
Second and Third Division grounds led to the Football Licensing Authority commissioning the FSADC to research and pub­
lish its final guideline, Terraces. Again, this co-operation between the FLA and the FSADC - the two bodies created as a
result of the Hillsborough disaster - promised rich rewards for the future. The Council was also grateful to the FLA for
funding the Terraces document.


The Government’s drive to improve standards of safety and bring the design of terracing more fully in accordance with the
Green Guide indicates how inextricably linked are good design and safety management. Throughout its existence the
FSADC has maintained that good design need not always cost more money and that the long term benefits more than
outweigh the intitial effort. This remains as true for stadia as it does for any other branch of architecture or engineering.
For this reason the FSADC continues to urge, as it has done throughout its existence, that an effective and responsible
form of quality assessment be established for all major grant-aided projects. Not only should this help to ensure a high
standard of design and construction, but it would also help to justify the continued expenditure of public funds derived
from the reduction in pool betting duty.


In conclusion, the Council members and I deeply regret the decision to wind up the FSADC, a decision which runs counter
both to the letter and the spirit of the Taylor Report. We have not had the time to fulfil the remit which we were given. The
decision is particularly disappointing at a time when the Football Association and the Premier League have recently
signed sponsorship deals reported to be worth over £ 3 5 m , and when reminders of the Hillsborough disaster have, only
too recently, been painfully seen and heard across the nation. We believe that the FSADC’s agreed initial expenditure of
no more than £ 1 0 0 ,0 0 0 per year (which included our establishment costs), and the latest funding of just £ 3 0 ,0 0 0 per
year, constituted a small price to pay for supporting an independent body dedicated to helping clubs and raising stan­
dards. No multi-million pound industry can safeguard its future without a commitment to research and development, or to
the establishment of recommended standards.


On a personal note, I wish the very best to all those entrusted with the tasks and responsibilities originally assigned to
the FSADC, and on behalf of the Council, may I heartily thank all those many individuals and organisations who have sup­
ported us with their hard work, dedication and moral support. Thanks also to those who have expressed support and con­
cern during our final months of operation. I remain firmly of the belief that, four years after the disaster which led to his
inquiry, Lord Justice Taylor’s original intentions in recommending the establishment of an advisory design council are as
valid as ever, if this country is not to miss the opportunity of entering the twenty first century with a stock of modern, safe
and well-designed stadia at both local and national level.




                                                                                         Gwilym Roberts CBE FEng
                                                                                                           FSADC Chairman
1. Analysis of the use made of FSADC services
  (by Football League Clubs, public and private organisations and institutions)

A major part of the FSADC’s day-to-day work has been in providing a telephone advisory service.

Up to 30.11.92, the telephone log shows that 73 Premier League and Football League clubs (ie. 79% of the total) have sought
advice from the FSADC, either directly or through their professional advisers. The clubs and the number of their calls are
listed below.

When clubs have contacted the FSADC it has generally been at Club Secretary/ Safety Officer/Stadium Manager level rather
than at Board level.

In addition, calls have been received by many other national and international bodies, details of which are also given below.

These lists do not include the substantial number of enquiries made on a personal level to FSADC members during visits to
clubs/organisations/conferences etc, or channelled directly to members of the FSADC’s various technical working parties
(architects, engineers etc.). Calls relating to specific Guidelines and other publications produced by the FSADC are also not
listed.

The tw e lv e s u b je c t areas on w hich inform ation is requested m o st regularly are as follow s:

   Toilet facilities                                              Turnstile manufacturers
   Seat manufacturers                                             PA Systems
   Interpretation of the Green Guide                              Temporary structures
   Facilities for spectators with disabilities                    Testing of crush barriers
   Ground criteria (FIFA, UEFA, FL etc.)                          Specialist consultants (from FSADC database)
   Sightlines                                                     Floodlighting

R equests for in form atio n , co nsu ltation and advice have been received from th e fo llo w ing se n io r fo o tb a ll clubs:

Arsenal x 5                       Coventry City                    Mansfield Town                    Sheffield Wednesday
Barnet                            Crewe Alexandra x 3              Middlesborough                    Shrewsbury Town
Barnsley x 4                      Crystal Palace x 2               Millwall x 2                      Southampton
Birmingham City x 4               Darlington                       Newcastle Utd                     Sunderland x 5
Blackburn Rovers x 5              Derby County                     Northampton Town x 5              Swindon Town
Bolton Wanderers                  Doncaster Rovers                 Norwich City x 5                  Torquay Utd
Bradford City                     Fulham                           Nottingham Forest x 6             Tottenham Hotspur x 5
Brentford x 3                     Grimsby Town x 3                 Notts County x 12                 Tranmere Rovers x 4
Brighton and Hove Albion          Huddersfield Town                Oldham Athletic x 2               West Bromwich Albion x 2
Bristol City x 2                  Hull City x 2                    Oxford Utd x 2                    West Ham Utd x 2
Bristol Rovers                    Ipswich Town x 4                 Plymouth Argyle                   Wigan Athletic
Burnley                           Leeds Utd x 3                    Port Vale x 4                     Wimbledon
Buiy x 4                          Leicester City                   Portsmouth                        Wolverhampton Wanderers x 5
Cardiff City x 2                  Leyton Orient                    Preston North End                 Wrexham x 3
Charlton Athletic x 3             Lincoln City                     Queens Park Rangers               York City
Chelsea x 2                       Luton Town                       Rochdale x 2
Chester City x 6                  Maidstone Utd x 2                Scarborough
Chesterfield x 2                  Manchester City x 5              Scunthorpe Utd


R equests for in form atio n , co nsu ltation and advice have also co m e from th e fo llo w ing public and p riv ate bodies:

Home Office, DoE, DNH                                              Professional Consultants
British Standards Institute                                        Manufacturers/Suppliers
FIFA and UEFA                                                      Professional Institutions (ISE, ICE, RIBA, Inst, of Building
Football Licensing Authority                                       Control, AMA etc)
Football Trust                                                     Foreign organisations (mainly local authorities & profes­
Emergency Authorities (police, fire, ambulance)                    sional consultants)
Sporting Authorities (rugby, hockey, tennis, cricket)              Research bodies and institutions (eg. Bradford Disaster Unit,
Scottish football authorities and clubs                            Universities, Further Education Colleges, Schools of Design)
Amateur Leagues                                                    Technical Journals
Local Authorities (mainly Building Regulations, Building           Students
Control, Emergency Services)
2 . Recognition of the FSAPC by various bodies

a. Royal Institute of British Architects: RIBA has recognised the FSADC’s Architects’ Working Party as an approved
group and confirmed that it will refer to the FSADC on matters relating to the design and construction of stadia.

b. FSADC recommended standards: Designers submitting plans to the Manchester Olympic Stadium committee have
been specifically required in the Briefing Document to adhere to FSADC recom m ended standards. The Mowlem
Construction company’s publicity material relating to the completion of three new stands at Notts County states that FSADC
recommendations were adhered to for seat spacing and sightlines. It is known that the same standards have also been imple­
mented at a number of other clubs (including Arsenal, Nottm Forest, Millwall), and that several planned designs adhere to
FSADC recommendations (Sunderland, Blackburn, Huddersfield).

c. The FSADC’s report on T em porary Stands at football matches was the sole submission from the UK considered by inter­
national bodies. It invited the following comment from Guido O rlandi, Sports Division, Council of Europe:
       “I found this report particularly well written, interesting and complete...your paper will no doubt prove very
        useful and helpful to the Standing Committee (of the European Convention on Spectators Violence).”

d. FIFA has acknowledged the work of the FSADC on a number of occasions (eg. in FIFA News, response to Report on
Temporary Structures) and carries all FSADC publications in its technical library. See also the comments of FIFA General
Secretary Joseph Blatter in FL News (attached).

e. Standing Committee on Structural Safety: in its Ninth Report, the Committee (set up jointly by Institutions of Civil and
Structural Engineers) states ‘The Committee welcomes the fact the Football Stadia Advisory Design Council aims to provide
an authorative source of knowledge for all those involved in the design of construction of stadia.”

f. The Institution of Civil Engineers has also given its official endorsement to the FSADC Design Guideline “Stadium
Roofs”.

The following two sections summarise the FSADC's Council's plans for 1 9 9 3 . These plans are subject to the agreem ent o f the
Football Association, after due consultation with all interested parties.


3 . Programme of publications for 1993____________________________________________ _______________

a. Safe Terracing - Design Guideline to be published February 1993, commissioned and financed by FLA

b. Toilets - Research is currently in hand but publication has been delayed by lack of funds. Projected completion costs are
£7,000. Application is shortly to be made to the Football Trust for funding.

c. Turf technology/pitch developments - The FSADC has noted a certain amount of confusion concerning current develop­
ments, leading some developers to waste a great deal ofclub’s time and effort on schemes which have no sensible application.
This document would update and explain current developments in natural/synthetic mix turf pitches,the effect of new stands
on ventilation and growth, new ideas in irrigation, recycling water, the future for indoor growth and moveable pitches. The
Council has already had interest from STRI in Bingley, would perhaps get support (editorial and possibly financial) from
likes of Fisons, ICI.

d. Stadia Control Rooms - As clubs move away from polcie control to club control, this document would establish best
design practice, equipment layout, pooling experience and input from police and safety officers. Preliminary work carried out
only. Projected costs £7 - 8,000.

e. Floodlighting - technical guides already exist from various manufacturers. FSADC will ascertain whether there is need for
an independent guide publication. Projected costs £8,000. Might attract funding from leading companies.

f. Planning Briefs - a planning primer for stadia, aimed at helping clubs plan their strategy for new stands or new stadia.
RTPI has offered editorial support. Projected costs £7-8,000.

g. Other subject areas which the FSADC might consider if funds were available:
        Catering/refreshment facilities                  M & E services
        Turnstiles/ counting systems/exit gates          Signage

With limited resources the FSADC recognises the need to make each publication as relevant as possible to the needs of clubs
and welcomes consulation on all these subject areas with interested parties.
4 . Sem inar/event programme for 1 9 9 3

The FSADC is regularly asked to provide speakers/chairmen to conferences or to help set up seminars on stadium related
issues. It has so far committed to participating in the following events:

a. Engineering for Crowd Safety: Conference March 17-18, to be addressed by Dr Chris Nicholson (FSADC Council mem­
ber) and Bill Reid (Member of FSADC Engineers’ Working Party). Principle subject: safe terracing. Costs to be met by
conference organisers.

b. RECMAN - Annual Recreation Managementt exhibition and conference organised by the Sports Council. To be staged at
Wembley 23-25th March. The FSADC has organised a one day seminar involving the FLA, Seating M anufacturers,
Structural Engineers and Safety Management experts. FSADC costs are to be met by the Conference Organisets.

c. Institute of Building C ontrol annual conference: 8-11 June, Bath. To be addressed by Simon Inglis (FSADC Council
member) and Rod Sheard (member of FSADC Architects’ Working Party). Costs to be met by organisers.

d. Sem inar for Stadium M anagers: the FSADC has identified a real need for closer communications between club stadium
managers (as a group in themselves) and related bodies such as the FLA, FSADC and FT. Last years’ two gatherings of
Safety Officers, organised by the FA/FL/ILAM demonstrated the value of such meetings, but as yet Stadium Managers, who
have a separate but equally important role, have yet to be brought together. The FSADC would therefore like to organise a
one day meeting, to bring the Stadium Managers into contact with various experts and improve lines of communication.
Suggested venue is Villa Park, in April. Application for funding will be made to the FT. Feedback from Stadium Managers
approached so far is positive.

e. The FSADC is providing representation on a newly-formed committee, set up under the auspices of CEN (Committee de
Norm alisation Europeanne - the EC’s equivalent of the British Standards Institute) for establishing European standards for
spectator accommodation in sports stadia. This will be important work which could ultimately affect all stadium develop­
ments in Europe.



5. Sum m ary_________________ __________________________ ________________________________________

The FSADC was set up by the Football League and Football Association in August 1990, and has since worked hard to offer
the football industry a practical and meaningful advisory service. Through its pioneering publications*, its telephone advisory
service, its database, and its role as a focus for research and expertise, the FSADC hopes to have fulfilled Lord Justice
Taylor’s intentions for such an advisory service.

The FSADC fully recognises, nevertheless, that much work remains to be done and that the work and composition of the
Council should therefore remain under constant review.

The FSADC Council is therefore extremely grateful to the Football Association for its continued funding and support, to the
Football League for its continuing provision of office accommodation, and the Football Trust and Football Licensing
Authority for providing financial support for specific projects.

As this Report on the FSADC’s activities hopes to demonstrate, a sound basis has been laid and it is to be hoped that this can
be built upon in the years to come.

                                                                                                             FSADC Council
                                                                                                            Jan u ary 7th 1992



* Publications to date:

         4 Design Guidelines on: Seating, PA Systems, Roofs and Facilities for Spectators with Disabilities.
         3 Reference works: Football Stadia Bibliography, Digest of Stadia Criteria, Stadia Handbook (with Sports Council)
         1 Research survey: On the Sidelines: Football and Disabled Spectators (with Sir Norman Chester Centre)


* The attached photocopies are taken from a recent issue of the Football League News.
                                                  NEWS FROM THE FOOTBALL STADIA ADVISORY DESIGN COUNCIL




                                                                                                                              a n a l y s i s of S t a d i a C r i t e r i a a s l a i d
Since its formation by The Football League and The Football Association in                                                    down bv FIFA, UEFA, an d t he se ni or
August 1990, the Football Stadia Advisory Design Council has been active in                                                   British            football           com petitions,
providing advice to football clubs. So far the FSADC has:                                                                     i n c l u d i n g t h e F o o t b a l l [.('ague. T h e
                                                                                                                              pu bl i sh e d Digest has b ee n we l c o me d
■ Responded to direct, enqui ri es from                            disabled spectators. This seeks to help                    by all p a r t i es as a cl ea r an d c o nc i s e
                                                                   c l u b s f a c e a s i g n i f i c a n t c h a n g e in   sum m ary of the myriad d o c u m e n ts
o v e r (iO F o o t b a l l L e a g u e c l u b s o n
t o p i c s as w i d e r a n g i n g as s e a t i n g ,            B uilding R e g u la tio n s which ta k e                  a n d g u i d e l i n e s w h i c h c l u b s a n cl
co m p u te rise d m o n ito rin g systems,                        effect this year and will affect every                     o f f i c i a l s c u r r e n t lv h a v e t o w a d e
toilet         provision.             floodlighting,               single Football League club. The                           th rough.
turnstiles, planning procedures,                                   r esear ch will cul mi na t e in a guideline
                                                                   booklet and a semi nar in September.                       H Produced              the         world s    first
h a r r i e r t e s t i n g , f a c i l i t i e s f or t h e
                                                                                                                              Bi b l i o g r ap h y of S t a d i a Re fer ences, a
d i s a b l e d a n d i n t e r p r e t a t i o n s of t h e
                                                                   ■     Established a comprehensive                          s o u r ce wh i c h is now widel y u se d by
G r e e n Gu i d e . O u r t e l e p h o n e a d v i c e
                                                                   r egist er of consultants, ma nu f a c t ur e r s          architects.           engineers.          research
service can deliver a r esponse wit hi n
                                                                   a n d s up pl i er s with e x p e r i e n c e of all       es t abl i shme nt s and spo r t i n g bodies.
'21 hours, and. often quicker.
                                                                   aspec ts of sta d iu m design and
                                                                   construction. The i nformati on on this                    T h e F S A D C e x i s t s for o n e p u r po s e 1,
I I Acted as advi sors to t he Football
Licensing A u t h o r i t y on s uc h ma t t e r s                 d a t ab a s e is available to all clubs, free             an d one p u r pos e only, to help you
                                                                   of charge. Companies who wish to be                        with any as pec t of s t a di u m design a n d
a s s e a t i n g w i t h a r e s t r i c t e d v i e w,
                                                                   in c lu d ed on the r e g is te r should                   cons t ruct i on. And to bor r ow a fami liar
safety certificates and implement at i on
                                                                   co n t ac t t he FSADC for details.                        p h r a s e , if we c a n n o t p r o v i d e t h e
of t h e Tayl or Report
                                                                                                                              a n s w e r s , we a l m o s t c e r t a i n l y k n o w
■ F o r m u l a t e d t h e Eng l i s h r es p o n s e             ■     C o n d u c t e d t h e first eve r det ail ed       someone who can!
to F I F A' s ba n on t e m p o r a r y s t a nd s ,
f ol l o wi ng t h e B a s t i a d i s a s t e r . A f t e r
c o n s u l t a t i o n w i t h its o w n t e a m of
expert engi neers the I’SADC was able
to inform FIFA t h a t t he existence, of
current             British     standards           and
g u id e l i n e s m e a n s t h a t a b a n on t h e
 use of t e m p o r a r y s t a n d s at f oo t ba l l
g r o u n d s in t h i s c o u n t r y w a s n o t
appr opr iat e.

 ■     P ublished th re e highly praised
 t e c h n i c a l g u i d e - l i n e s on S e a t i n g ,
 P u b l i c A d d r e s s S y s t e m s a n d Roofs.
 S u b j e c t s t o be c o v e r e d i n n e x t
 season's               publications              include
  F a c i l i t i e s for t h e D i s a b l e d . T o il e t s .
 T e r r a c i n g a n d P l a n n i n g P ro c e d u r es .
  Every Football League club receives a
 free copy of the guidelines.
                                                                       FSADC executive officer Christine Gausden is a Chartered Builder. Based at The Football League's London
 ■ C o m m i s s i o n e d t h e fi rs t r e s e a r c h                office, Christine emphasises, "The FSADC is independent of commercial interests, so clubs can be sure
 e v e r c a r r i e d o u t o n f a c i l i t i e s f or                                    that we will do our best to point them in the right direction."
EXPERTS SERVING THE NEEDS
OF BRITISH FOOTBALL
The Football Stadia Advisory Design                            Villa. West Ham. and both the
                                                               Sco t t i sh a n d Engl i s h Rugby Football
Council was set up on the                                      Unions.
recommendation of Lord Justice                                     '1'he e n g i n e e r s a r e BK B a r d h a n -
Taylor, '...to provide an authoritative                        Rov. S t e p h e n Mor l ey. Bill Reid a n d
                                                               Jo h n Thornton, who between them
source of knowledge for all those                              have        worked         at       Twickenham.
involved in the design and                                     N ew ca stle. W atford. Don Valley.
construction of stadia...'                                     Ra ng er s . L o r d ' s C r i c k e t G r o u n d a n d
                                                               the new Bari St a d i um in Italy.
             licit' r t h e c h a i r m a n s h i p of
             G u i h m Ro b e r t s CBE, F. Eng.               GUIDELINES
             and G eraint John. Chief
Arc hi t e c t of the S p o r t s Council, t he                Each g r oup plays a leading role in the
FSADC ha.- a s s e mb l e d two w o r k i n g                  f o r m u l a t i o n of g u i d e l i n e s , a s do
p a r t i e s c o n s i s t i n g ol t h e m o s t             numerous                 other          experts        and      FSADC Council members Geraint John (right)
e x p e r i e n c e d s t a d i u m d e s i g n e r s in       o r g a n i s a t i o n s w h o s e s u p p o r t for t he                   and Simon Inglis.
Britain.                                                       FSADC is gr eat l y appreciated.
     The           architects        are       Ernest                B r i t i s h f o o t b a l l c a n be p r o u d of
A t h e r d e n . D u n c a n M a c L e a n . Ro d
Shear d. and Terry Ward, who number
                                                               havi ng suc h experts to call upon, an d
                                                               it is t h a n k s to the sponsor ship of the                   WHAT THEY SAY...
among              their       current         clients         F o o t b a l l L e a g u e a n d FA t h a t t h e
M anchester               L'nited,      Liverpool.             FSADC h a s been able to d r aw those                            We c om m en d the FSAD C for
Blacklnim.              Nottingham             Forest.         p r o f e s s i o n a l s t o g e t h e r to s e r v e t h e      being the o n ly in depen den t
Millwall. Arsenal. Huddersfield. Aston                         needs of the game.                                                   source o f g u id a n c e a n d
                                                                                                                              a ssista n c e in im p le m e n tin g the
                                                                                                                               Green Guide, a n d p a r tic u la r ly

WHAT THE FSADC CAN DO                                                                                                           for the h igh s ta n d a r d o f the
                                                                                                                                        F S A D C ’s technical
                                                                                                                                p u b lic a tio n s. The adv ic e has

FOR YODR CLUR                                                                                                                        been in valu able for the
                                                                                                                                 redevelopm en t o f M olineux.
                                                                                                                                     Alan Cotterell Partnership
                                                                                                                                 Architects and Project Management
The FSADC is just one telephone call                           a p p r e c i a t e b e i n g g i ve n a c h a n c e to
                                                               s t u d y y o u r c l u b ' s p l a n s , a n d wi l l
away from helping your club.                                   e n d e a v o u r to c o m m e n t w h e n e v e r             FIFA is very h appy to see that
       % ; e can help you an d your                            possible. U n fo r tu n a te l y however,                      FSAD C is f u lly c o m m itte d to
  % :% / p r o f e s s i o n a l a d v i s e r s               owing to limited resources, we ca n n o t                       carry out the m issio n it has
    t ¥ i nt erpret exi sting guidelines                       m a k e d e t a i l e d a p p r a i s a l s of y o u r          been e n tru ste d w ith by Lord
a n d r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s , s u c h as t h e         schemes. F u r t h e r m o r e , the FSADC                       J u stic e Taylor...the efforts
Green Guide. FLA directives. Building                          cannot             and      does        not endorse            un dertaken by the FSAD C are
Regul at i ons. F11A a n d U E F A st a di a                   par t i cu l a r products.                                        an im p o r ta n t p a r t in our
criteria.                                                             "One t h i n g we wo u l d urge. ’ says                 common str a te g y to achieve a
      We c a n adv i s e w h i c h c o m p a n i e s            FSADC me mber Simon Inglis. "is t ha t                        m a x im u m o f safety in football
ar e experienced in specific fields, such                      club officials with responsibilities                                         g rou n ds.
as f l oo dl i g ht i ng, s e a t i ng , s t e e l w o r k .   co n c e r ni n g the football g r ound should                   Joseph Blatter, FIFA General Secretary
CCTV installation and virtually every                          r e a d a n d digest, t h e c o n t e n t s o f o u r
o t h e r as p e c t ot s t a d i u m d e s i g n a n d        guideline pu bl i cat i ons r a t h e r t h a n j ust
cons t ruct i on. Our d a t a b a s e allows us                 h a n d i n g t h e m s t r a i g h t o v e r to t h e         The FLA c o n siders the FSADC
to call up the i nformati on immediately                        club's professional advisers.                                      to be a v ita l p la n k in the
a n d . t o h e l p \ o u r c l u b m a k e its                       "We a r e not s u g g e s t i n g e v e r y o n e         im p le m e n ta tio n o f the Taylor
 c h o i c e . it s h o w s    which       clubs the            becomes a n i ns t an t expert, but at least                   Report. We very m u ch hope it
 compani es have worked for and which                           the guidelines will provide the l ayman                         w i l l develop its work fu rth e r
 oper a t e in your region.                                     with a basic g ro u n d in g , and th a t                      a n d w o u ld encourage clu bs to
      We visit y o u r c l ub to offer free,                    c o u l d be v i t a l w h e n it. c o m e s to                           use its services.
 impartial advice. Already, a n L*SADC                          deal i ng with professional advisers.                                 Norman Jacobs, Chairman
 r epr esentative has formally visited                                      "Remember, small mi stakes can                            Football Licensing Authority
 over 30 League football                                                                 be c o s t l y , a n d t h e
 clubs, and nearly                                                                              c o n s e q u e n c e s ot
 all have subsequent Iv                                                                         poor design can                 On b e h a lf o f West H am m a y I
 u s e d t h e FSADC'                                                                         h a m p e r a cl ub a n d           offer m y th a n k s for a ll the
 services.                                                                                  i t s s u p p o r t e r s f or        a ssistan ce y o u have given
      We also very much                                                                    ma ny years."                       re cen tly...it is m ost c om forting
                                                                                                                                 to know th a t we are able to
                                                                                                                                tu rn to y o u for im p a r tia l a n d
                    For more information contact: Christine Gausden                                                                   p ro fe ssio n a l advice.
         FSADC, Winchester House, 259-269 Old Marylebone Road, London NW15RA.                                                         John Ball, Stadium Manager
             Telephone: 071-224 9944, or fax your enquiry on 071-723 2792.                                                                 West Ham United
