Ref: DCP/WAC


9 March 1999


Mr Simon Eastwood
W inckworth Sherwood
Solicitors
35 G reat Peter Street
W estminster
London. SW1P3LR



Dear

JUDICIAL REVIEW - DAVID DUCKENFIELD AND BERNARD MURRAY

As you are dealing w ith the above I forw ard a copy of correspondence I recently received from a
solicitor acting on behalf of the Hillsborough Family Support Group. Also enclosed is a copy of uny
reply.

I understand the hearing has now been brought forw ard to 22nd - 24th March.

Yours sincerely,




Des Parkinson
Chief Superintendent
National Secretary
Ref: DCP/WAC


5 March 1999


Arm A dlington
Solicitor
Hillsborough Family Support Group
1st Floor Central Buildings
41 N orth John. Street
Liverpool. L2 6KR



Dear CLajx. >

R v SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY, EX PARTE CHIEF CONSTABLE OF THE
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

Thank you for your letter of 25th February regarding the above.

My letter of 8th February was sent to Mr Hedges the Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire Police.
I believe the letter is dear and straightforward and its contents do not require a detailed explanation.

I was happy for m y letter to be included (no doubt w ith other documents) as part of the evidence in
the judicial review proceedings. That having been done the letter is now before the H igh C o u rt
Should that Court w ant any clarification or inform ation concerning the view s expressed in m y letter
I w ill be happy to oblige and if necessary give w ritten or oral evidence. In the meantime I do n o t
believe any useful purpose w ould be served in providing you w ith further information.

One of your questions (No. 5) related to the Police Federation and its pow ers to fund the defence of
its members in criminal proceedings. Not being a member of the Police Federation, nor having access
to its detailed policies I am not in a position to answer that question.

Yours sincerely,




Des Parkinson
Chief Superintendent
National Secretary
.vSB°«<to




                       Hillsborough Family Support Group
                                                                                   ^ S U P E R I^ ^
Des'Parkinson
Chief Superintendent
National Secretary                                                                    2 - MAR 1999
Police Superintendents Association of
England and Wales
67a Reading Road
Pangbourne
                                                                                  ‘ANNgp
Berkshire RG8 7JD


Ref: DCP/WAC

25 February 1999

Dear M r Parkinson,

R v. South Yorkshire Polka A uthority, ex parte Chief Constable o f Smith Yorkshire Police

 On S'1' February 1999 you wrote a letter to the Chief Constable o f South Yorkshire Police, a
 copy o f which I enclose. It has been produced in evidence in judicial review proceedings m
 which 1 am the Respondent prosecutor.

 1 am preparing evidence for the court.    1 should be grateful if could answer the following
 questions.

 1       Can you give examples o f the practices o f which you speak in criminal cases?
         Obviously, if there are cases in which officers have received financial assistance from
         the’rr Police Authority as opposed to the Police Federation or Superintendents
         Association, all parties would benefit from hearing about them, and I therefore ask you
         to provide further details.

 2       Why is this a matter o f national importance, given that the two former officers have the
         same rights to apply for legal aid as any other citizen?

  3      Why do you suggest that “as early a hearing.... as you can possibly arrange’1 should be
         sought? Are there other cases pending which are affected by this decision?

  4         Does your Association have the power to fund the defences o f these officers? If it
            does, why are you not financing the defence, and why do you have the power if it is
            the practice o f Police Authorities to fund proceedings such as these.

  5         The Police Federation has power to fund the defence o f its members in criminal



                Phone 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151.236 1936. E M ail info@hfsg.org
              1st Floor C entral Buildings 41 N orth John Street Liverpool L2 6RR
       proceedings. In what circumstances does it do so, and why, in your experience, does it
       have the power if it is the practice o f Police Authorities to fund the defence?

Given that the case is said to be o f such importance, I do hope you feel prepared to answer
these questions, so that the court can be given as much information as possible,

Yours sincerely



 /l-Adiwfa          '




Ann Adltngton
Solicitor
                     /


                                                                                                67A Reading Road
                                 Police Superintendents                                              Pangboume
                                                                                               Berkshire RG8 7JD
                                       Association
                                                                                                 T el: 0118 984 4005 - ‘
                                           of                                                  • Fax: 0118 984 5642

                                   England and Wales                               E-mail: PDlice.Siipen@BTInietiiet.com
                                                                                    Website: htrp^/www^oliccS upcre.com


Ref: DCP/W AC

8 February 1999

Mr M.LL Hedges, QPM,LL.B
Chief Constable
South Yorkshire Police
Police Headquarters
Snig Hill
  ?ffield. S3 8LY


Dear

 FINANCIAL SUPPORT FOR. FORMER POLICE OFFICERS DAVID DUCKENFIELD AND
 BERNARD MTJT0RAY

 It has come to my notice that at a meeting of the South Yorkshire Police Authority on 5 February it was
 decided to discontinue financial support for the two above najned officers. As I understand it that
 decision was based upon independent legal advice which they had received as to whether there was
 a pow er in law for them to make such financial assistance available, and in particular whether that
  power was available under the Police Act 1996, sections 6 and 88, and the Local Government Act 1972,
  section 111 (1).
  Home Office Circular 4/1998 deals w ith the issue of when police authorities can provide financial
 -assistance to police officers in legal proceedings and in its introduction says " [t is important that police^
   jiczrs should be able to carry out their duties in the confidence that their police authorities will support t if
  they act in good faith and exercise th e ir judgement reasonably".

  The decision by the South Yorkshire Police Authority has therefore come as a considerable su rp rise to
  the Superintendents' Association and would appear to r u n counter to all previous beliefs and practices
  of police authorities in supporting both serving, and former police officers. Xunderstand th aty o u r
  position, as advised by your Counsel, is that there is clear authority in law for such an action an   a
  you intend to seek a determination of this matter by way of Judicial Review.

   This m atter is clearly of national Importance for the Police Service and certainly from the perspective
   of the Superintendents' Association I would ask you to take this forward w ith all due espatc
   diligence and seek as early a hearing before the High Court as you can possibly arrange.

   .Yours sincerely.


   D es P a rk in s o n
   C h ie f S u p e rin te n d e n t
   N a tio n a l Secretary
                                                     03 G
Ref: PW/ESP


5 March 1999


M r Simon Eastwood
W inckworth Sherwood
Solicitors
35 G reat Peter Street
W estminster
London
SW1P3LR



Dear Simon/

REQUEST FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
DAVID DUCKENFIELD AND BERNARD MURRAY

I w rite in reply to your letter of 18th February 1999 and in confirm ation of our recent telephone
conversation.

The request w hich you m ade on behalf of David Duckenfield and Bernard M urray has now been
considered by the National Executive Committee of the Association. The Committee recognises that
it is a m ost unsatisfactory position in which the retired officers now find themselves in respect of
funding their legal representation in the pending judicial review. The judicial review has
implications in the service far beyond the H illsborough case but of course it has major implications
for the two retired officers. It is for this reason that the Committee believe it to be appropriate that
they be represented at the hearing.

The Committee also believes that David Duckenfield and Bernard M urray should not p u t themselves
financially at risk in order to co-join the action. For this reason the Association is prepared to
‘'underwrite' the legal representation of David Duckenfield and Bernard M urray up to a m aximum
of £20,000.

Should the issue be returned to the South Yorkshire Police A uthority follow ing the judicial review
then you m ay consider it appropriate to draw its members attention to the fact that such financial
assistance has not previously been provided by the Association to its retired members. Although
they are no longer members of this Association the National Executive Committee believes that there
is a strong m oral obligation to provide them w ith the support they deserve and w ithout doubt


Yours sincarely




Peter Williams
Superintendent
National A ssistant Secretary
 W iH C K W O R T H S H E R W O O D                                                                                           35 Gre.it Peter Street
                                                                                                                              Westminster
 SOLICITORS        AND PARLl          NTART A G E N T S
                                                                                                                              London SW1P 3LR.

Our ref:         SB E/24                                                                                                      Telephone; 0171 593 5000
Your ref:                                                                                                                     Fax: 0171 593 5099
                                                                                                                              DX: 2312 VICTORIA

                                                                                                                              Direct Line:                  0171 593 5107

Peter Williams
                                                                                                                        /                                  0171 593 5099

Superintendent
                                                                          S C .A M N E D          \     |
                                                                                                                                   lil: sbeastwood@winckworths.c
National Assistance Secretary
Police Superintendents Association of                                     £.             \ ..-Y                                   February 1999
England and Wales                                                        i m it
                                                                         0 * J C ‘N A L
                                                                                                             NOT T o S e
                                                                                                             SCANNED
67A Reading Road
Pangboume
Berkshire RG8 7JD                                                                                                                           k
Dear Mr Williams

 Police funds - David Duckenfield

 I refer to David Duckenfield’s previous correspondence with you, and our lengthy
 telephone call earlier this week.

 To assist the Association in considering the request for financial assistance on behalf of Mr
 Duckenfield and Mr Bernard Murray (whose legal representative is Richard Manning of
 Walker Morris Solicitors, Kings Court, 12 King Street, Leeds LSI 2HL), I enclose herewith
 the following:

  1)          letter Garretts Solicitors 10 February 1999, together with resolutions and chairman’s
               statement;

 2)           judicial review bundle from Hammond Suddards (solicitors for Chief Constable of
               South Yorkshire Police).

  As you will know from our discussions, submissions were put to the South Yorkshire Police
  Authority by ourselves, Walker Morris and Hammond Suddards to the effect that the South
  Yorkshire Police Authority did have the power to resolve to provide financial assistance to
  the Defendants in regard to the criminal proceedings, and in respect of other proceedings
  (specifically the judicial reviews which were foreshadowed).

  I appreciate that you are aware of the convention that has operated for many years in regard
  to such funding, both by provincial police forces and the Metropolitan Police, and in that
  context you may be interested in the enclosed, statement of Chris Porteous, a consultant to
  this firm, dated 10 February 1999.

  At the time of writing we do not have the timetable relating to the judicial review which has
  now been filed by the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire although the Court has granted
  leave for the application to be made and an expedited hearing has been ordered. On behalf

                                                                                                                                  T he linn Ik a mciflbti1ftff c u r w o a U .
                                STEPH H N WIGGS              R .O G J s ll H T T O N                  T IM W AT T S
   paatneas                                                                                           HEAD OF TAX
                                                                                                                                  an international nstworic o f I n w y v s .
   N IC H O L A S Q W 5 T O N   M U CH M A C D O U C A L D   [‘A U L IPwVING
                                                             R O N A L D FARRANTS                     G E O K .C tiU U I.1*       The firm is regulated by The Law Society
   B IU A N H O O D             JOHN
                                                             n .o m ; u .T h o t k a i                CONSULTANT                  in ilx wnddGt o f Invcsimcffi
   I'ALT I,. MOH.K.1S           H ZTER WILLIAMS
                                ANIJKHW MUH.R.AY             SIM O N EASTW OOD                        HIIANK tt Q U S O N OBE
   M ICHAEL T H A TC H E R .                                                                                                       •Natt-vtllcltar
   A i.IS U N CO U.L O V        CV1MSTOPHKH. VINK            NAOMI GOODE
 of Mr Duckenfield, we would wish to be heard in regard to that application, which involves
 the preparation of an Affidavit (which will largely encapsulate the submissions we have
 already put to the Authority) and later attendance to argue the substantive case before the
 Divisional Court. As I have indicated, Mr Murray would also like to take a similar part in
 the proceedings.

 In the absence of Authority funding, Mr Murray and Mr Duckenfield would be personally
 responsible for any costs incurred in taking part in those proceedings and this would seem
 particularly harsh given the context of the Authority decision, and the wider implications for
 the police force should the Divisional Court hold that the South Yorkshire Police Authority
 decision was valid. The best estimate I can give of costs is that, on the basis of an hourly
 charge of £125 per hour and with the need for Counsel attendance at the hearing, the legal
 costs in regard to both former officers would be in the region of £10,000 to £20,000.

 I should mention that the possibility remains that in the event the Divisional Court finds that
 the South Yorkshire Police Authority does have the power to grant financial assistance, the
 matter would then return for further consideration by the Authority with a view to
 exercising its discretion. If that discretion is exercised in favour of Mr Duckenfield and Mr
jVluiTay, the Authority may well be moved to .retrospectively, indemnify the officers for costs
 in relation to funding issues. In the event that your Association is in a position to assist in
 relation to the judicial review proceedings, it would then be a matter for the Authority as to
 whether it would reimburse the Association for those funds.

I trust the above is sufficient information for you to take the matter further, and specifically
tor the application for financial assistance to be considered by your national Executive
Committee at the earliest opportunity but in the event that I can clarify matters please do not
hesitate to contact me at your convenience.

I have of course advised David Duckenfield of your general words of support, and that you
are happy to take this matter to the Committee for consideration and he veiy much
appreciates your efforts. I look forward to hearing from you accordingly.

Yours sincerely




  ipron Eastwood


cc        Walker Morris




                                               2
10050.0
                                                                                                                                             1 City Square:
                                                                                                                                             Leeds LSI 2AL
                                                                                                                                             0113 207 WOOTelephonc
10 February 1999                                                                                                                             0113 207 9G01 Facsimiles
                                                                                                                                             DX 26444 Leeds Pcirk Square

Winckworth Sherwood                                                                                                                          Direct line      0113 3996136
Solicitors and Parliamentary Agents
35 Great Peter Street                                                                                                                        Our ref          D H /K H
Westminster
London                                                                                                                                       Your ref
SW1P 3LR

                                                                       For the attention of 5 Eastwood

Deaf Sirs

South Yorkshire Police Authority

We refer to the meeting on 5 February 1999 of the South Yorkshire Police Authority. You will
recall that the meeting considered whether the Authority had power to provide financial
assistance to Mr David Duckenfield and Mr Bernard Murray in relation to their costs and expenses
on the private prosecutions and various applications for judicial review.

The matter was considered in private meeting by the Authority, although submissions were heard
from or on behalf of HFSG, Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray. After giving careful consideration to
these submissions, the views of the Chief Constable and our advice, the Authority resolved that it
did not have power to provide the financial assistance. This resolution was in accordance with our
advice.

Our advice, which incorporated the views of Ms Presiley Baxendale QC and Mr Mark Shaw of
Counsel, was to the following effect:

1            Section 6 Police Act 1996, which confers on the Authority a wide duty to maintain an
             effective and efficient police force, in conjunction with Section 111(1) Local Government Act
             1972, appeared to give a very broad discretion to the Authority to preserve the morale of the
             police force without which, an effective and efficient police force could not be maintained.
             Accordingly, if it was, in the Authority's view, genuinely and reasonably necessary, in order
              to maintain police morale, to meet the out of pocket costs and expenses of police officers,
             incurred in defending themselves against criminal or civil proceedings, it was arguably
             within Section 6 of the Police Act 1996, coupled with Section 111(1) of the Local Government
              Act 1972, to pay such costs.
 2           However, that there were powerful arguments against this interpretation including the
             following;

            a                   If there were a general power under section 6 Police Act 1996 to indemnify officers
                                against the costs of legal proceedings arising from the performance of their duties,


 O-iiYiiUs i?i         rp«.‘m bcr f.i?            A ndersen le g a l     A list ol the nam es or thv punnum is npi*n tn                                O ffices in: llirmin^harn C am bridge !.«v
                                                                         in*F*Xlii>n nv th e              r.jffiiv.TlH' p ;irliii:i‘, iiu'             U m d o n Mand'iu.-'tei' U^ulin^,
 i n t e m . i l i o r t u l n e t w o r k ol: !?uv
                                                                         1,'Ulu.v -.iilu'iHury; J i tV.y.rilnt?il           hwVi.TS.                   A sso ciate firm in S co tlan d : l>tu:J;ts- il'-i V

 j:\£A i*r*tt\»6ulhyorkshire policc\lc-00021.doc\5b
                                                       G arretts

                                                                                     10 February 1999



                        there would be no reason for section 88(4) Police Act 1996 specifically to allow the
                        recovery of such costs in tort proceedings. Section 88(4) would simply be unnecessary.

         b            The issue turns on the proper construction of the Police Act 1996. In London Borough of
                       Sutton -e- Morgan Grenfell & Co Limited (1996) die Court of Appeal stated that where
                      Parliament had enacted specific provisions setting out how a local authority was
                      intended to perform its functions, there was no room to imply other means of carrying
                      out those functions under section 111(1) Local Government Act 1972. In particular,
                      where a local authority was intended to have power to incur financial obligations that
                      power must specifically be identified by statute. This was an example of a well-
                      established general principle of statutory interpretation; where Parliament specifies
                      one particular matter, it impliedly excludes any other allied matters. In addition,
                      section 6 of the Police Act 1996 is so wide in its language that it was doubtful that
                      recourse to section 111(1) Local Government Act 1972 could usefully expand i t The
                      real question is the relationship between section 6 and section 88 Police Act 1996.

         c            In R v Derbyshire Police Authority ex parte Wilson and Dalton (1989), both parties had
                       accepted that the basic power to meet the officers' costs existed, and accordingly this
                       did not fall to be decided by the court. The power to pay costs was therefore assumed
                      not decided. Similarly, a Home Office Circular is only guidance. It does not define or
                       modify the law and should not be assumed to be correct.

         d            Mr Justice Denning stated in Askey -v- Golden Wine Co Limited (1948) the public policy
                      that the punishment inflicted by a criminal court is personal to the offender and that
                      such an offender is not entitled to recover from a third party an indemnity against the
                      consequences of the criminal proceedings whether that be a fine, an award against him
                      of the other party s costs or the accused's own legal costs. This public policy helps to
                      explain why section 88(4) Police Act 1996 does not cover criminal proceedings.

         e            A judge would not necessarily consider it desirable for the Authority to have such a
                      power. In the light of Askzy -v- Golden Wine Co Limited, it was doubtful if a police
                      authority was intended to have power to indemnify officers against costs of a case in
                      which they were found guilty. An acquitted defendant would, in any event, normally
                      receive an award that his/her reasonably incurred non legally-aided costs be paid in
                      full out of central funds, unless the accused was at fault in bringing suspicion on
                      himself or was found not guilty on a technicality see Practice Direction (Crime: Costs)
                      (1991) 1 WLR 498. Accordingly, in the normal run, an acquitted police officer should
                      have no (or few) costs to pay himself/herself, which a police authority would need to
                      meet.
3            The issues raised were difficult and that there was no guarantee which way a Court would
             decide. There were certainly strong policy reasons why the Authority should have power to
             support its officers (current and former) in this way. Given the points summarised in
             paragraphs 2 (a) to 2 (e) above, however, there were considerable doubts about the power of
             the Authority to support the costs either of the criminal proceedings or the judicial review



;:\gam !tt\so uth yorltshlre po)lc«\ le-0M ll.doc\ib
                                                                    -3 -     10 February 1999



          proceedings (neither being covered by Section 88(4) Police Act 1996), particularly before any
          judgment had been given in those proceedings.
4        It was also necessary to be mindful of the terms of the latest Home Office Circular. One
          would not lightly advise that it is wrong but it is much more hesitant that its predecessor.
          Therefore, it was sensed that the Home Office may have its own doubts about the existence
          of this power.
5        Accordingly, whilst it was wished to review the matter further in the light of any
          representations made on behalf of the officers, the Chief Constable or the HFSG, the current
          recommendation was that the Authority should resolve to reverse its earlier decision and
          decide that it has no power to provide the financial assistance which had been sought. It
          should then co-operate with those parties in bringing the matter before a court for an early
          decision on whether that view of their legal powers was correct.

In disclosing the effect of our advice, the Authority shall not be regarded as having waived its legal
privilege whatsoever. This disclosure is made solely for the purpose of providing the Authority's
reasons.

We enclose:

1               The Resolutions of the Authority;

2The Statement of the Chairman of the Authority which was released following the meeting.

You may also be aware that the Chief Constable has announced his intention to seek judicial
review of the Authority's decision. You may wish to consider whether to make representations at
that hearing.


Yours faithfully



Enclosures




j’:\garrcttt\};oM th y o fto h ife p o lk e \ Ie-00021 .d o c \sb
   RESOLUTIONS OF THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY ON
   FRIDAY, 5 FEBRUARY 1999

   1.       In the light of legal advice, including advice from leading Counsel, m em bers are
           recom m ended to resolve that, on balance, the A uthority has no legal pow er to
           provide financial assistance to Mr David Duckenfield or Mr Bernard M urray in
           relation to their costs and expenses of defending the private prosecutions brought
           against them by the HFSG, by Information d ated 10 July 1998, and accordingly to
           determ ine that any previous decision of the Authority, or any officer acting
           u n d e r its authority, to m ake such assistance avaitable is null and void.

  2.       In the light of legal advice, including advice from leading Counsel, m embers are
           recom m ended to resolve that, on balance, the A uthority has no legal pow er to
           provide financial assistance to M r David Duckenfield or M r Bernard M urray in
           relation to the costs of any judicial review proceedings brought by either of them;
           w hether relating to the decision of the Crow n Prosecution Service n o t to take
           over th e conduct of the private prosecutions and discontinue such prosecutions,
           or to any decision of the Clerk to the Sefton M agistrates' C ourt to challenge the
           paym ent of the officers' costs of proceedings before that court from centra! funds,
           or to any other decision of any court, authority or body arising from such
           prosecutions; and, accordingly, to reject the applications of M r Duckenfield and
           M r M urray for financial assistance in relation to such proceedings.

 3.        In recognition of the fact that the legal advice provided to the Authority is that it
           rem ains arguable that pow er exists to provide the assistance referred to in 1 and 2
           above, to take such action as the Clerk and Treasurer, in consultation w ith the
        Chief Constable, the Authority's legal advisers an d the C hairm an of the
        Authority, m ay decide as appropriate to have the decisions referred to in 1 and 2
        reviewed by the H igh Court and to expedite such review w ith a view to
        clarifying the Authority's pow ers in this regard.

4 . To defer consideration of the procedural issues raised by Ms Adlington, in her
        letters of 22 December 1998 to the Clerk an d Treasurer and 5 January 1999 to the
        m em bers of the Authority, until the legal pow er of the A uthority to provide the
        financial assistance referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 has been resolved to the
        satisfaction of the Authority.




lc-00024
CHAIRMAN'S STATEMENT


South Yorkshire Police Authority has m et today to consider issues relating to the
funding of the defence costs of former police officers in legal proceedings relating to
the Hillsborough disaster.


As well as considering various legal advice, w e h e a rd representations from the
H illsborough Families Support Group and solicitors representing tw o former
officers.


Q uestions have been raised recently about the pow ers of Police Authorities to pay
the defence costs of police officers in legal proceedings. W e have taken extensive
legal advice on the matter. On balance, our advisers have concluded that Police
A uthorities do not have the pow ers and w e have felt obliged to su p p o rt that view.


How ever, the issue is far from clear c u t We have heard this m orning from several
other legal advisers - including the Chief Constable's adviser - w ho are firmly of the
view that Police Authorities do have the powers. W e are therefore co-operating w ith
th e Chief Constable to have the true legal position determ ined by the c o u rt


The implications of this m atter go beyond South Yorkshire a n d could affect the
Police Service as a whole.




 pp»OOOl4
                                                                                                   2 Park Lnnc
H    ammond                     Su b d a e d s                                                     Leeds
                                                                                                   LS3 1ES
                                                                                                   Telephone (0113) 284 7000
                                                                                                   DX No. 26441
                                                                                                   Fax (0113)284 7001


    FAO S Eastwood Esq
    Winckworth Sherwood Solicitors
    35 Great Peters Street
    Westminster
    LONDON
    SW1P 3LR




    O ur Ref:                                                        Y our Ref:                                                     Dais:
    PCM/ASAH/CHI.057-0009                                            NAFO/24332/1                                                   17 February 1999


    Dear Sirs

    S O U T H Y O R K S H IR E P O L IC E A U T H O R IT Y JU D IC IA L R E V IE W

    Further to our letter dated 11 February 1999 sent by DX which appears to have gone missing please
    find enclosed a further copy bundle as lodged with the Crown Office. Please note the Crown Office
    reference number is C0582-99.

    Yours faithfully
          ir

    HAMMOND SUDDARDS

    Enc

    ehi.057-Q009.lciS.1702.asah




    Offices also at:

    7 Devonshire Square              Trinity Court                     Pennine House                   Suite 65S Uoyd's                     Avenue l,ouise 250
    Cutler; Gardens                  16 John Dalton Street             39-45 Well Street               One Lime Street                      ll>50 Brussels
    London                           Manchester                        Bradford                        London                               Beljium
    EC2M4YH                          M60SHS                            BD1 5NU                         EC3M 7HA                             Telephone (0U) 32 2 627 7676
    Telephone (0171) 655 1000        Telephone (0161)830 5000          Telephone (01274) 734700        Telephone (0171) 327 33SI.V53W       Fax (00)32 2 627 76*6
    Fax (0171) 655 1001              Fax. (0161) S30 5001              Fax (01274) 307239              l-a.-i (IU7I) &21 1217

    A list of Patoera can be viewed at the above address. This firm is regulated by [he Lnw Society in the conduct nl' investment
                              INDEX TO BUNDLE

    Document___________________________________                               Page No


    1. Reading List                                                          1

    2. Form 86 A                                                             2 -1 7

    3. Affidavit In Support                                                  1 8 -2 2

    4. Exhibits                                                              23 ~ 36

    5. Relevant legislative provisions, case-law, Statutory Instruments and Home Office Circulars

           a) Extract From Royal Commission on the Police 1962                37 - 50

           b) Section 4 of the Police Act 1964                                51 - 52

           c) Section 48 of the Police Act 1964                              53 - 54

           d) Section 111 (1) of the Local Government Act 1972                55

           e) Section 6(1) of the Police Act 1996                             56 - 57

           f) Section 88 of the Police Act 1996                               58 - 59

            g) Home Office Circular 77/87                                     60 - 63

            h) Home Office Circular 4/1998                                    64 - 69

m           i) R v Derbyshire Police Authority ex parte Wilson                   70 - 72
            and Dalton - The Times 8.8.89
                                     R E A D IN G T.TSt



m atter consists o f t f i o m ? e T i t S f t h e 0nl y eSSentiaJ readinS i:
                                            Affidavit in support, and the statutory and
other matenal referred to therein, copies of wmcn are at             <
TN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE

QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION

CROWN OFFICE LIST




  NOTICE OF APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO APPLY FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW
                                       (F O R M 86A )




In the matter o f an application by Michael Hedges for leave to apply for Judicial Review (Ord
53 r.3).

And in the matter o f The Police Act 1996, and the Local Government Act 1972.




    Applicant’s Ref. No.         Notice of APPLICATION             Crown Office Ref. No.
                                   for leave to apply for
                                 Judicial Review (0.53 r.3)


 This form must be read together with Notes for Guidance obtainable from the Crown Office.



   T o the Master o f the Crown Office, Royal Courts o f Justice, Strand, London, W C 2A 2LL



 N am e, address and description of              Michael Hedges
 applicant(s)                                    Chief Constable
                                                 South Yorkshire Police
                                                 Police Headquarters
                                                 Snig Hill
                                                 Sheffield
                                                 S3 SLY



 Ju d g m e n t, order, decision or o ther The decisions made by the Respondent on 5th
 proceeding in respect of which relief is February 1998 :
 sought
                                           1.     that the Respondent has no legal
                                           power to provide financial assistance to M r


                                008     l_      1
                                                                          d 1i,tl574M K l'J.:ipp.p«.m 0S02.rtf.il0e
                                                 David Duckenfield or M r Bernard Murray in
                                                 relation to their costs and expenses o f
                                                 defending the private prosecutions brought
                                                 against them by the Hillsborough Family
                                                 Support Group (“HFSG” ), by information
                                                 dated 10th July 1998, and that any previous
                                                 decision o f the Respondent, or any officer
                                                 acting under its authority, to make such
                                                 assistance available is null and void.

                                                 2.      that the Respondent has no legal
                                                 power to provide financial assistance to M r
                                                 David Duckenfield or M r Bernard Murray in
                                                 relation to the costs o f any judicial review
                                                 proceedings brought by either o f them :
                                                 whether relating to the decision o f the Crown
                                                 Prosecution Service not to take over the
                                                 conduct o f private          prosecutions   and
                                                 discontinue such prosecutions, or to any
                                                 decision o f the Clerk to the Sefton
                                                 Magistrates’ Court to challenge the payment
                                                 o f the officers’ costs o f proceedings before
                                                 that court from central funds, or to any other
                                                 decision o f any court, authority or body
                                                 arising from such prosecutions ; and,
                                                 accordingly, to reject the applications o f M r
                                                 Duckenfield and M r Murray for financial
                                                 assistance in relation to such proceedings.



                                      R E U E F SO U G H T


Judicial review in the form o f :



(1)     Certiorari to quash the decisions o f 5th February 1999 identified above.


(2)     A declaration that the Respondent has vires to provide financial assistance to David
        Duckenfield and Bernard Murray in relation to their costs and expenses o f defending
        the private prosecutions brought against them by the Hillsborough Family Support
        Group.



(3)     A declaration that the Respondent has vires to provide financial assistance to David



                                                                                    |icm,o5y2.ri!’Uotf
                                    oo*5 2
        Duckenfield and Bernard Murray in relation      10   their costs and expenses of defending
        the private prosecutions brought against them by the HFSG as and when such costs
        and expenses are incurred and irrespective o f the outcome o f the prosecution and any
         application for costs made against the private prosecutor.


4)       A declaration that the Respondent has vires to provide financial assistance to David
         Duckenfield and Bernard Murray in relation to their costs and expenses o f defending
         the private prosecutions brought against them by the HFSG irrespective of whether
         they have attempted to obtain or could obtain financial assistance by way o f Legal Aid
         and / or a declaration that the availability or otherwise o f legal aid is an irrelevant

         consideration.


(5)      A declaration that the Respondent has vires to provide financial assistance to David
         Duckenfield and Bernard Murray in relation to the costs and expenses o f any judicial
          review proceedings brought by either of them relating to the decision oi the Director o f
          Public Prosecutions not to intervene in the private prosecution,


(6)      A declaration that David Duckenfield and Bernard Murray have a legitimate
          expectation that their costs and expenses o f detending the criminal prosecution will be

          m et by the Respondent as and when such costs and expenses are incurred.


(7)      The applicant seeks an expedited hearing o f the substantive application for judicial
          review (if leave to move is granted) together with an Order abridging time for service
              o f the Respondent’s evidence to seven days or such further period as the Court deems

              appropriate.



 Nam e and address o f applicant’s solicitors,        Hammond Suddards Solicitors
 or, if no solicitors acting, the address for         2 Park Lane
 service o f the applicant                            Leeds
                                                      LS3 1ES

                                                      Ref : PCM .SB.CHI.57-9



     Signed                                                               Daied       ~      ^
               GROUNDS ON WHICH RELIEF IS SOUGHT


The issues in this case are :



(a)     whether the Respondent was in error in law ^ re so lv in g on 5th February 1999
        that it had no legal power to provide financial assistance to David Duckenfield
        or Bernard M urray in relation to their costs and expenses o f defending the

        private prosecutions brought against them by the HFSG by information dated
        10th July 1998 and in determining that any previous decision of the Authority,
        or any officer acting under its authority, to make such assistance available was
        null and v o id ;



(b)     whether the Respondent was wrong in law in resolving that it had no legal
        power to provide financial assistance to David Duckenfield and Bernard

        Murray in relation to any judicial review proceedings in respect o f the private
        prosecution brought against them ;



(c)    whether the Respondent has vires to provide financial assistance as and when
        costs are incurred in defending the private prosecution or whether power is
        limited to meeting any costs incurred and not recovered from other sources.


(d)    whether the Respondent has vires to provide financial assistance irrespective o f
        the availability o f legal aid.


As to the A pplicant;



(a)    The Applicant is the Chief Constable o f South Yorkshire. As such it is his duty
        to secure the enforcement o f the law in his area and he is responsible for the
        disposition and control o f his force.   David Duckenfield and Bernard Murray
        are former police officers who were acting in the course o f their policing duties
        at the time when it is alleged that they committed criminal offences.                The
        decision in question is of very real consequence to the      A p p l ic a n t ,   If it be
                 correct in law that a police authority has no power to grant financial assistance
                 to police officers who subsequently fate a private prosecution arising from their
                 conduct when acting in the course o f their duties, it will have very significant
                 repercussions with regard to the recruitment o f police officers, discipline and

                 effective policing. The Applicant made representations before the Respondent
                 before it made the decisions in question.       In the circumstances, the Applicant

                 has a sufficient interest.


          (b)    The Applicant has no alternative remedy.


                                                T H E FACTS
•
    3.    On 15th April 1989 the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster occurred.                 B oth David
          Duckenfield, then Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, and Bernard Murray, then

          Superintendent Murray, were on duty at the Stadium that day. They have both since

          retired from the Force on medical grounds.


    4.    There have been two inquiries in respect o f the Disaster.        Lord Justice Taylor was
          appointed to carry out an inquiry into the events of the disaster on 17th April 1989.

          His interim report was made public on 4th August 1989.            Then in June 1997 Lord
           Justice Stuart-Smith was appointed to conduct an independent scrutiny as to whether

           there was any new evidence relating to the disaster.            His Scrutiny Report was

           presented to the H ouse o f Commons on 18th February 1998. He concluded that there
           was no basis for re-opening Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, nor did he consider that there was
           any material which should be put before the DPP or the Police Complaints Authority

           which might cause them to reconsider decisions already taken.


     5.    In 1990 and 1997 the Crown Prosecution Service considered whether there was
           evidence to support any prosecution arising out o f the Hillsborough Disaster and
           decided against any form o f prosecution.        Plainly they did so on the basis that there

            was no realistic prospect o f conviction.




                                         006            5
On 10th July 1998 a private prosecution was brought by Ms Adlington. a solicitor
representing the Hillsborough Family Support Group (an association o f families who
suffered bereavement in the disaster) against David Duckenf.eld and Bernard Murray.
The officers are charged with the manslaughter o f John Alfred Anderson and James
Gary Aspinall, two. o f the deceased from the Hillsborough disaster, and also with wilful
neglect to perform a public duty.            Further, M r Duckenfield faces a charge o f
intentionally perverting the course o f justice in lying about the circumstances in which
Gate C at the Stadium came to be opened.



Criminal proceedings w ere initially commenced in the South Sefton M agistrates’

Court. But as objection was made on the basis that the offences were not committed
within the area nor did either defendant live in the area, and the objections were
upheld.        An order was made for the payment o f the defendants’ costs from central
funds, but the Clerk to the Justices has since queried the claims for costs on the basis
that the Respondent had originally agreed to fund their legal representation.



On 27th February 1998 in the light o f threatened private prosecutions against officers
involved in the Hillsborough Disaster, the Respondent considered the general question
o f whether financial assistance should be granted to the officers concerned.                 It was
recognised that actual decisions about financial support could only be made on
individual application. The Respondent resolved as follows ;



          ‘7 .      That in the light o f the findings o f Lord Justice Stnari-Smith's
                    inquiry and his comments an the outcome. members do not
                    believe there is any new evidence to cause them to reconsider
                    the Authority's previous view, and remain o f the opinion that
                    the officers acted in goodfaith.


          2.        That the Authority agrees to authorise the (. lerk und Treasurer
                    to consider applications for financial assistance front officers
                    (serving and retired) in accordance with the provisions o f
                    Home Office Circular 77X7, Financial Assistance to Police
                    Officers in Legal Proceedings


                                007         o                         Ju ll^T-triJUV.upp|Vm.(>SU2.rt£iloc
9.         In M arch 1998 an application made by Mr Duckenfield for financial assistance was
           approved. In June 1998 an application made by Mr Murray for financial assistance was

           approved.


10.        Pursuant to the said decisions, those acting for Mr Duckenfield and M r Murray in
           defending the criminal proceedings have done so in the expectation that their costs

           would be met by the Respondent. Very significant sums have been incurred by way o f

           defence costs.


 11.       During the Autumn o f 1998 the Director o f Public Prosecutions considered whether to
           intervene in the private prosecution following a request made by the former officers
           that he intervene and terminate the prosecutions.      On ISth December 1998 it was
           announced that the DPP would not intervene either to terminate or conduct the

           prosecutions.


 12.        T he private prosecution is proceeding swiftly, pursuant to a tight timetable, to a fixed

            committal date on 19th April 1999,


     13.    At an interlocutory hearing concerning the private prosecution at Leeds Magistrates
            Court on 21st December 1998 those acting for the two former officers indicated that
            they proposed to apply for judicial review ot the decision of the DPP not to intervene.

            They sought to extend the tight timetable imposed by the Magistrates Court leading
            up to the fixed date for committal.        They were unsuccessful.             The stipendiary
            magistrate acceded to the submission made by the prosecution that it was essential that

            the prosecution be proceeded with speedily.


     14.     On 22nd December 1998 and 23rd December 1998 respectively M r Murray and M r
             Duckenfield made applications to the Respondent to extend financial assistance to
             cover the proposed application for judicial review of the decision o f the DPP not to

             intervene.




                                       003                                     ..In U ^T.IK JIP J ii p p
          In   December    1998   and January     1999   the    private   prosecutor made      written

          representations by way of letter to the Respondent complaining about the provision o f
          financial assistance to the officers and suggesting that in providing assistance to the
          former officers the Respondent had acted unlawfully.        Further, complaint was made
          about any proposed funding o f an application for judicial review o f the decision o f the
          DPP.



    16.   In the light o f the complaints about funding from the private prosecutor, the

          Respondent sought legal advice and then held a meeting on 5th February 1999 to
          determine whether or not it had power to grant financial assistance to the former

          officers. Reluctantly, on 5th February 1999 the Respondent resolved that it had no
m         power. M ore specifically, it resolved as follows :



                  “J      ... the Authority has no legul power to provide financial
                          assistance to Mr David Duckenfield or Mr Bernard Murray in
                          relation to their costs and expenses o f defending the private
                          prosecutions brought against them by the HFSG,                 by
                          information dated IOth July IV9X, and that any previous
                          decision o f the Authority, or any officer acting under its
                           authority, to make such assistance availahle is null and void.


                  2.      In the light o f legal advice, including advice from Leading
                           Counsel, members are recommended to resolve that, on
                           balance, the Authority has no legal power to provide financial
                           assistance to Mr David Duckenfield or Mr Bernard Murray in
                           relation to the costs o f any judicial review proceedings
                           brought by either o f them : whether relating to the decision o f
                           the Crown Prosecution Sen>ice not to lake over the conduct of
                           private prosecutions and discontinue such prosecutions, nr to
                           any decision o f the Clerk to the Sefton Magistrates' Court to
                           challenge the payment of the officers' costs of proceedings
                           before that court from centra! funds, or to any other decision
                           o f any court, authority or body arising from such prosecutions


                                    009
                          ; and. accordingly, to reject the applications of Mr
                          Duckenfteld and Mr Murray for financial assistance in
                          relation to such proceedings.


                  3.      In recognition of the fact that the legal advice provided to the
                          Authority is that it remains arguable that power exists to
                          provide the assistance referred to in I and 2 above, to take
                          such action as the Clerk and Treasurer, in consultation with
                          the Chief Constable, the Authority's legal advisers and the
                          Chairman o f the Authority, may decide as appropriate to have
                           the decisions referred to in I and 2 reviewed by the High
m                          Court and to expedite such review with a view to clarifying the
                          Authority'$powers in this regard. "


    17.1   As is evident from the third resolution made by the Respondent, the Respondent
           accepts that the question of whether there is power to grant financial assistance is, at

           the very least, arguable.


    17.2   The Respondent does not oppose an application for leave to apply for judicial review.



                                                    T H E LAW


    18.    Pursuant to section 6(1) o f the Police Act 1996 :


                   "Every police authority established under section 3 shall secure the
                   maintenance o f att efficient and effective police force for its area. "


    19.     Pursuant to section 111(1) o f the Local Government Act 1972 :


                    “Without prejudice to any powers exercisable apart from this section
                  . but subject to the provisions o f this Act, a local authority shall                   have

                   power to do any thing (whether or not involving the expenditure,
                   borrowing or lending o f money or the acquisition or disposal o f any

                                        ^   -i* ^       o                      . i n (i57-l»(]U ‘.J,;i|>ji.[ K ? i n .( J 5 0 2 .r t i t d o c
       property or rights) which is calculated tn facilitate, or is conducive or
       incidental to, the discharge o f theirfunctions. ”


Pursuant to their duty under section 6 o f the Police Act 1996, and its predecessor

section 4 o f the Police Act 1964 which is in very similar terms, police authorities
nation-wide have as a matter o f practice over many decades granted financial
assistance to police officers to defend legal proceedings in appropriate cases.


As long ago as the Royal Commission on the Police .1961-1962, the practice whereby
police officers were granted financial assistance, when proceedings were begun and not

after the case had been heard and decided, in order to meet and defend private
prosecutions was recognised and no recommendations were made to alter the practice.



Two Home Office Circulars have purported to offer guidance to police authorities in
deciding whether or not to offer financial assistance to police officers to defend
litigation brought against them in respect o f their conduct when acting in the course o f
their police duties.



Home Office Circular No 77/87 includes the following passages :


     "... Also acting in pursuance o f its general statutory duty to maintain an
     adequate and efficient police force for its area, the police authority has
     discretion to meet expenditure incurred hy officers in alt kinds o f legal
    proceedings where the officers have acted in good faith in pursuance o f
     their duties, or the interests o f the force as a whole are involved...


     The central principle which should guide consideration o f individual
     cases is that, where a police authority considers that ail officer has acted
     in goodfaith in pursuance o f his duties or that the interests o f a force as
     a whole are involved, the officer should have the support o f the police
     authority to ensure that he has the services o f a lawyer and that he
     should not he out o f pocket.




                            O il          IU                        J n 0 < ‘?.IKKIV a m '   [<oui.0Su2.nr.tlo>;
               A police officer should be able to carry out his duties in the confidence
               that, if he acts in good faith and exercises his judgment reasonably, his
              police authority will support him. I f in a case where a member o f the
              public brings q prosecution against an officer, the authority is satisfied
               that the officer has acted in this way, the authority should provide or
              fund legal advice and /o r representation. "


    23.3   Home Office Circular 4/1998 includes the following passages :


                  “I.     It is important that police officers should be able to cany out
                          their duties in the confidence that their police authority will
                          support them, if they act in good faith and exercise their
                          judgment reasonably. ....


                  6.      It is fo r individual police authorities to decide in the
                          particular circumstances o f a case, and on the basis o f legal
                          advice, whether     10   make financial assistance available to
                          officers in criminal proceedings. "


    24.    In R v Derbyshire Police Authority ex parte Wilson and Dalton The Times 8.8.89 the
           Divisional Court considered an application for judicial review o f the decision o f the
*          Derbyshire Police Authority, in the exercise o f their discretion, not to pay any part o f
           the legal expenses o f two police officers with regard to an auditors inquiry.                                The
           Divisional Court proceeded on the basis that section 4 o f the Police Act 1964 provided
           the statutory basis for the payment o f money to the police officers with regard to legal
           expenses. Although it would appear that there was no specific argument as to whether
           the Authority had power to grant financial assistance, the source o f the Authority’s
           power was considered by the Court and not found wanting. Ralph Gibson LJ stated

           that “section 4 o f the Police Act 1964 .. defines the duty o f the police authority and the
           purposes for which the authority may spend the money provided, namely, to secure the
           maintenance o f an adequate and efficient police force".




                                                                              J n tl* 7 .lM J N ‘| ;ip|» (SMII U 5 0 2 .f lt .d O O
    25.   Further, in Wilson the status o f a Home Office Circular was considered. The Court
          referred to and endorsed what was said by Scarman LJ in Bristol District Council ^
          Clark [1975] 3 All ER 976 concerning the status o f Home Office Circulars to the effect
          that they are a good indication o f the purposes to be served by the relevant statute.


    26.   Both Home Office Circulars recognise the importance o f the principle that police

          officers should be able to carry out their duties in the confidence that their police

          authority will support them if they act in good faith and exercise their judgment
          reasonably. The earlier 1987 Circular is plainly put on the basis that there is a power
          to grant financial assistance.    The later 1998 Circular does not suggest that it is
9         improper to extend financial assistance to officers facing criminal proceedings and
          suggests that there is power and justification for doing so.



    27.   There are very strong public policy reasons as to why it should be open to a police

          authority to provide financial assistance to police officers facing litigation, and more
          specifically as in this case a private prosecution, arising out o f his or her conduct acting
          in the course o f his or her police duties. Much is asked o f police officers in acting on
          behalf o f a Force.    They have to make difficult decisions, often in the heat o f the
          moment, where lives are at risk or individuals exposed to injury.               Further, they are
          daily dealing with the unscrupulous and situations o f conflict. Police officers, by virtue
          o f their duties, are liable to be made the subject o f litigation and, indeed, litigation
          without proper justification.    It is essential to effective' policing that police officers
          police officers know that if they make mistakes, or face litigation arising from their
          work on behalf o f the Force that they will receive financial support where they have
          acted in good faith.


    28.    In this case the former police officers face a private prosecution which is brought in the

           name o f a solicitor who is said to represent the HFSG. On some three occasions the
           DPP has declined to prosecute these officers.       This must be on the basis that the
           prospects o f success do not justify a prosecution. Yet the private prosecutor is subject
           to no such restraints and the prosecution continues.      It is contended that the public




                                                                              - h i ii V .M l Hi'P u p p ,| v im .U.MI2 .r tf .do*:
                                                    P
                                           013
       policy interest in providing financial assistance to officers .who face prosecutions where
       there is no or little realistic prospect o f success are overwhelming.


29.    In summary, it is contended that the Respondent has power arising from section 6 o f
       the Police Act 199.6 to grant financial assistance, which has been recognised in two
       Hom e Office Circulars and by the Divisional Court in Wilson.


30.1   It is understood that the Respondent’s concern about whether or not there is power to
       grant financial assistance to police officers in these .circumstances arises from the
       provision at section 88 o f the Police Act 1006 (originally section 48 o f the Police Act

       1948) which provides for the liability o f the chief officer o f police in respect o f torts
       committed by constables under his direction and control.          At section 88(4)(b) it is
       provided that a police authority may pay out of the police fund any costs incurred and
       not recovered by an officer in respect o f an action in tort brought against him. It is
       said that as a matter o f statutory interpretation, it should be inferred from the presence
       o f this provision that Parliament intended only to provide for the recovery o f costs

       incurred by an officer in these circumstances.


30.2    It is contended by the Applicant that this suggested interpretation o f the 1996 Police
        Act cannot be correct, for amongst others, the following reasons :


        (a)     There is no express suggestion in the Act that section 8S(4)(b) was intended to
                fetter the power arising from section 6.      Section S8 does not purport in any
                sense to preclude assistance for non-tort claims.           It does not deal with

                assistance in non-tortious claims at all.


        (b)     Section 88 exists to provide for vicarious liability in respect o f actions in tort
                on the part o f the chief officer o f police for his officers and to ensure that the
                 payment o f damages and costs will be met by the police authority and not the
                 chief constable.   Sub-sections (2) and (4) are necessary to relieve the chief
                 constable o f the ordinary civil consequences o f bearing the damages and costs.




                                     U14                                        J u i)57.uuo»J.:ipp.fvm .(J?U 2_rtf.doc
       (c)    It is evident from the Royal Commission Report on the Police 1-9&1-62 that
              there was never any recommendation that the making o f section 88 (originally

              section 48 o f the Police Act 1964) would fetter the practice o f making
              assistance available in non-tort claims.



       (d)    It is apparent from the Home Officer Circulars that it has never been suggested
              by the Hom e Office that the presence o f section 8S(4) should limit the pow er o f
               a police authority to provide assistance.



       (e)    It would be contrary to public policy to interpret section 88(4) as limiting the
               power which a police authority has under section 6.



31.    At the Police Authority meeting on 5th February 1999 those acting for the Respondent
       indicated that they considered t h a t :


       (a)    Even if the Respondent had power to grant financial assistance to Duckenfield
               and Murray to defend the private prosecution, it was limited to meeting costs
               not recovered at the end o f the proceedings.


        (b)   The grant o f financial assistance was dependent upon the former police officers
               exhausting alternative sources o f funding including legal aid.


32.    It is contended that the pow er arising from section 6 o f the Police Act 1996 to provide
        financial assistance is neither expressly nor impliedly fettered in the manner suggested
        and that any such conditions are inconsistent with the duty o f the Respondent to
        maintain an efficient and effective police force.


33.1   On 5th February 1999 the Respondent resolved that it did not have power to grant

        financial assistance to the former police officers so as to allow them to seek judicial
        review o f the D PP’s decision not to intervene in the private prosecution.


33.2   It is contended that the Respondent has power to grant financial assistance to police
        officers facing litigation as a result o f its duty pursuant to seciiun 6 o f the Police Act
1996 to maintain and effective and efficient police force.       In the event that the
Respondent has power to grant financial assistance to a police officer facing a private
prosecution, such assistance cannot properly be specifically limited to simply defending
the private prosecution and to exclude the sort o f steps which a legally aided defendant
in criminal proceedings would properly take on legal advice extending beyond the
specific criminal jurisdiction.



The Respondent has made clear representations to the former officers that their costs
and expenses o f defending the private prosecutions will be met by the-Police Authority.
On this basis many tens o f thousands o f defence costs have been incurred. The former
officers have not sought funding from elsewhere. The private prosecution is now at a
crucial stage.   It is contended that they have a legitimate expectation that they will
receive financial assistance.



In the light o f the above, the Applicant contends that the Respondent was wrong in law
in resolving that it had no power to provide financial assistance to the former officers
both with regard to defending the criminal prosecution and in respect o f any judicial
review application arising therefrom,



                                  EX PEDITION


Given (a) the proposed committal date o f 19th April 1999 (b) the tight timetable
imposed upon the parties in the run up to the committal date (c) that those acting for
Duckenfield and Murray seek to apply for judicial review o f the D PP’s decision not to
intervene in the private prosecution (d) that if the former officers are to be without
financial assistance from the Respondent in defending the private prosecution they need
to seek funds from elsewhere (e) the former officers currently find themselves suddenly
without any source o f financial assistance to defend the private prosecution, this
application must be heard and determined as a matter o f extreme urgency.


It is recognised by both the Applicant and the Respondent that this application must be
determined as a matter o f extreme urgency.
    38.   Both David Duckenfield and Bernard Murray are currently    receiv in g   medical treatment
          as a result o f what occurred at the Hillsborough Stadium. Thus far, they have acted in
          the expectation that the Respondent will support them financially in defending the
          private prosecution. They need to know as soon as ever possible whether they can
          continue to receive financial assistance from the Respondent, or whether they will have
          to try to find funds from elsewhere.




    LOUISE VARTY


9




m




                                       017       >»
                                                                         DEPONENT : LAN DAlNES
                                                               .SWORN ON BEHALF OF : APPLICANT
                                                                        NO OF AFFIDAVIT : FIRST
                                                                          NO OF EXHIBITS : FOUR
                                                                            DATE SWORN : 10.2.99
                                                                          DATE FILED :


                                                                          TROWN OFFICE REF NO ... 1999
  TV TTTF. H IG TT C O U R T O F J U S T IC E


  nm -TTN ’S B E N C H D IV ISIO N

  ( TjCtVJN O F F IC E L IST

                                     ■     ■      T H E C H IE F C O N ST A B L E O F SO U TH
  m   T H E M A T T E R of an application by ,I1L-
®                                      , / c r n AJ*FLY FO R JU D IC IA L REVIEW
  Y O R K S H IR E P O L IC E FO R LEA V E TO Al I l y


   I IA N D A W E S , A * ! * * Chief Co— bto o l ' S - . h Yorkshire Police, Police Headquarters,

    Snig Hill, Sheffield. S3 8LY M A K E O A T H AND S W E A R as tollow* .


    1.                                                  i i o f S o u t h Yorkshire
           I a m t h e A s s is t a n t C h i e f Constable               Y o rK sm r Police,   1 am duly authorised to

                   . „         .    , . u- r            r h iu f Constable o f South Yorkshire Police. I
           swear this affidavit off behalt o f the      u w -i ^
                                                                       for l e a v e to a p p ly for judicial r e v i e w o f
           m ake this affidavit in suppon ot an app
                . . . .                    Y f l f k s hire P o l i c e Authority made on 5th February 1999
           certain decisions o f the South YorKsnir
            referred   to   in   RSC   A ppend ix   A   Form N o   H6A.


m                                               i        d isused to within this affidavit are within
            Save as stated herein, all facts and m ature cu-po*
            my knowledge, information and belief


                                                             t ' i i . ...line and to which 1 refer in this Affidavit are
            T he concerns and worries which I ouilm t anti
                                                                  i            I cannot stress too highly how important it is
            shared by The Chief Constable. Indt-t- •
                                                                                  whether there is power to provide financial
            to The Chief Constable that the questm
                                                                      i ,i vlnrcDver while clearly it is a matter for the
            a s s i s t a n c e t o p o lic e o f fic e r s b e re v iv e d
                                                             •                                     i I- , nm ncr ami efficient policing that it be est
            Court, it is regarded as crucial                           pr >]                                              _
                                                                      i . .. ;,f,ni;Li U is a matter o f the highest priority,
             that there is power to grant financial j »>i»*




                                                        018        ■
I    h a v e re a d t h e M o t i c e o f A p p l i c a t i o n prepared b y t h o s e a d v i s m y ' h *   th ie l        C o n sta b le

a n d c o n f i r m th a t th e fa c t u a l a s s e r t i o n s c o n ta i n e d th erein are true.



There is now produced and shown                        10   me:-


    a)            marked ID l a copy of the recommendations section o f a report dated 1
                  February 1999 and prepared by Messrs Garretts, the South Yorkshire Police
              ■   Authority’s legal advisors. On 5 February 1999 the Authority resolved to act
                  in accordance with paragraphs 1 - 4 o f those recommendations. The terms o f
                  those resolutions are set out in the body ot the Notice ot Application,


    b)            marked ID2 a letter from Messrs Garretts dated 10 February 1999 on behalf o f
                  the South Yorkshire Police Authority which indicates that they do not oppose
                  the application for leave to apply for judicial review and supporting the

                   application for an expedited substantive hearing i


     c)           marked ID3 copies o f the informations laid against David Duckenfield and

                   Bernard Murray dated 10th July 1998,


         d)       marked ID4 correspondence received from The Association o f Chief Police
                    Officers and the Police Superintendents Association of England & Wales
                    dealing with the concern which these bodies have with regard to the decision
                    made by the Police Authority and the need to have this application determined

                    as a matter o f urgency.


         It is my experience that there has never been any question but that a Police Authority
          has the power to grant financial assistance to a police officer who faces legal
          proceedings brought in respect of his or her conduct whilst on duty.                                              1 know o f no
          other case or set o f circumstance in which the Police Authority’s power to grant

          assistance has been questioned or challenged, As can be seen from the letter from the
          Chief Constable o f Derbyshire Constabulary, President of the Association o f Chief
          Officers, the decision that there is no power to provide financial assistance which is the




                                            019                                                         J ill ( iJ T .l J U W   a l l I U U I .p i.in .w d .d o c
e s s e n t ia l   subject    m atter      of    this     a p p lic a tio n   is   co n tra ry      to    current       p r a c ti c e   and

u n d e r s ta n d i n g . T h e r e s o l u t i o n o f th is i s s u e is a m a t t e r o f n a tion al im p o r t a n c e .



I am greatly concerned at the suggestion that there is no power to provide financial
assistance to police officers who face legal proceedings. 1 consider it absolutely vital
that officers should know that if they act in good faith in performing their duties that
their Police Authority will support them in the event that they face litigation.


 I fear that if officers do not enjoy the confidence that they have this form o f support,
 that we will see defensive policing, That is, officers deciding not to act when faced
 with a difficult situation in case it rebounds upon them, or officers seeking to push
 decision making up the rank structure rather than taking responsibility themselves. It is
 absolutely vital that officers feel confident about immediate decision making, This is

  essential to proper policing.


  It is important to bear in mind that it is a particular feature of police work that it is
  usually the most junior officers who are fiaced with the immediate problems o f
  managing or dealing with violent or dangerous situations. They are at the front line, as
   h were. These officers need to know that if they act in good faith they will have the
   support o f their police authority in the vent that they become the subject or target o f
   litigation. It is essential to effective policing that junior officers have the confidence to
   make the difficult decisions and choices which are demanded o f them in the course o f

   their duties.


    Policing necessarily involves situations o f conflict. Police officers daily deal with the
    unscrupulous who are well practised in taking advantage o f any weaknesses which they
    may be able to exploit. It takes little imagination to think o f how the threat of private
    prosecution may be used to intimidate where police officers do not have the confidence
     that they will receive police authority assistance should any such threat be realised.


     I am concerned that if police officers cannot act in the knowledge that they will be

     supported if they face litigation that it will impact on recruitment,
      As a result o f the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster tragically % people died. The impact
      on South Yorkshire Police has been enormous.              Such   is   the profile o f the private
      prosecution that the whole Force will know o f the decision           011   the pan o f the Police
      Authority to cease funding.       1 have no doubt that the decision will be the subject o f
      much concern within the Force, both with regard to the way that David Duckenfield
      and Bernard Murray have been treated and how the decision will affect all current
      officers. Further, given the      press    coverage o f events, it will not have escaped any
      officer's attention that the decision to cease funding came about as a result o f
       representations made by the private prosecutor.



      The decision to cease funding has come at a crucial stage in the private prosecution.
       The decision can only have come as a major blow to the two former officers who have
       thus far acted in the belief that they had financial assistance. Clearly, the question o f
       whether they have funding or not has to be determined as a matter o f absolute urgency
       either so that funding can be resumed so that they can continue properly to defend the
       prosecution brought against them or so that they can make alternative financial
       arrangements.



       In all the circumstances, the Chief Constable seeks leave to apply for judicial review as
       sought in RSC Appendix A Form No 86A and thereafter, the substantive relief
       claimed.

                    .


SW ORN-by the above named Ian Dailies)
this              day o f February 1999   )
atjLeeds in the County o f West Yorkshire )




            S olicito r/C m   n   f y   . -     fW hg



Address:




                                                                                  •111 (J57-IIWJV a i r 1U 02.pcni.vid.doc
                                        021          4
             D E PO N EN T : IAN DAINES
   SW ORN ON B E H A L F O F : A PPL IC A N T
            NO O F A FFID A V IT : FIR ST
              NO O F EX H IBITS : FO U R
                  DATE SW O R N : 10.2.99
              DA TE FILED :




           C R O W N O F F IC E REF NO ... 1999




IN T H E H IG H C O U R T O F JU S T IC E

Q U EEN ’S BENCH D IVISION

CROW N O F F IC E LIST




  IN T H E M A T T E R O F AN A P PL IC A T IO N
  BY T H E C H IE F C O N ST A B L E O F SO U TH
   Y O R K S H IR E P O L IC E F O R LEAVE T O
      APPLY F O R JU D IC IA L REV IEW




           Hammond Suddards Solicitors
                 2 Park Lane
                    Leeds
                   LS3 1ES

              Ret': P C M .S B .C H I.57-9
                                                                    D E P O N E N T : IAN DA IN ES
                                                        SW O R N ON B E H A L F O F : A PPL IC A N T
                                                                   N O O F A FFID A V IT : FIR ST
                                                                     N O O F E X H IB IT S : F O U R
                                                                         D A T E SW O R N : 10.2.99
                                                                     D A TE F IL E D :



    IN T H E H IG H C O U R T O F JU S T IC E                  C R O W N O F F IC E R E F NO ... 1999

    Q U E E N ’S B E N C H D IV ISIO N

    C R O W N O F F IC E LIST




                                                EXHIBIT ID1




     This is the exhibit marked ID I referred to in the first Affidavit ot lan Dairies.




A     SWORN by the above named Ian D;iines)
    ' th is   1          da y oFFebruary 1999       )
      at Leeds in the C o u p t^ o f West Yorkshire )


      B efo re m
                   SoUcitor/C oium kilunm fiH ^ il llts—-

       Name :
       Address:
                             /

        vnT*. ^ r T                      C x,*-m»TAT TN TH IS TEXT A N D jH E AP PES O ICES W HICH
         , c rn ^ n K W T K v L . r r c o ? q a i ^ J i i g B ^ n a i i J 2 i ^                                  °   ^       BY- M S
         g n r C L ^ .n .                   MR
         i m l T ! ! r.ENTBAtT.Y AVAH AUT.T. AT THIS ST APT; C P U y ? TRtTUD-----
         • m r p . TPnAT r o S m Q M                          MEMBERS A Pf TffiR^FOPK R f Q U O TED I B
                I I I TT.T- n r m r T i r —     «                ™> c o n t e n t s w r m N O - p j j S
                          TH E              H * T m r o . V T c o m m i t t e e . i t s g m c E R S Aif f i

           ADVISERS.

           PURPOSE OF THE REPORT                                                          '    .'

           To consider:

•          i)                the decisions taken in principle on 27* February 1998 to provide financial
                             assistance tc M r David Duckenfield and Mr Bernard M urray m relation to
                             certain criminal p r o c e e d in g s taken against th e n a n d to reviaw and decide
                              whether to reverse or confirm those decisions,

               ii)           further applications for financial a s s is ta n t from M r David D u c W ie ld and
                              Mr Bernard M urray to m eet their respective legal costs and disbursements m
                              proposed proceedings for judicial review of.

                              a.         the decision of the C row n Prosecution Service not to intervane to take
                                         over the conduct of the private prosecutions brought against them by
                                         Ms Aim Adlir.gton, Solicitor, on behalf of the H illsborough Family
                                         Support Group ("HPSG");

    ^                          b.         an adverse ruling by the Clerk to the South Sefton Justices on claims
                                          jnade for the paym ent of costs from central funds;

                 iii)        ■ written representations subm itted by Ms Adlington, on behalf of the HFSG,
                                to the Authority;

                     RECOMMENDATIONS

        . ‘-i.,- 1..         T n the light of legal advice, including advice from leading Counsel, members
                     *:■ -   J a r e r e c o m m e n d e d to r e s o lv e that, o n b alance, th e A u th o r ity h a s n o le g a l p o w e r
           .                   to provide financial assistance to M r David Duckenfield or M . Bernard Murray
                               in relation to their costs an d expenses of defending the private p.csecutions
                               brought'against Uiem by the H1:SG, by Information dated 10 July 1998, and
                               accordingly to determine that any previous decision of the Authority, or any
 officer a ctin g u n d er its a u th o rity , to m a k e su ch jissistar.ee a v a ila b le is n u ll and
 v o id .


 In the light of legal advice, including advice from, leading Counsel, member*
 are recommended to resolve th a t on balance, the Authority has no legal power
  to provide financial assistance to Mr            D a v id   Duckenfield or Mr Bernard Murray
 in relation to the costs of any judidal review proceedings brought by either of
  diem: w hether relating to the decision of the Crown Prosecution Service not to
  take ovei‘ the conduct cf the private prosecutions and discontinue such
  prosecutions, or to any decision of the Clerk to the Sefton Magistrate]' Court to
  challenge the paym ent of the officers' costs of proceedings before that court
  from central funds, or to any other decision of any court, authority or body
  arising from such prosecutions; and, accordingly, to reject the applications of
  Mr Duckenfield and Mr M urray for fin a n c ia l assistance in relation to such
  proceedings.                                                   '

  In recognition of the fact that the legal advice provided, to the Authority is that
   it remains arguable that power exists to provide the assistance referred to in 1
   and 2 above, to take such action as the Clerk and Treasurer, in consultation
   with the Chief Constable, the Authority’s legal advisers and die Chairm an of
   the Authority, may decidc as appropriate to hsve the decisions referred to in 1
   and 2 reviewed by the H igh Court and to expedite such review w ith a view to
   clarifying the Authority's pow ers in this regard.

   Tn defer consideration of the procedural issues raised by Ms Adlingtcn, in her
    letters cf 22 December 1998 to the Clerk and Treasurer and 5 January 1999 to
    the members of the Authority, until the legal power of the Authority to provide
    the financial assistance referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 has been resolved to
    the satisfaction of the Authority.




"HUn-p\ml.niM\T5RiC3lli»trouCE/rNjinln.noc;          i
                                                                        D E P O N E N T : IAN DAINES
                                                              SW ORN ON B E H A L F O F : A PPLIC A N T
                                                                       NO O F A FFID A V IT : FIR ST
                                                                         NO O F EX H IB IT S : FO U R
                                                                             DA TE S W O R N : 10.2.99
                                                                         DATE FILED :



rsr TTTF. TTTGH C O U R T O F JU S T IC E                                C R O W N O FFIC E JR E F NO ... 1999

Q U E E N ’S B E N C H D IV ISIO N

C R O W N O F F IC E L IST




                                                    E X H IB IT ID2




 This is the exhibit marked ID2 referred to in the first Affidavit o f te n Daines.



                       9*



•
    SWORN-by the above named Ian Daines)
    this I c r t o ■ day o f February 1999     )                     y
    at Leeds in the County o f W est Yorkshire )             sy


    B efore m e
                  S o licito r/C & tittirisiiU U ii' I'oi'TJsiths^


    Name :
    Address:




                                                             025
                                                 G arretts


                                                                                                                     1 City Squirt
,n r ,            _                                                                                                  Leeds LSI 2 a L
10 February 1999                                                                                                     0113 207 900(1 Telephone
                                                                                                                     01X3 207 9001 Facsimile
Mrs L Kuapm an                                                                                                       DX 26444 Leeds ftirk Squ3{e
C row n Office                                                                                                       Direct line 0113 3996136
Royal Courts of Justice

London                                                                                                                           CX B /D H /K H
WC2




D ear M adam

R - v - T h e South Yorkshire Police Authority ex parte T he C hief C onstable a£ South
Yorkshire Polic-P            :                           '    ---------------------------------

We have been instructed by the South Yorkshire Police Authority ("SYPA")-

We axe awaxe that the Chief Constable proposes to seek judicial review of resolutions made by
SYFA on 5 February 1999. These resolutions were to the effect that SYFA did not have power to
provide financial assistance to two former police officers in relation to th or costs and expenses' of
defending private prosecutions brought against them arising out of the Hillsborough Stadium.' '
disaster.                                                                              —..........—

SYFA. passed these resolutions with, great reluctance on the basis of the advice received from " ___
puiselveg and Counsel we instructed to advise, Miss Presiley Baxendale QC and Mr Mark 5ha.w.- •'—

    O uef Constable contends that SYPA, and indeed all police authorities, did have power to       ----
grant financial assistance in officers faring prosecution- This view accords with a practice which      ■
police authorities have adopted for some 60 years,' This practice appears to have been endorsed by
    Home Office in two Circulars (Number 77 of 1987 and Number 4 of 1998), although we have
now received a letter from the Home Office which appears to cast some doubt on die matter.

The Chief Constable's proceedings will raise questions of national importance. The questions need
to be determined as a matter of urgency. Hus is because the officers who have been denied
financial assistance as a result of SYFA’s decision are facing committal proceedings due to
commence in April 1999 in the Leeds Magistrates Court Those committal proceedings have been
given an estimate of 4 W eeks.

 We understand that the Chief Constable will be seeking leave for judicial review and an order or
 direction that these proceedings be expedited.

                                                                   027
 l -arfelU ;i mcmbvf   the AnJ»n«x*h Lcftil          S\lu f      lhi» name* of th e pATJHM* is y pcn u»                    O ffic e    WnnmfchJm C an'bodt*1
 m iB#fun«rw l       o/Uv* iifTTu                              m m At th* j 'w w olin> ’Ih c                                   LaoUi«i \Aanrft■?*]»» Kc&ling
                                                     * * » n c i m » Iu * h i» o vC        tO U r& n l a t f v t n                     l i r m ir v            k   V \M > o n

                                    jertekui p-UB^U-00aza^K\c»W
              ,                                                                       T0O*. tS2 Etta - SJ_l3 yyV9                       ^L£:TI         6&/S3/0 I
         □N
                                                            G a r r etts

         Mis L Knapman,
                                                                       ' 2“                                    10 Februaiy 1999


         On behalf of the SYPA, whose decision is to be the subject of review by the c o u rt we:

        1          c o n se n t to f o e grajnt o f le a v e ; a n d


        2                       ? etC? efJC a n S ta b k ,S aF P Hc* dQri ^            ^ fu ll b e a r in g o f h is a p p lica tio n b e
                   ex p e d ite d . I n d e e d , w e s h o u ld h o p e th a t th e m a tter c a n b e h e a r d a s s o o n as p racticab le and
                   m a n y e v e n t d u r in g th e m o n th o f March 1999.                                                    p racticab le, and


        ^ ° rde! fadli tate 311 eaily i'V x n g        SYFA Will endeavour to p u t in its evidence in reply
        w ith in 7 days of service of the application.                                              111ieply
    m
            J ^ e r s t a n d that those acting fo r the Chief Constable intend to serve the H om e Office as a
                       K       k    • CQnSider^ at we should ^                  to * * Court's attention at this stage, in order to


        Yours faithfully




                                                                       028
        \\W*/ow»\T»«\..\d«u\I.~«n.~iihyrthiK
                                                                 fs       T00£ vQZ Cl 10 "** S liS aw g                   1S:TT           60/£ 3 /2
M            ‘CN                                                 P-            —-------------------
NRESOLUTIONS OF THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY ON
 FRIDAY, 5 FEBRUARY 1999

 1. In the light of legal advice, including advice from leading Counsel, m em bers are
       recDixunended to resolve that, on balance, the Authority has no legal pow er to
       provide financial assistance to Mr David Duckenfield or M r Bernard M urray in
       relation to their costs and expenses of defending the private prosecutions brought
       against them by the HFSG, by Information dated 10 July 1998, a n d accordingly to
       determine that any previous decision of the Authority, or any officer acting
       under its authority, to m ake such assistance available is null and void.

    2. In the light of legal advice, including advice from leading Counsel, m em bers are
       recom m ended to resolve that, on, balance, the Authority has no legal pow er to
       provide financial assistance to M r D avid Duckenfield or M r Bernard M urray in
       relation to the costs of any judicial review proceedings brought b y either of them;
        w hether relating to the decision of the Crown Prosecution Service n o t to take
        over the conduct of the private prosecutions and discontinue such prosecutions,
        ar to any decision of the Clerk to the Sefton Magistrates' Couxt to challenge the
        paym ent of the officers' costs of proceedings before that court fro m central funds,
        □ r to any other decision of any court, authority or body arising from such
        prosecutions; and. accordingly, to reject the applications of M r Duckenfield and
        M r M urray for financial assistance in relation to such proceedings.

    3, In recognition of the fact th a t the legal advice provided to the A uthority is th at it
        remains arguable that pow er exists to provide the assistance referred, to in 1 and 2
         above, to take such action as the Clerk and Treasurer, in consultation w ith the
         Chief Constable, the Authority's legal advisers and the C hairm an of the
         Authority, m ay decide as appropriate to have the decisions referred to in 1 and*2
         reviewed by the High C ourt and to expedite such review w ith a view to
         clarifying the Authority's pow ers in this regard.

     4. To defer consideration of the procedural issues raised by Ms A dlington, in her
         letters of 22 December 1998 to the Clerk and Treasurer and 5 January 1999 to the
         m em bers of the Authority, until the legal power of the Authority to provide the
         financial assistance referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 has been resolved to the
         satisfaction of the Authority.




                                            020
                                                     taOA vee c i i a - su.-wnwg .
ES'iTH ■                                               ------------------- ----- ---
    CHAIRMAN'S STATEMENT


    South Yorkshire Police A uthority has m et today to consider issues relating to tihe
    funding of the defence costs of former police officers in legal proceedings relating to
    the Hillsborough disaster.


    As well as considering various legal advice, w e heard representations from the
    Hillsborough Families Support Group and solicitors representing two former
    officers.


    Questions have been raised recently about fee pow ers of Police Authorities to pay
          defence costs of police officers in l e g a l proceedings. We have taicen extensive
    legal advice on the matter. On balance, our advisers have concluded th a t Police
    Authorities do n o t have the pow ers and w e have felt obliged to su p p o rt that view.


    However, the issue is far from clear c u t "We have h e a rd this m orning from several
    other legal advisers - including the Chief Cpnstable's adviser - who are firmly of the
    view that Police A u th o r itie s do have the powers. W e are therefore co-operating with
    the Chief Constable to have the true legal position determ ined by the c o u rt


    The implications of this m atter go beyond 5outh Yorkshire and could affect the
    Police Service as a whole.


•     ■




                                                                                                 66/'E&/'fc1c
                                                            D E PO N E N T : IAN DAINES
                                                  SW ORN ON B E H A L F O F : A PPL IC A N T
                                                           NO O F A FFID A V IT : FIR ST
                                                             NO O F E X H IB IT S : F O U R
                                                                 DA TE S W O R N : 10.2.99
                                                             DATE FIL E D :


IN T H E H IG H C O U R T O F JU S T IC E                  C R O W N O F F IC E R E F N O ... 1999

Q U E E N ’S B E N C H D IV ISIO N

C R O W N O F F IC E T.TST




                                          EX H IB IT ID3




This is the exhibit marked ID3 referred to in the first Affidavit o f Ian Daines.



 PrpQ-iMtf) <?VV
■S W O R N by the above named Ian Daines)
 this              day o f February 1999   )
 at Leeds in the Countv o f West Yorkshire )


 B efore m e
               Solicitor/Com taiswHiei for

 Name:
 Address:
                                                                                          T O - '"-            " ‘ 9 0 1 1 3 2 3 ^ 7 ^ 1 " :^ . P . 0 2 ^ 5
                / X    l : 3 9    F R C n   U IN C K U C R T H   S l-£ R U O O D




                                     IN TH E COUNTY OF W EST YO RK SHIRE




THE INFORMATION of ANN ADL3NGTON, Solicitor, acting                                      o n   b e h a l f o   f   the HmsboroughFsnnly
Support Group, who stales .that

               T H E    D E F E N D A N T




               D A V ID G O D F R E Y P P C ^ VETFT X> of


  >•
                On the 15th April 1989 at IQlsborough Football Stadium, Sheffield

                                 UnbwfeBy killed JOHN ALFRED ANDERSON
                 CD
                                 Contrary to Common Law
                                 Unlawfully killed JAM ES GARY A S P lN A lX                              ^
                 (2)
                                 Contrary to Common Law
                                 'WQfijfly neglected to perform a public duty
                  (?)
                                  Contrary to Common Law
                                  w ih intcct to ptrvcrt the coo™ o f justice fid an
                      (4)         t = S U y topervHttie coun* ofj s f c e m «tat hr tad *c«a * e
                                  drctmirtimces in ’which gate C becam e open.
                                  Contrary to Common Law




                       DA.TEDTHE IOIHDAY OF JULY 1998




                                                                                   032
                                        SUM M ONS T O DEFENDANT

                                   IN THE COUNTY OF WEST YORKSHIRE

                                  LEEDS CITY PETTY SESSIONAL DIVISION


                                             T he l3 fcvdayof3 yki-^ 133S




          Informations have been laid this day before me, the undersigned Justice of the Peace, by
          ANN ADLINGTON, (Solicitor) acting on behalf of the Hillsborough Family Support
          Group that you BERNARD DEAN MURRAY

          of

          on the 15* day of April, 1989

          at         Hillsborough Football Stadium, Sheffield

          1.         Unlawfully killed JOHN ALFRED ANDERSON
                     Contrary to Common Law

           2.        Unlawfully lulled JAMES GARY ASP1NALL
                     Contrary to Common Law
      4    3.        Wilfully neglected to perform a public duty
- v                 • Contrary 10 Common Lot#


                                                                                                     K
           YOU ARE THEREFORE HEREBY SUMMONED to appear Q T'UU                  the
           day of f V w t - 1998 befon; the MAGISTRATES’ COURT sitting at W ESTGATE,
           LEEDS ta siuwer the said informations, cw \ O C7°




                    tytLiLoSyp
               J u j t k i uf ih i Pmcc. Tor th e C ounty aforesaid
                                   C'f'xoijv, Wjsfcc.


                                                                 033
                                                              DEPONENT: IAN DAINES
                                                     SWORN ON BEHALF OF : APPLICANT
                                                             NO OF AFFIDAVIT : FIRST
                                                               NO OF EXHIBITS : FOUR
                                                                 DATE SWORN: 10.2.99
                                                               DATE FILED :


  TNT   TTTF, TTTGH C O U R T O F JU S T IC E               C R O W N O F F IC E R E F NO..... 1999

  OTIEEN’S B E N C H DTVISION

   C R O W N O F F IC E L IST




                                             E X H IB IT ID4




    This is the exhibit marked ID4 referred to in the first Affidavit of Ian Daines.




IjP SW0RNJ)y the above named lan Daines)
    this \ o ^ -      day of February 1999 )
    at Leeds in the County, of West Yorkshire)


     Before m e.
                Solicitor/Grrniniissioaei for O.Hr

     Name :
     Address:
                              T H E A S S O C IA T IO N OF C H I E F POLICE OFFICERS
                              O F E N G L A N D . WALES A N D N O R T H E R N IR E L A N D

                              President:                     John Newing, QPM., BA(Hons).,
                                                             Chief Constable, Derbyshire Constabulary


M. Hedges Esq.,                                                                                                        Our Ref; JN/JB
Chief Constable,
South Yorkshire Police,
S n ig H ill,                                                                                                          5th F e b ru ary , 1999
S heffield. S3 SLY.




             I understand that the South Yorkshire Police Authority have received
independent legal advice which informs them that they have no power to grant
financial support to serving or former officers facing prosecution. This advice was
given in respect of a private prosecution currently faced by former Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield and former Superintendent Murray as a result of their
involvement in the tragic events at Hillsborough.

               This decision is clearly contrary to current practice and understanding
 and is a matter of national concern. You have said that you are looking for this to be
 judicially reviewed. Can I ask you to pursue the review w ith all diligence and obtain
 as early a hearing as possible.

                                                                           Yours sincerely,


                                                                                             •i



                                                                                John Newing
                                                                                 PRESIDENT




                                                  r^U'plimic       111177?I 57:7»)l!         t'J \    i t M T t 'i
              111 U l O S. I Il k I I t *’%''• I M H I \ K V III     V kllK N   I M I ’U l\l I   ^ 11 U X    u t i l I ’l   I >| k l l \ M II k l   )»)•■' *KN




                                                                          03 3
                  /

                                                             .   ,     i ^                    67A Reading Road
                                P   o   U   c b   S u n e r i n t e n a e n t s                      pangboume
                                                           ■   ■ ■                            Berkshire RG8 7JD
                                                  Association                                  Tel: 0118 984 4005 -
                                                         OT                                    Fax: 0118 984 5642
                                                                                  E-mail: Police^Supers@BTInteniet.com
                                        England and Wales                          Website: httpJ/www.PoliccS upcrs.com



Ref: DCP/WAC

8 February 1999

Mr M.LL Hedges, QPM, LL.B
Chief Constable
South Yorkshire Police
Police Headquarters
Snig Hill
 hejSSfeld.
  e^jpl     S3 SLY


 Dear
 FINANCIAL SUPPORT FOR FORMER POLICE OFFICERS DAVID DUCKENFIELD AND
 BERNARD MURRAY

 It has come to my notice that at a meeting of the South                                               it that
 decided to discontinue financial support for t e o a                        received as to whether there w as
 decision was based upon independent legal advice whi                 J               particular whether that
  a power in law for them to make such financial a s s i s t a n c e available, and »
  power was available under the Police Act 1996, sections 6 and 88, and the Local Govemm
  section 111 (1).
  Home Office Circular 4/1998 deals w ith * « issue_oE when p<
  I j p   * £                                                        * * * * police                               a - if
  th ^ /act in good faith and exercise their judgement reasonably. .
   T h e d ^ o n b y ^ S o u A Y                      o r ^ P c U c e A u ^ h a a t h ^ ^ e ^ ^ b t e ^ ^

   the Superintendents' Association and would appear                      i;c<! officers I understand that your
   of police                           j^ ^ ^ b ^ ^ q le a T a u th o r ity ir U a w for such an action and that




    dm s^fce and seek as early a hearing before the HiSh Court as you can poss.bly arrange.

   .Yours sincerely.


    Des P a rk in so n
    C h ief S u p erin ten d en t
    N a t io n a l S ecretary
                                                           03 6
        Royal Commission
          on the Police
                                      1962

Cl
                          FINAL REPORT

                   Presented to Parliament by Command o f Her Majesty
                                        May 1962




                                       LONDON
               HER MAJESTY'S STATIONERY OFFICE
                                 ■■ in fir I2.i. firf.   nbt
     CmncJ. 172H
                                                                                                                                   m
   .... HI |.'| v.      U       li.iu'   iliv iiw t   .r< oiwlii'iil   Huil   a   i ,miiimv.i'in shimM
> . I*...-ill I I. i-> I M'’K |IjOiMJistillltiiipml pnn'MiwlHlf               lliriM^hiHtl
. V li.it              ' .(rMtii'L’ini'iH.'i hu* iMr m i H i u l uml suJmini^lrsimm :uul„
                                                                                                                                                           C0N1KNTS
      ,, ;        tii «•MisiiJcr:                                                                                                                                                                                                         <’«!!•
     i t , !*,.           :nuii'in       uikI   fuiictiww »f local pnlice uuthnriiies; (-) the                                                                                                                                                 I
                       .111.1        ...........           «rmembersnfiwliw forces incluJinj!             C tlA l'lliK       ]. Pmwdure uT the CtiitnnissEi*il ...                             ...         ....
           .in. i ..w .-t* i*t imlit'0 ; (.11 the relationship of the policc m ill the                                      II    Tim Swipe of the                       .............................................................
                                                                                                          C lIA I'ltH
                      ,1 . 1.1 the in.uiis of (in^ntiny iltai co m p lain u b y the public
            , - .i,,,; Hi.- r u lu v :iro dfcoiivrfy ileult w i t h ; uml (41 Ihe bro,iil                 OlAt'IEK         III.   The Dewlnjjraiiit <*f Palien Fwrerai! Tin- tVilire Serriw l<«l»>
                              which ilw ulil g i n « n tlic rotmiinirution of llw wnsiitM e,                                          to fiil cliLirjcter of the polios                   ......................................
               I I-in- ny-irJ u> il 10 nature mid extent of polfcc dunes ami                                                          Conintmi hiw ilerivnlion o f the conslabUi’s odlec aiiit
                   ; ..ii .Url.iin iiml Hie nceil liv attract and Main an :ic!c<tu:ile                                                   powers        .........................................................................
               u..m:Ii -il lecruits with llw proper c]iialilinilions;                                                                 Subiirdiiunion nfjioliee [o jiulices                            ...
      . , pl, k jjV . \ I. ili.il Wo. winishni great trust ami confidence in y°ur                                                     Niiieleeiilh ivnmry kiislmioti; (wo fiinlur feuliires
      ! =,|           .n.l ..l.ilil). have anihurinal uini appointed and ih> by llicse                                                    siqvrinipcucil           .............................................................
                                                                                                                                      'I he llienry i'f ilu? iwliw i« Ihe niuekemli ivnlmy
                ‘ ...... - .,<ni                y m s i t |L,"r>'                   w1tll1inS
 <           , ,i is. ill-v J'ltai, llanm (rwliUft uf ISpswu; Srr litlvv;iftl wn                                                      ■J‘he iiioJei'ii pelke                   .................................................
I ’. I j’ - .t.               Ml Iirtn-(j.c Wilfrcil Turner; Arthur Lehman Guild nut;                                      IV. The Purpuscs or (he Police n«J ^Liir C'unstUiittuiiiil 1'esltiuii...
                                                                                                          C H A I 'T E R
> J ni.1 J | _ u i ttuluciMn : Owen Temple Temple-Morris: kaililecn                                                                Th<i purpoics o f (lie police                        ...............         ...............
s:\i.i' U,............ „. li.mliiwi' Sumner Ilnhxim : John Clwrlcs Hiirinsin;                                                      The present conililuiional stiitus nr ihc police..............
i\         i l>.i It. hi J'i':m-r; I'hurtes l.wlie Hale; Hectur Alustuir
                                                                                                                                   S tutus o f iunks hclow thief consla ble ..........................
I I ’ .-iisis: -ii . J.-iri.-r, Writ!In Maufarlane ami Margaret Alison RidiarJson
..          it ,          imiirtwnfrs'fur ihe purposes <if tlic said inquiry                                                       I.ctul siiims ciftbief cunslLihlci ...                                                   —
                                                                                                                                   Ix1ip«c i'l' the anm nl’le"* siihniJininioii in tlw jiMikv
      'M i |.-I i!-■ lu'ii.-r ellivtinu III!! purposes of Ihis Our Commission. We                                                     o f ihe |>tiiiLXs          ......................................
  . i. ,|L j',.... h , ^ite iimt £ khii untrj you. or any Uw or mnie of you,                                                       SuhorJiiiailon uf dhEcf con^labtcs lo democraiiJ iup.T-
.            ................. l^-ruie you such persons tis you aliull judge likely to                                                vision          .........................................................................
!.ii :!l %...i ..ui inliHmiiwii upon ilie subject of this Our Commission:
 i.. . j IM.ii iiit.iMiuiiiin in wrilini;; iinil alio to cull for have access to                           C 'H A V ita     V. ArranBeiiientJi for Hie Coiilrot of llic Police ...
                  .... .Ml Midi lwoks. doiiinicuts. registers and ructwb u» «wy                                                     Pivseiit control over ctiief wnslabk's:
 ..ii .i.l i..u iljv Utlk-.M JiLfunii.iliiHi «n ilie MibJcL't ami to litt|uiro of ami                                                    Dlrcct fcBLil euntrol .................................................
     n.-niiii-j ili.- |-i.-jiiii.t:a hy all tiilier luwfnl n;iys unit means whulstHSver.                                                 Indirccl leijjl          ................................................ .
       \ \ i i w . . i.i In HiL'se I'fLSL-nb aui Unlive anti criipowcr yon, or uny of                                                    Non-slatutory urritnaeiiKiils ...
    ... i.. w.n .iii.I ivr.siinsilly insfwti such places us you may ileein it                                                      Tfit ciisc for a uniliud or ” luilionnl " police iervjes ...                                                W
  . .j                                               l|w J,u,ri: eH^t'Kiw! curryIns out of ihe purposes                            Comment on [he case for unifyiny ihe police servieo ...                                                     J-
                                                                                                                                          Police s la te s ........................................................................
     vM) \ \ . - h i iUej,i' PrciuiU will ami ortlam lliat this Our Commission                                                            Tlio case for toiuimilnj! Uieul police Hsrces                              ..............
  ■ il . ..umi.K in' Tull forw ami virtue, mid that you. Our said Comm's-                                                                 Conclusions on nrmiiBeiiienls fnr Ihe eonlrol o f 'he                                                ^
  ;...................   ihc ur wore i.l you Jiuty from tmie lo tirae pracecd in tlie                                                       poliee         .............................................................
             ...........  f.    nml nf every m aitcr uml ilima llieroiii dUitumcil.
 ‘„it,...r-li il.o '..iiik lie JWt to n iln u ttl frtim limu to m n o by u JJm irn n iu il.                C U A C T tll   VI. Tho I’allce Aulhotlly      .............................................................
     V sl', w ,|„ fimlKr urdaii) iliul you, or any five o r more o f you, have                                                     Genera! functions o f police 4iull loril le a ..........................                      ^
  I,,;,,',, ........            tiiur prawUblit iimler this Our Commission from tune                                               The police niillim ity a* un advisory body _                          .......................
                                                                                                                                   The polite uutharjly’s rule in appninlinB tliiercnMiiblei,
  I. tttii. if         k.m '.hull jmli-ii it c»|>etlicnl SO to tlo :
                                                                                                                                      depaly chlefcoitslnbrcs mnl assistant chief cumt-iiMo...                                  55
      ,M , ,i„, (1irii,cr »ill ami phamn is ital yon *3o.wilhus Imle delay
                                                                                                                                   Tho police nulliority’s rflle In rcnwvlnB_chief'eimiliiUet.
  j, j.T.sihW- r.'jh>ri in         your opinion upon the malters liercin submitted                                                    deputy chkf wnslables und assistant chief coibt.iblci                                      ^
  |i*l ^hMil                                                                                                                          from ohlee          ..............................                                  ; ....
       t„ ■„,i tun- I '-uni al Sli1.iI Jmiies’s Ilie l^iUylifih day ofJanuary.                                                     The puliec uutlui rily'H role Jn relaliml Iti llie iqipoiniiiieiil.
                                                                                                                                      promotion, discipline and removal Hrom olliee *H
          I'ft.j ; III the I'iglilli Vcur of Oiir Itciun.                                                                                     s u b o rilin silc m ilk s
                                                                Uy H er Mitjcsty's Com m and.
                                                                                    R. A. BUTLER.                                                                                                                                        A.1
                                                                                                                 JIIM
                                                          iv
'• 'h t V
us ihuwj that these relations are at present good, «id we.thinkMhart
ilmy tan bcit bo maintained by accelerating 4ho pace
service moves towards greater unity, rather than by any abrupt and radicv                                     CHAPTER VI
cha n^e which might not be readily understood.
   151.    It follows from thla conclusion 4hftt w make no r«emmefl<fouon                         THE POLICE AUTHORITY
to alter ihe present legal status of the chief constable—a matter whjch we        152, H e diversity which characterises the police system is "°whera more
lull over from the last chapter. As ihe chief «H «f of * local police force
fat should in our view continue to posswsthe status defined by theicourB,      apparent than la the variety ia composition. Md fraction of. police autho­
                                                                               rities. There aw five or six different types. In the Tvfttrop^tan force tJii
and not that of a Crown or a local authority servant. But hi* “ “duct
and efficiency in his office should be subject to control and supervision In   police authority hi the Home Secretary, and in Aie CiV of London ft. is
                                                                               die Common Council of the City. In English and Welsh                11 “
ways which we proceed to discuss.                                              standing joint committee, « body im posed of equal numbcn of
                                                                               councillors nominated by the covpty council and justices of the
                                                                               elected by quarter sessions. In (he cities and .boroughs of E n g la n d and
                                                                               Wales the police authority is 4he watc* committee, a body              f
                                                                               more than one-third of the council. In Scotland the police authority a the
                                                                               county or burgh council itself. Where police forces have been Mmbintd
                                                                               lie police aulhority comlsls, In England and Wales, of an ad hoc body,
                                                                               which generally, -but not invariably, contains representatives of tie local
                                                                               authorities whose forces (have been combined; en
                                                                               authority is also an ad hoe body, but in Ihis case Ihe local authorities
                                                                               retain Iho title of “ police authority ".
                                                                                   153. The present functions of police authorities are not clearly defined
                                                                               by statute, and (he recommendations in this chapter are designed to clarify
                                                                               their r&le and to deal with their composition.
                                                                               Genera] functions ol police authorities
                                                                                  154 , A police authority, in our opinion, ought to have four main duties.
                                                                               Tie first is to provide an adequate police force for its area, properly para,
                                                                               equipped, housed and administered. T ic second is to constitute a body ol
                                                                               citizens concerned with the local standing nnd well-being of the police,
                                                                               interested in the maintenance of law and order, and able to give advice and
                                                                               guidance to a chief constable about local problems. The t o d is to appoint,
                                                                               and if necessary discipline or remove, the senior officers of the force. The
                                                                               fourth Is to play an active rile ia fostering good relations ietween the police
                                                                               and the public.
                                                                                  155. The evidence before us, including that ol chief constables.!isthat
                                                                               police authorities cany out -tiie first of these purposes pwpejiy. they Mke
                                                                               Sample provision for Ihe polios as they (reasonably cu . Danng the postwar
                                                                               housing shortage rmmy authorities secured high priority for ‘P0*1* “ “ “ T
                                                                               modatton. A legacy of antiquated and u ira tof^ ry p o llM S ^ oM M d
                                                                               headquarters remains, and with Unrated resources available for capital invest
                                                                                         this as In oiher services some year* must elapsebetore po^»^i]d-
                                                                                ing throughout the country achieves uniformly h i g h i j * ,£ ? ^
                                                                                generally no lack of intention Nor have we any teason to think that the
                                                                                wuipment provided far (he police ts indicative of parsimony in any dgoUicant
                                                                                number of cases. The FoUoe FedetatkwC) expressed to us the opinion that
                                                                                the           control exwdsed by eome police authorities, concerned with ihe
                                                                                 0) M[mita ofBvideawe IS,pajo IOM-7.
                                                                                                                       51
 k id of ihc local rale rather than tlie poiidng of their area, may pul a brake           commitlMd.O The Magistrates’ Association suggested that the inspectors’
 on proper dcvdopttvenl. The weight of thn evidence doss not support                      reports should always be sent to the pollco authorities concerned.?)
 thk view.                                                                                    1J8 We do not *hJnV that these proposals meet the situation. Tho difficulties
                                                                                          are inherent in tho principle* which underlie the present system, and what
    156.     11 is ool useful to try to define precisely what is " adequate ” provision    it required, in our view, is a modification of principle, not oE machinery.
 for the polic«. In the nature of things there is a good deal of discussion               There are at present overlapping responsibilities; and there is an. inertia
 bslweeji a police authority end a chief constable, and perhaps'the chairman               thus resident in the system which acts against the public interest^) It is
of a finance conimittee, when police estimates are being settled. Moreover,               necessary in our opinion to put an end to the anomaly lhat a police authority
 the police rtsouioes required in one area may not be the same as those                   appears to have responsibilities for the efficient policing of its area, yet has
required ia another. Local circumstances, the incidence of crime, geography               no technical competence in the matter and no adequate system of
and the density oT population must all be taken into account. We do not                   inspection. ■
 therefore think that any rigid formula can be usefully employed to determine                 159. To rationalise this situation we recommend lhat police authorities
police requirements in manpower or equipment. But there are certain                        be relieved oE any legal responsibility they may have for the efficient
 minimum standards which clearly ought to be adopted. Already the Secre­                  policing of the' area, An aulhority will continue to Iw responsible for
taries of Stale have power to approve the numbers of police in a force.                   the proper provision of manpower, equipment and buildings and for the
 Recently, as we said in our interim report. Ibis power has sometimes been                appointment of proper persons to be the chief constable, deputy chief
used as a brake upon the expansion of forces rather than as a means of                    constable and, where appropriate, assistant chief constable of the force.
encouruginji their development: and we recommended that existing establish*               Failure in any of these duties would, as now. endanger payment of the
meats be reviewed to ensure that they provide for adequate police
protection^1) We are confident that any police authority which made no                    police grant.
elfoft to provide for aa adequate establishment for its 'foroe would be                       160. We discuss the functions of the inspectors of constabulary in me
compelled to do so by the Secretary of Stale. As regards the professional                 !nwt chapter, but it will be convenient here to set out our views about
requirements of the police, we describe In the next chapter new central                   tiheir relations with police authorities under (he iole which w* propose for
arrangements, the provision of which we regard as urgently seosssary, for                  ihe polios authority. It might be inappropriate for the whole of the
developing modem methods of policing and items of equipment. Again                        inspector's reports to be made available to it. We recommend. l°w «er
it Is implicit in our proposals that the            estimates of police authorities       that the inspector always meet the chairman and members of the authority
will be adequate to ensure (hat their farce* are constantly kept up-to-date,              during the course of an official inspection and discuss with them matters for
and ihiit local authorities will make suitable provision tor Ibis purpose.                which the aulhority is legally responsible. At such meetings toe g « erl“
                                                                                          state of die force would, naturally, be reviewed. To the extent t o t this is
   [57, We referred earlier in our report to the differing Interpretations put            nor already done, we also recommend that the Home Department draw the
before us as to the extent of a police authority's responsibility for the                 attention of the police authority formally to all mailers concerning its
efficiency of iu police force and. In the phrase used in tho Police (Grant)               responsibilities which may come to the inspector's attention. We ihln*
Orders, for the “ efficient policing of the area”. We also described in the               that arrangements of this kind mil meet the legitimate concern of police
last chapter the awkward dilemma in which these statutory provisions may                  authorities to know what opinion the inspector has formed of their forces.
place a police authority. If It purports to give instructions to its chief                    161. A clarification on the fore^ing lines of tho duties of a police
constable, even stopping short of Interfering with law enforcement, it may                authority will remove the present uiSerUlflly in the relations between the
well be going too far; if, on the other hand, it fails to take timely action              authority and its .chief constable, while leaving the authority s present
against an ineffective chief constable {and it is difficult to see how such               powers suhsUntiaily unchanged. The most important of these is the
action can avoid the giving of instructions or at least advice) it may be                 annual duty to make financial provision appropriate to the wale of policing,
failing in the purpose for which it was appointed. The police authority's                 having regard to other demands on a local authority’s resources. We
task is rendered yet more difficult by Ihc inadequacy of Mson between polios              recommend that the principle of sharing the cost of the police equally
authorities and inspectors of constabulary, 11# reports of Your Majesty s                 between Ihe rates and the Exchequer be maintained. It Is in our view
inspectors arc submitted to the S e c r e t a r y 0f State. If 4hey reflect adversely     entirely appropriate that locally elected people should bo responsible for
on ihe functions of a police authority, the authority** alienlion is normally             settling the amount to he raised locally and that; subject to any requirements
drawn co (be alleged shortcomings* Bui it is not ^ practioe to acquaint                   of the Secretary of Slate, they should have i voice ta determining the
a police authority with the nature of die remainder of the report. In theso               size of the force, and the scale on which it Is equipped and thi manner
circumstances the Assooiatloo of Municipal Qjfporatioos aslced us to
recommend that the Home Officc should give police authorities id account                    (ft MJnulo of EvJienoe 11-11, P?S° «1.                          .J ,
of inspections, And lt*at arrangements should be t&flrfe for formal consultation             ii) jtataataao aw n broujhfSiVur attention In .whfcfc tbs cojtflnuuiw la oaoafor etrijt
about the state of police forces between inspectors and members of watch.                 v ein of a chJef couUMo known by both ttua pollco authority « 4 Iha Horn* Offlco to be
                                                                                          jjufcclive w u tolerated became each party waited for lbs other to set anil neither w «
  (0 Cnvid- 1227, paragraph* 6^-71.                                                       o o i l M of tiis support of tiis other.
                                         52
                                                                                                                                     53
                                                                                  authorities, but there is no statutory requirement th a t they should d o so.
jj] which it is housed. The financial responsibilities of a police authority      These reports vary greatly in quality, form and scope. There ^ Is good
involve muL-li routine in arranging, for example, contracts for Ihe erection      reason lo encourage, originality in thought and aPP™tt*b>
urnl iiiauiisjiBuce of police buildings and in making provision for police        gams repoiis tend to be obscure and unhelpful .and the lack of uniformity
training. flut ihere is scope for an enlightened police authority lo exercise     in their contents, materially, reduces Iheii value Ja providing the Secretaries
considerable initiative in promoting the well-being of the police, and in         o f State with a n .o v e ra ll picture of th e.p o lic e n n r k e . W e iherefore
giving financial backing to the imaginative proposal! of a chief constable,       recommend ihai chief constables in England a n d Wales be required to
particularly in ihe field of training.                                            subm it to police authorities annual reports on the policing of their a re a s:
                                                                                  and, as regards both England and Wales and Scolland, th at the form and
T he police authority u an advisory body                                          scope o f annual reports to police authorities be guided b y regulation.
    1( 2 . We turn now to the second important function of a police authority     We further recommend th at Ihe reports contain statistical Information,
—lo constitute a body of citizens concerned with 'the local standing and          including information .about complaints against the police, compiled o n a
well-being of the police, interested in the maintenance ot law and order,         uniform basis,
and able to give advice and guidance to a chief constable on local problems.
                                                                                     1(5 We are attracted by a suggestion of the Association of Municipal
Already there is much informal consultation between chief constables and
                                                                                  Corporations lhat the right should bo recognised o f a member o f a council
police authorities, for the authority needs to have a thorough grasp of
                                                                                   to « k questions of Ihe chairm an of a police authonty on the ™ to s tu td -
police problems if it is to give proper consideration to proposals for changes
                                                                                  ing lhat he would he under no obligation to reply If to do so would be
in the establishment of a force, and for (he supply of vehicles and equip­
                                                                                   contraty to law o r the public interest,?) Again, this is already the practice
ment. it should be the duty of both parties to see that consultation is
                                                                                   in some places, and it entirely accords wllh our view that local P 'obkm J
close and continuous.                                                              of law and order should be the concern o f local people. Such an arrange­
    163. There Is a t present a general understanding between police authori­      m ent would not, however, w ork easily in a combined authority.
ties and chief constables about Ihe limits lo which discussion of police
affairs can properly go, and a general acceptance that within these limils           1(6 Reports submitted to police authorities, other than annual reports,
disuujsion Is valuable to boih sides, It was suggested to us by some              should be regarded as confidential to the authority. Moreover, the
witnesses that arrangements for this purpose should be put on a more formal       authority's role cannot, under Ihe arrangements which we propose, extend
basis, and that the concern oE a police authority with problem* of law and        beyond the giving of advice : and it will n o t be entitled to give °rd e « or
order should be unequivocally recognised. Although, for Ihe reasons we            instructions to a chief oonstable oo' inalters connected with policing. TTius
have set out in paragraphs 157-158, we do not think it either necessary           the relationship between a police authority and its chief constable^ rnLl m th u
or desirable that police authorities should have legal responsibility for the     field differ from that between other council committees and iheir chief officers.
efficient policing o f Ihe area, we regard them as entirely suitable bodies       In the U tter case the role oE the official is to advise the comrmttee and to
to give advice to chief constables on general questions of policing. To           implement its decisions on m atters of p o licy ; but the decisions
enable them to carry o u t this function effectively, we recommend th at           are the responsibility o i Ihe elected body. In the case of the police the e
a rra n g e m e n ts be introduced ia England and Wales on the lines of m o        positions will be reversed. T he r « e of the police authority will be to
provision in section 34 of the Police (Scotland) Act, 1956, which enables         advise the chief constable o n general m atters M n n e c t e d wtth the policing
a police authority to call for reports from its chief constable. I t is already   o f the a r e a ; b u t derisions will he the responsibility of the chief constable
the practice in many places for chief constable* !o make reports to police        alone. However, the lack of local control which this reUtionsbip implies
authorities, often in response, for example, to a petition from tho residents     will i * offset by taoressdng a chief constable’s accountability for his
of a particular locality urging that police protection should be increased,       actions, and also' .by improvements in the cohesion ol separate pohcc
or lhat police activities should be directed against a prevalent type^ot          forces, to ways we discuss i a the n ext chapter, designed to m ake t i e police
offence. The police authority is well placed to bring such opinion! to tho        function more effectively as & national body.
attention of the chief constable, and we do not think th at any reasonable
chief constable would refuse lo report on such matter*. However, in               The police authority’s rMe In appointing chief constables, deputy chief
order to protect a chief constable from improper or ill-judged req u est             constable*             chid constables
for reports on police activities concerned with law enforcement we                   1(7. We ju w come t o tho third of a police authority's main funcliomi.
recommend lhat he be entitled lo refuse a request for a report, subject           In this Mid the following section we deal with «he aulhanty’e p o w « * in
lo a determination of Ihe m atter by the Secretary of Stale.                      relation to t ie appointm ent, discipline a n d removal from office c t
    164. Section 34 of the Police (Scotland) Act, 1956, requires every chief      sente* officers o f the fo ro o; an d w e conclude this f a r t of cwr descnplfon
                                                                                  o t «ie r tto «* «he poJtee authority with a ftutiter eectfoa. the purpose of
constable in Scolland to submit to the police authority nn annual report
                                                                                  w&ldh is to recommend th a t ttw present powera c f watch committees in
 on the policing of the area, and to send copies o f the report to the
 Secretary of State and other authorities. I t Is also a common praclice for         (t) Mlautes o f Evhkaco ll-!2 ,p a g a 632.
chief constables in England and Wales lo submit annual reports to police
                                                                                                                                   55
                                         54
                                                                                           In principle that h o thaald bo appointed by t o polle* « * « W * « «
    relation to foe appointment, promotion and dkcipUnt of police officers                 cotiluludoa with tho chief constable. We Iwthw icoonmcnd tbal the
    of lubordinuie rant be transferred to chief constables.                                appainiment of » person to bo deputy cbiof coiwlsble be subject to the
       I6 R Tha aonrovd of (ihe Seorcfcuy (X State Ja sequired to the appoint-             approvaJ or the SeaieUry of State.
    rai ' J / Z l X n                 The practice ^ lo r & « U » authority to                172 We recommend the tamo arrangements tor (he appointment ot assistant
    Tdm.?* ^ c ^ l f o l t o w i n g M          thccc is generally JUonM1 con­             chief oonsiablfcs(*). Most offioew of this rank are, to fad. dePul>' c^ 'f
    sultation with officials in the Horn* Department about tie ap^ icaB^ v J ^             constables; and it would be poln(l«s to place the appttotment'of <&ejep u£
                                                                                           in tie hands ol the police authority while leaving the ohfef constable to
                                                                                           appoint to ihe one post from which, In the larger forces, the deputy could
    S ffiB r S H S S K g g                                                                  be found. Moreover the post of assistant chief conitsblt s often“ “ WjJJ*
                                                                                            sums to a chief cottttabJwMp In another force, and it is
                                                                                            persons appointed to these posts should be seleoted from the widest possible
                                                                                           M A so as to ensure that they are fijfed by the best men available. In all
                                                                                            cases ^hewfor^ appointment should be by Ihe police authority after
    F fe £ r 5 S S sE « 5 2
    for two reaso ns. b ecause a j x a w e * » u u i             ^             wifll ^      consultation with the chief constable, and It should ba subject to the
                                                                                            approval ol the Secretary of State*
                                                 f c e t t a t ; or tc^aise of iho
                                                                                           XJje police authority's (Me In removing chJel constables, deputy tWef
    M inisier would fcaYO difficulty    vn aWjro'fj°*1 P .           n w a t to withhold        coostabUj w d Malslant chief constables from office
                                                                                              173. A police authority may have occasion to remove s
                                                                                           from office on one or other of two grounds: on account of bis P '^ ra l
^   constable cannot be regarded as efficient.                                             conduct, cr bscause be has ceased to be effective and b o longer enjoys its
      lfi9. Il has been th e stated policy during                                          confidence in his ability to command the force properly.
    Secreiarles of Slate will not approve ^    c B D d i^ t^ ih ^ ^                           174. Removal from oflSce op (he Erst of these grounds iwmely wfeaijto
    in the force to which they *“ *                    ft*, this policy is                 chief conslablo’g personal conduct is la question, may be etested “>'dtr
    suoh candidates possessoutstanding oarH. We fflttUrua             rf ,                 discipline regulations applicable to chief constablMf) or. uJ England^ and
                                                                                           Wales but oot in Scotland, under (he Mupicipal C o r p ° r a U o n s Act lB8 ^

    isr-sfsss .s*»^s^stciSiSiS
    nX t                                         flnd C0tmnendab]0 loyally to w            aod the County Police Act, 1*39. as regards boroughs and couni ies
                                                                                           respectively.                                                     .
                                                                                              175. The discipline regulations enable (he police authority, after
                                                                                           tion of allegations that a chief constable has committed an offence against
    :c m s s asssar                                                                        discipline/1’) to impose a punishment of dismissal, requirement to resign
                                                                                           or reprimand. Provision is also made for an appeal by
                                                                                           to the Secretary of State against the two more serlouj punishments^ ) and
                                                                                           tht regulation* permit a chief constable to be suspended from
    S T £ £         h S « S ? £ . <* «•<• * •“ «*» * W                     i“““" - 1       pending (he hearing of a charge aeaiwt him, .TJl«e ansngements appear
    chid constable.                                                                        to us to strike a satisfactory balance between         interests of (he P®Hce
      170 We do noI reooduauend any ohacfte b tb* piinciplft                    ®^         M      y and ftL eof the chTef consUbfe. and we make, no « c™ n d aU o n
                                                                                           to alter diem excopt to one particular. The procedure laid down in England

    S              S              r          S
    and embarrassment to whidi we have retened.
                                                             S              a              and Wales for hearing a ease agaldst a chief constable provides that a pol
                                                                                                                    for th! case to b, heard, and for a^report to bo
                                                                                           submitted, by a tribunal consisting cither of a person selected by (h


     "J S        < £ £ " miy bs a mKdDteBtait or WM W N « i « ; Tto
    S i f S S ^ - t a U . to E n g la n d We*h                            « S 2 b K -£
     a: csxxxsst*S S 5 * " S ? m s
     cha/ge^Ttlhe foreo in -the cWef constable's absence, w thlfllc it ia tight            3 » S « sffi8 a w «
     “   >Tolkc RtsuIatfeoJ, 19J2, resulitloo 6} PaU» (Seefe"* Act.   MS, KCllon « 0).
                                                                                               321B5
                                                                                                                                57
authority (rum a Hat of persons nominated by the Lord Chief JuBtice,or^of
not more than five member* ol tho police aulhority itself. Wft no
think il appropriate that mombers or ihe police au!hori[y
uibunat for thia purpose. Wc accordbjlyiecoBm endhat^atonaU ve                               bias or lade of, regard ior                                  wasteful administrative
provision be repeated. With (his amendment the discipline regulations                        unconcern about Ihe, stste of poHc               ^Sncli' conduct would not appro*
K illin g to chief constable} should protect their UteJ^Uad^uatelyand                        methods or genual resistance to d ia ig -               , j jjMji*ble that a police
provid! reasonable safeguards against improper duphsaL A rtie same                           priately be met by dlscJplinary ^tion, but it is                         ^ ^ p<)ljce
lime the offences prescribed aw, in our opinion, so broadly dabnca a* »                      authority should havo g * * ® J J J ipoli^ PeMlom (Scotland) Regula-
enable a police authority to take action on any proper occasion! >                           Pensions Regulations, 1955, ana ol                                    o£ Bny raB); to
    176.    We have considered, on this basis, a request by the chief                        lions. 1955,(“) enables an                      J X w S r f interests of efficiency
of Eneland and Wales that the additional powers of dismissal contained                       retire if hi* retention In the forced “ot              £ ,{he has ^ thirty years’
in the County Police Act, 1839. and of suspei"ta Ujj <h! 2 S r f p « * S                     and If he is entitled to receive a                 .            t-en used in relation
in the Municipal Corporations Act. 1882. should ^e r, p.f? reL |afi3 n5                      service We are; not a w a r e ^ f lm j * * jK ^ C o r p o r a t io n s bought,
arenracnl for their repeal is, broadly, that the modem discipline regulaUo                    to chief constable?. The Asisocia.                        c^jtf 5 0 m table could not
provide a satisfactory disciplinary procedure which MVC“; 0' C^                               in any case, lhat it was Jnappiopm e. sm                    j               resolution
made to cover any circumstances in which it is reasonable u> consider the                     b, retired                                                          publicly: and to
^ ^ n sio n or d“Z u sa l of a senior police officer; and that lh«e later                     referring to inefficiency, wnicn wo                 Mnslon was unduly restrictive,
provisions incorporate safeguards for the rights of                     wh.ch are             require that he should be e a U t l e d t o t a l w l*
lackinc where resort is made to the Acts ot 1839 and 188 .                                    They therefore recommended lhat an1authqmy                                       chief
retaining these old powers is that Ihc discipline code was drafted with the                   iucJi a case without passing a                                               before he
lower ranks in mind, and no! many of the offences which il describes are                      constable's efficiency, that an o f f i c e r might t a ^ u i r w i         ^ right o t
suiiable bases for a charge against a chief constable; and that theretenilon
                                                                                              was e.nf tlJ^ , s Mr e u T o fS t^ ;^r alternatively, that exercise of the pow«
oUrLerve power lo w fpad or dismiss Is a useful
is protected from the consequenoes of unreasonable dismissal by the
 existence of a right ol appeal to the Secretary of State under Ihe Polica                                                                            sta'e‘ * * an ° PP°
 (Appeal*) Act. On balance we think that the posllion M ^ JSVn/* We
 England and Wales should be brought into line with that in Scotland. We
 according recommend that the 19th century statutory provisions which
 enable a police authority to suspend or dismiss a chief consiable be                         constable in whom it has lost “ “ * * * ■ . “ :^ ice               y/e also think it
 repealed.                                                                    .
     117 So far we have dealt only with measures lo secure the removal ol
 a chief constable whose personal conduct is in question, and these measures
 arc in the first place a maiter for the police authority and only secondarily,               srr&-?P»V
  in the event of an appeal, for the Secretary of State. Under the present
  arrangements ihe initiative in removing a chief constable on the other                       Uon 52 should be revoked in its application to chief constabl .
  ground which we distinguished a b o v fr -t a e f f ic ie n c y ^ o ^
  authority. This situation requires lo be examined In the light of our re­                      181 H « olher main field in which .inefficiency                                  b“ J
  definition of the authority's rile.                                                          j s . i. * * • 1 * "            • s f s r . s s s i f s a i ; $
     178 Three possibilities have to be considered. A chief consiable might
  h* inefficient in carrying out duties on behalf of a police authority for                    wm W a r i l y ^S*                                                                  am
  which The authoritfTlself. and not the chief constable is responsible: or                    regard W discuss la the1 next       ■fated through ike police autho-
                                                                                               mechanism of removal should always be operated tnrougn      y
  be might be inefficient in the way in which he commands his force—a matter
                                                                                               d*. . I t o j t t o 1.CU.O.                                                    ^
 —, - r r r —              fiodt. dtoyMm igaliul “ dUcrediubto conduct" In tbe following       dicunutances be for the Secretary 01                       authority, with it* close
  (.. Thus ilu D ia L p to ^                       force act* In a dljcrdtilv manner or m
 S r ^        W                                     ” brin*                  KPU
 lhn « ‘“ ° r I v S j S w                  hold his office until ito lssed by iN ita n d N
                                                                                               s-LSZSi SU&JBSSX
                                                                                                  (tfl 8.T. ISiSrtEO m<H8S. „        ■ ,,,
                                                                                                  }li( Micnlca of Evidence 11-11, pas&636.
 Is comjiiiKl lo section 36 of IhoCounty and Boioujh Police Art,                                                                             59
                                                                                                                                             J                                Cl
                                             58                                                     32l»
had reason to think that a chief constable w u doubtfully efficient in IhJi
pan a Hi is duties. Certainly any action should be preceded by consultation
between ihe authority and ihe Department.
   182. Under ihe arrangemejils which we propose, the powers of IheJ>te­
rnary of Stale would be limited to requesting a police authority to retire
an inefficient chief constable. Refusal to comply with such a                                 -m. poita » ‘ dl,dS i . C f i£ ‘K                                  “ofTkr*
however, endanger payment of the police granI.stoceiihopdice
would then be continuing in office a chief constable Jrom whom the Secretary               ssj"                                               m s -se r r w
ol Stale had withdrawn his approval.                                                       r s ? ' . T . ‘‘ s                  s          s        s   :   *■“    b»i'
   183. So far wo have discussed lhe arrangements for removing chief                        ineviiablv t o   local   pressures and prejudices          .


constables Irom office. In our view ihe same considerations should apply                Slmlatly fliey °{«e^
to the removal from office of deputy and assistant chief constables.
   184. At present the disciplinary authority for deputy and assistant chief
constables t h r o u g h o u t Scolland, and also in ihe English                        commented                                     ,       m . wj, 0 acjvist him see the men
is ihe police authority: but In county and combined fo r c e s In England and
Wales the disciplinary aulhority Is the chief constable. The Oaksey Com­
mittee recommended(») that in aU cases Om police auUion^. and not die
chief constable, be Ihe disciplinary authority for asjlstant anddeputy
chief constables. They held tha view, wilh which we agree, thal Ihe
chief constable is too closely associated wllh the men
lo enable him to feel satisfied lhat he can always act with complete
impartiality in disciplinary matters concerning them. We accordingly                       n't.m i.no. fttoVitbttjgtelta                                          uZS **
recommend that Ihe police authority be ihe disciplmary authorlty for
deputy and assistant chief constables In county and con*'"*^
England und Wales, Ihus making the paltem uniform throughout Ihe
                                                                                                                        A -U*
                                                                                        to discover lhat earlier recommendations on thu m «          ^ wa,ch com.
                                                                                                                                                                 ££ S7SS
                                                                                        adopted. We accordingly sU0“* J' ® „ton,olion and discipline of sub-
country.                                                                                mittees In relation to the * P P ° £ ® 7 'P ‘° £ ° f ^ ’^btes. We further
    185 We also recommend that the changes in the law which we have
                                                                                                                             cease to have any appellate hmctioo in
proposed in paragraphs 17J-180 as regards the discipline and removal
 Irom office of chief constables be applied to deputy and assislant chU!
 constables. The effect of this will ba that a charge against such an officer             J89. This     r e c o m m e n d a L o n   wiU nol lo^ch^pollceoa^tto1^
 will noi lie heard by a tribunal consisting of member* of a police authority.
 :hat a police authority will cease to have power to suspend or dismiss
 a deputy or assistant chief constable except under the discipline regul*-
 tions • and that statutory provision will be made for the compulsory                    a r s s a                                             * *** y « s £ W           i£ s
 retirement of a deputy or assistant chief consiable on Ihe ground of
 inefficiency to be made subject to ihe approval of Ihe Secrelary of Slate.              “                                                    be exercisable only wi*
                                                                                         police officer. B                , Statfc xn our interim report we referred
                                                                                         the approval ^                               a p njLed automatically in some
The police authority’s r8 le 2a relation l o Ifie appolntaienl, promoHon,
      discipline and removal from office ot subordinate ranks? j                         to «**<“* ^ J h S f S w * ! * promotion flow a n d without *egaxd
                                                                                         forces Twitih toe object <ot cwausig v*            jMxlmum twrvicc of which
   166. Apart from tha foregoing proposal! in relation 10 *e"ior                         lo the •overriding need to re^ ^ ^ a[td ^at we should not expect «hts
                                                                                         they ate usefutty             W e«w cc«
we do not think it appropriate that police author lies should have powsri
relating lo the appointment, promotion and discipline of the police. Some
7 9 per cent of polics officers serve in forces where these powers are vested
in chief constables; and only about 30 per cent, namely those In county
borough forces in England and Wales, serve in forces where Ihe aulhority                   n g^ ;™ n O T & ' c ? ilp r ty « « * » .' cbMeoertaWo-.
                                                                                         leoauiijji.                    .
       U? polka olfian^olher ihtn chfer conslabtu, deputy chief conJlsbte* end Msbtut      (i») Cmad* I22J, parapapt 112.
tbic/ coittlaMei.
                                         CD                                                                                                   6J                           C3
                                                                                             321«
 regard ihfs as on eultreJy Improper use o/ the regulation, and wo recommend                 the present status of cadets he reconsidered with a view to giving chief
 ihut ilic Saxetarles of Stale give ihsuuclions to police Authorities thal the               constables control m a t them.
 regulation is nol to ie applied as a standing rulo to provide for the automatic
 retirement of officers ia the sole ialerwti ©f promotion policy,                            Support o! police officers Id legal proceedings...........
    140. Il Is our intention that, under (he foregoing proposals, the discipline                 195.       There is a fres& responsibility which we' think should be placed
 of subordinate ranis ahoidd in evuy case be the concern of the chief                         upon o polico authority. It should, la our view, be liable for tortious acts,
constable and not the police authority. The residual powers of suspension                     or delicts, committed by a poHw officer la the course cf tab duty as a
and dismissal conferred on watah committees toy section 26 of the County                     constable, or in the ioteaded execution of such duty. Tlhls proposal
 and Borough Police AcU 1859. and on watch committees or Justices by                          represents a significant departure from the present position which, as we
 section 191 (4) of the Municipal Corporations Act, 1882, should accordingly                  Indicated in Chapter IV, was affirmed by the decision in Fisher v. Oldham
 be repealed in their application to subordinate ranlcs.C*1) The chief                        Corporation and other cases.
constables told us, however, that these provisions have still a certain                          19fi. At present, because a constable is not a servant of the police
 usefulness ia making it possible to suspend a man who (has committed a                       authority, the latter cannot be made liable for his wrongful acts. Conse-
serious offence in stioh a way as to prevent turn from resigning to avoid                     quendy an injured plaintiff has to rely on bis right of action against the
disciplinary action and dismissal” ) since suspension from duly under the                     constable alone. To enable a plaintiff to recover any sum awarded by the
discipline regulaiions does not have this effect. We accept Dial a power                      court, and also to encourage the police to cany out their duties confidently,
of this kind may have value aod we recommend that the discipline regula­                      officers are assured that public funds will, in certain conditions, be made
tions be reviewed to take account of this point.                                              available to meet damages and costs awarded in civil proceedings. These
                                                                                              conditions were considered by a committee of the Police Council in 1931
   191. Il remains, before discussing Ihe eolations of -the police authority
with the local authority and the composition of police authorities, to deal                   and by Ihe Oaksey Committee. The current practice is fs follows r ~
with a further fesponsfoiiity which we think should 'be transferred from                            (а) A cons table must have acted In good faith in the intended execution
police authorities to chief constables; and to develop reasons for our                                   of his duty.
proposal, mentioned in Chapter IV, io make police authorities vicariously                           (б ) The turns in question (so far as not fixed by the court) must be
liable for the wrongful eels of police officers.                                                        reasonable and, ia tha case of costs, necessarily incurred.
Police cadets                                                                                       (c) The likely effect on discipline if payment were denied is considered.
   192. It was represented to us by police witnesses that responsibility fot                       (d) Following a recommendation of the Oaksey Committee it is a
appointing cadets should *be transferred from pcltco 'authorities to chiof                              common, although not Ihe invariable, practice for a police authority,
constables.                                                                                             following an application by a constable, to consider the question
                                                                                                        of meeting damages and costs when proceedings are begun end
   193. The present arrangements are a logical consequence of (he legal                                 not after the case has been heard and decided. This practice is
position that only a constable cam be a member of a police force. Cadets,
who are trainees and have not yet been appointed to the office of constaMe,                             universal in Scotland.
have the stains ol local government employees. Ia some forces this status                          {<} It is tho practice for a police aulhority which is not satisfied lhat
is reflected in the persistence of the oid titles " cadet clerk ” end “ boy                             payment should be made to refer the matter to the Secretary of
clerk ”, and il may wea occasionally be seen in the range of their duties.                              Slate.
We understand also that ■because of diis status, cadets do not enjoy standard                    197. Criminal proceedings against a constable are treated, in Scotland,
rates o l pay or conditions of service throughout the country. In some areas                 in the same way as civil proceedings. In England and Wales a distinction
police authorities appear to play on active part in enrolling boys for cadet                 is made between a private prosecution, in which the decision as to the
service, with the result that some of those selected are not acceptable to                   support of a constable will be taken on the same basis ns In <th.^case of a
the chiof constable.                                                                         civil action, and a publio prosecution brought by the police or the Director
   194 . it .is in our view important, at a time when increasing reliance Is                 of Public Prosecutions. Here the view Is taken lhat, where a constable
being placed on the cadet system as a source of recruitment to the police,                   has been prosecuted and is acquitted, but, without an award of costs, he
that cadets should eojoy a proper standing as junior members of the police                   ought not to be treated more favourably than any other member of Ihe
force, with national rates of pay and conditions of service. Il is equally                   public; and it fs exceptional for a‘:constable who has been acquitted to
important that they should be placed jnore directly wader the supervision                    have his costs paid by his police authority. We accept that tho difference
of the chief constable, who Ls obviously tho right person to fee in charge                   in practice between England and Wales and 'Scotland Is grounded in the
of their selection, (raining and {tisclpllno. We therefore recommend that                    different prosecuting systems, and wo mate no recommendation to alter
                                                                                             the practlco in cither country.
  (ji) w « have already recommended [bo tepetl of Ito I9lh century croviiloiu which tn»bl»
a polk* authority l<s tusptod qkUijhIu • chiefcoiulaljlc, dtpuiycwcf cooiUbloor Militant        198. There was a strong body of opinion in favour of retaining the
chief cunsitble, (Paragraphs 176 tad 185.)                                                   present arrangements relating to civil actions against the polico. The local
  (*■) Minutes o f Evidence 15, page M l,
                                             61                                                                                  63
                                                                                                32T85                                                            04
                                                                                          acts of a constable without Implying any alteration In the constable’s legal
auihmfiiy association* and the Magistrates’ Association regarded them as                  status^'*)
iiiinnuiriait! lo the constitutional position of the constable vlt-a-vit a police            201 We have already stated our view that the present legal status of the
urnhomy, and the police witnesses also told us that these arrangements                    constable should continue, and Itwould be wrong to
liJvu rise 10 no practical difficulties .(rl) The police witnesses asked til to           £n his liability which would Interfere with it. We are wtisflefl. noweve ,
recommend lhat ad police authorities should follow the Scottish practice,                 that to make a police authority vicariously liable f o r a constables actions
by formally adopting the Oaksey CcmmilKe’s recommendation that the                        would not derogate from this status; nor would it confer any power upon
million wheiher 01 not to support ft constable should be decided as soon                  a uolice authority to control his duties. It appears to us that there are good
as proceedings wero launched, and not after they were completed- Ihe                      reasons for making this change, and that to alter the
Polite Federation also urged that there should now be set up a standing                   would be to the advantage of both fha police and Ihe public. i" Pa^ lar-
commiiiee of the Polico Council lo consider cases referred to the Secretary               we are impressed by the argument that, where a particular constable
of Slate, as was recommended by Ihe 1931 Committee of the Police                          complained of is not identifiable, a member of the public is at present
C o u n cil.^ 1)                                                                          unable to pursue ft legal remedy. We recommend, therefore, that a police
    1^   The arguments usut in defence of *lhe present arran^mcnts may be                 authority be made liable for the wrongful acts of police officers w the same
summarised as follows. They exactly reflect the legal status of the constable             way as the Crown is liable, under the Crown Proceedings Act, 1947. for the
and the legitimate Interests of the police authority, and they demonstrate                wrongful acts of an officer of the Crown.
to the public lhat a policeman enjoy* no special protection. They also                       202 On this basis it would no longer be for the police authority to
provide reasonable assurance of remedy for an injured parly, while giving                 determine whether Ihe constable complained of hadlacled in the course of
a consiable confidence to carry out his duly properly without encouraging                 his duty or In Ihe Intended execution of his duty. This question would b
irresponsibility. Thus they strike a fair balance between Ihe inleresis of the            Secided by the courts, Normally we should expcct proceedings o bo
consiable and of the public.                                                              brought against the constable and the authority jointly. If the court foimd
                                                                                          that the matter complained of had m arisen In the course of or in the
   100. Against this we heard a body of evidence favouring an arrange-                     intended execution of duty, the actioi\ could succeed against the consuble
mem under which Ihe police authority should be vicariously liable for the                 alone and the police authority would not be liable, It would accord with
 tortious acts of a constable. This view was argued by the Faculty of                      the spirit and Intention of this recommendation that a chief officer of police
Advocates, the Sheriffs Substitute Association, the Inns of Court Conserva­               should in the absence of special circumstances disclose the names of men on
tive and Unionist Society and Professor Wado on the following grounds.( >                  duly on a particular occasion so as to enable an aggneved person more
Failure lo Identify a pellicular constable might preclude Ihe bringing of an               easily to identify a police officer against whom he wishes to seek a legal
action, even though it was beyond doubt that a member of the constabulary
was concerned t thus s complainant would have no redress. Moreover,                        remedy.
although there are few. if any, cases in which financial support has been                 Relations between Ihe police authority and the council in England and
unreasonably refused, the lack of certainty on this point may well have
discouraged the bringing of well-grounded actions. It was also submitted                    W ales C*7)
                                                                                             203.     Although there was no concluded agreement, toussions had been
thal a police authority, in teserving to Itself Ihe decision whether or not
                                                                                          nraceedlne for tome time before our appointment between the County
a wrongful act had been done in the course of the constable's duty, was lo                Councils Association and the Magistrates' Association about changes m toe
 some extent usurping the normal function of ihc court. If the decision
 were llike a before Ihe bearing it would be on inadequate information, end               functions of the standing joint committee, and in its relationship to the
                                                                                          S y c o l l ? It was accepted by both bodies that the county council
 without detailed knowledge of the plaintiff's case. If the decision were
 taken after the proceedings has been concluded, bolh Ihe constable and the               should have financial control In the county, as the b o r o u g h council has in
 injured party would be In doubl whether financial support was forthcoming,               the borough; thal the county coj^ndl should become the police authority,
 anil how the police authority would exercise iu d!screlfonr Finally* it was              and that it should be required to appoint a police committee composed as to
 represen led to us that the doclrine of vicarious liability as dependent upon            one-half of Its membership of Justices. County councils also agreed that
 the ability of a master to give orders to his servants has been broadened                they should be under a statutory obligation to delegate responsibility for
 by recent decisions of the courts. Thus the liability of a hospital manage-              police administration, other than financial control, lo tho re-constituted
 ment committee extends to the professional negligence of a doctor or                     standing joint c o m m i t t e e . _______________ ______ ________
 surgeon In the health service—whero no question of orders arises. On this                  tH Another wreestton pul lo w w « Uial UatiUly ilouM altteh to » chief wiutaMe for
 basis it was suggested that a police authority might bo made liable tor the              iba (O rttouiid]nihil subordinate!. We think Uist web an Mruueffleat If open to objection.
                                                                                          Nor do we favour a propois) submitted to uj by the Law Soclclr lijT > W                 bo
                                                                                          established under Uie Crown from which (tnmagej awarded agaiijit * constable ibeiilo be
  !■)) M in u tu if Evidence 11-12, w   634; 14, pajoW lj 23. pigei IJSl-2i
                                                                                          PSM In this and Uw Wo following sections we are not concerned with combined authorities.
                                            J J .P O -1 M M I Appendix II to Minutes of   These are dlscuwed In paragraphs 218-221.
tridents, page 100.
                                                                                                                                     .65
                                            £4
                                                                                         20?. The M agistrates’ Association             ^   «t a t o
                 submission to us Ihe County Councils Association invited
  2 0 4 . in their
as 10 endorse this agreement, but representatives of some counlies( )
tliiscnlcd from the proposals in this form. In particular, they expressed
miiRiviflK about Ihe wisdom of placing a county council in a position
to put political or other pressure on the police. Thus U» Berkshire Co<raty
Council submitted: “ It is more Important thal the independence of Ihe
police should be safeguarded than .that financial «ving should be achieved
by granting financial control to county councils and thus ascnfictnj; such
independence ".(’’J And a memorandum from the Essex Counly Council
was even more specific—
       *' In a county such as Essex, where political persuasions arc of some
    considerable consequence in the county council, i t is of toe utmost             m                  r                 n             m              m
    importance that there should he no opportunity for allegations to be                 210 Under the arrangements which we are proposing, with a clarify^
    m ade ihat the adm inistration of the force is subject to political influence,
    It is not enough that such allegations could easily be re fu te d ; It is in
    the public interest that Ihe very opportunity for their betas m ade
    should n ot be available a n d this can only be achieved by the m ain­
    tenance of the status quo ante whereby ihe adm inistration of the police
    not merely is, b u t can be seen lo be. in control independent o f the
    counly council "X”)
  205. We understand these misgivings, but experience in Scotland and in             T             i            W             M         m        s         m
ihe English and Welsh boroughs suggests thal they are groundless. We: see
no reason, therefore, to continue the arrangement under which ^tan& iig
joint committee, alone among uncombined police authorities, precepts upon
the council. We accordingly recommend that the standingJoint committee
submit estimates of polico expenditure tor approval, in the same way as
any other committee of tho council.
  206. We received no evidence favouring any change in <he relationships
between other police Authorities and the councils by which they are
appointed, and w e m ake no recommendation lo alier lhem, except for
recognition of a qualified right for a member of * council to ask questions                . tL.t .I,. Justices be elected in counties by quarter sessions and in
of the chairm an o f a police commitiee.{J ■>                                            borough* by the local body of justices for automatic co-option to the police
Composition of police authorities In England and Wale*                                   authority.
  207 The reasons for lie difference in the constitution of standing joint                 211 Hie size of a watch committee is limited, under sectioni 190 (I) o
committees and watch committees are historical, and we think thal the time
has come to assimilate the two.
  208. We have considered what is the appropriate compasilion lor an
authority with the functions we propose, A body associated with local                    variations in the size o f standing jo in t comm ittees K
government ought clearly to contain elected councillors. Witnesses wore,
however, divided about whether it should also contain outside persons,
and in particular whether there was a case for continuing the ■™S-itudkg
arrangem ent under which Justices are appointed to standing                                      rf rt£dh£ W * committees should be limited in the same way
mittees but not, unless a member happens to be a Justice, to watch                       ^ ^ S S i S m S u w . On balance we think this unwise, because
                                                                                         as that ,     . h>_ oI gj, authority may depend to some extent on
committees.              _______________ __________________           --—
 ■ rut nuluhira Cumberland, Bu m , OlouoestertMre, Hajnpjhlra iod h i* o r Wight,
                                                                                         £ S aL d nature o! iU area, the difficulties eoM.tmteredbymemtosm
                                                                                          -               nnd tiossibly ihe amount of business to be transacted.

$ & m s & a s^
       Minutes of BvIdewM , page 1141.
                                                            tsa s^                       m
                                                                                           (ii} Minutes of Evidence 14, page W .
       Minolta o fE v U u n 20. page l l « -
   (»i) See pjtajuraph 16S-                                                                                                        67
                                               66
 we recommend that the aizc of all police authorities be reviewed with                           proportion of justice* of the p a c e , and we accept that the poJJ°® authority
                                                                                                 must be composed, as at present, vAioliy ol elected councillors, We do
ilic object of restricting them to the smallest practicable number of persona,                   not, however, regard the whole council a* a suitable body to discuss and
   2 1 2 . We recommend Ihal police authorities so constituted be committees                    finally decide the important matters which arise In connection with the
of the local authority, end that their appointment be made obligatory                           police. Wo accordingly fccommeod that statutory provision be wads for
by statute. We further recommend that the chairman o( the police                                the appointment of 6 committee of Hie local, authority to be wc P°"5 e
authority be a member' of the local authority. Wo see no reason to                              authority, and that the size of Scottish police authorities be reviewed, like
abandon ihe present title o( the police authority In county boroughs:                            those in England and Wales, with [he object ol restricting them to tie
the name Watch Committee has associations going back for many centuries.                        smallest practicable number of pw&orw.
We recommend, however, that Ihs police aulhority in a counly &e called                             217. The function? of police oommittees in Scotland should comprise ali
the police committee rather than the Standing Joint Committee, which is                         the matters for which, under our recommendations, police -authorities will
a clumsy title of no great antiquity.                                                           be rwwmiWe, These do not include financial control, end ihe police
                                                                                                committee ia Scotland will continue to submit estimates to the council,
 Police authorities ta Scotland^1)                                                              as at present The functions of police authorities will then be uniform
    213. Different considerations arise in Scolland, where the police authority
                                                                                                throughout Great Britain.
 is the counly or burgh council itself. This docs not mean that in practice
 all police business is transacted in Ihe full council i it is referred in the                  Combined police authorities
 first instance lo a police committee, as in most olher fields of local authority                  2 1 8 . Where two « more local authority areas £a Bnglaad aasd Wales are
 work. Hut il does mesa that ali decisions of the polico committee, whether                      amalgamated foe police purposes the oonstitrueot authorities surrender ait
 in financial or olher matter*, must be ratified by the council, The police                     their police functions to a combined authority. This means that the
 committee has no power* oE its own, nor has it any legal standing. A                           individual council* (have thereafter no say in the cowant to oe spent
 consequence of these arrangements is lhat the local administration of the                      annually on ihe polico, and must contribute their proportion <X the cost as
 police is entirely in tho hand* of elected persons,                                            assessed in the amalgamation scheme. In Scotland ihe oaoetatuenf councils
    214. The Scottish system accords with the pattern found both in England                     at -present remain police authorities, and may retain the right lo chalieog*
and Wales and in Scotland ta the administration of other local authority                         Ihe estimates ol the joint poEce oonunittee, although tills adaiatwn appears
functions, such as education and housing, In which responsibility is veiled                     hardly ever to have arisen.
in the local authority as such. We do not think, however, lhat this principle                      219 We recommend that the Scottish procedure in this matter be brought
should hold in relation lo the police. We therefore recommend lhat in                           Into line with that In England and Wales, a is the combined committee thal
future the police authority in Scolland be the police committee and not the                     should be (he police authority, cot the oonatituent counotls. We also
council.                                                                                        recommend that ail oorabltied police authorities have the righl to precept
    215. There are iwo particular considerations that have weighed with us                      or requisition oipoa their constituent councils. Combined authorities will
in making this recommendation. In the first place, it seems likely lhat                          thus form aa exception to the general principle that police authorities should
Scolland will increasingly be policed by combined forces covering the                            have to secure approval for their estimates ftora their rating authorities.
area of more lhan one local authority. In these cases an ad hoc committee                       We think that this Is amply justified by convenience-
is appropriate, and It seems unreasonable in such circumstances lo adhere                          220. The constitution of Joint authorities is not at present controlled by
to the present practice of attaching the title of police authority to separate                  statute, but fe left to be determined by agreement in the s^eme of
councils which have no police and little authority over a combined force.                       amalgamation. There ia much lo b i said for this, but in our view mere
The title should be accorded where it properly belongs—to the Joint                             are two matters which ought now - to be reviewed. The aizo of joinl
committee.                                                                                      authorities should -be restricted to the smallest practicable number ol
    216. The second consideration applies lo all forces, not only those in                      persons, and in England and Wales the proportion of co-opted justices of
Joint areas, and introduce* Ihe question of the composition of police                           the peace should bo -the wane as in individual authorities, w nely «ne-lhlrd.
authorities. As already slated, we favour the Inclusion of Justices of the                         221. Although who® e combined police area Is formed In England and
peace In M i county Bad borough polio* authorities lo England and Wales.                        Wales a Joint oommiUeo becom es tho police authority, it la a common
Wo have considered whether a similar protWoo should apply in Scotland,                          practice to maintainia being tho individual standing joint or vraloh com­
but justices in Scotland are not so numerous as Iheii counterparts la                           mittees vriridh were the police authorities before the amalgamation took
England and Wates, nor do they have Ihe same wide Judicial functions.                           place, Theso committee* haw «o police function# apart tom Ube duty
Historically, moreover, they haw not played » large a part in local                             ol nominating somp of their members to the combined police authority:
government as the maglataacy In England and Waiee. Consequently we do                           they may, ftowever, oentiot» tp exercise vther.wfajor local'emtJioxity func­
not recommend tho appointment to police authorities in Scotland of a                            tion such as the control of house-to-house collections. Tho retention of
 l 11) Olhcr ill Lin combined police auihurittej, which are dull wllh la par»*r»phi 218-221.
                                                                                               -these committees seems to us confusing awl iHwctssary, We therefore
                                             6   B
    ,           .         I(J         ilu-y Ik- a h .W in l iiml (licjf iniimr limcliims icinsfcrr^J h>
        IM. . i s . .   .............Iliv ul (III.- mniicil or In Ihc lN' Ui'cs'                                                                                227. The sot will criticise rehlcd l.i                                       linve n»
                                                                                                                                                             wliivli amirilm lc lo llw upkeep *>                  uC( jnfot)1Vlil airunfcciiieiil has
        I In- \li iii.|Miltl!iii urea                                                                                                         .              control over Llicir exiie-iiillinre.         <•        ihe chief financial officers nf
                                                                                                                                                             been operated under which Ihu                     . M elIoro litan Police estimates
                                                                                                                                                             these authuri lies as soon us poss.ble art M h e l* e rop<m                            ^
                                                                                                                                                             have been prcsenkd to Parliament, in o n k r tu■ s w » »              ^    MelrilJinfiuin
                                                                                                                                                             aliout tho policy and details of the P” »P ■           £ M ujMiun of this arranse-
    ^ S S S iS S S iH S                                                                                                                                       Hocoughs Standing Joint Committee
                                                                                                                                                              m a tt lo allow for c«fich»llitl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ^ estimates arc prcstiUiMl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        £ ^ 'a p p e a l by the l « u l
                                                                                                                                                              (o Parliament and, in the event of ^ B                 Receiver's r>«i|'nsa1ilJ’ l w>l
                                                                                                                                                              authorities ti» Ihe Hnnie                       binll 0f cunsiiKaliiw. which--pro-
                                                                                                                                                              stfo little constilutional                           r is t of S1ibverline ihe Home
                                                                                                                                                              vitlcil 11 is kept co n fid e n tla l-cjn                  l||;il |Uc pro|>l.r piactf ui
                                 ............             T h e tii.vxnii.icnl                                               h        ,d n o t.               Secretary's juriiiijclion.                 ^ ^ n w n l . where ihc dom e S e w wry

                                                      r ' r = : 'sx u rtiu —                                                                                  challenge 'he r ° llCf , e ^
                                                                                                                                                               is publicly answerablu. Uut, ps _
                                                                                                                                                               ihe MtflrnpoHlan iloroujjhs t&
                                                                                                                                                                                                        undersland iuiiie maohitiery re«ittesie.l by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                nravide a means, not of challfiig-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ule iimineinu of the Metro-
                    ■...ti.v .u tili-rily 1<t Hie M e lru H w .
                                                                                                                                                               infi the Home Secretary s policy irt              . ,       ,^c policy is presented In
                                                                                                                                                               P,Uilan Police, hut or IflOiKocme ^                      ^ ^ o b j e l l i v , ,m l we
                                                                                                                                                               Parliament. This seoms “                               be C d e . . U          .He lines
                                                                                                                                                               nccordinsly recoinrrtiid ^                        Receiver and represenunves nt
O         m.                                                                                                                                                  S         ' i o                 r 1K E S S - K - « ■ * D^ -

                                                                                                                                                               ^     r »             r r , , » - r s                           -        « • • s z g - z x z .
              ► ij‘lll 'III                                                                                                                                    of the vast Mitropolitan area ^                         iom ,       ^        Counci| Gf the City—a U w «
              ,.upu .1 <»'
           ....                                                                                                                                                wilh a distinct l’o1,^ haul “ " ^ hore lH„d a chief ollieer dijjniliJd by ttie uile
             •I if.I.-                                                                                                                                         rale of p o l,« f ^ n t t h « *ta-wh.>re      ^    h n w w r . an imporl.nce and
           U \H.‘ VfclVliU)
                                ,u llV'"is
                                        n wiswcrLiUle     U) I’arlinmcal in a way that no J i ^ c
                                           » n a..v.i.~ — -- - --
                                                                                                                                                               of CiimmissronEf. The City or                         . . . nohemu its problenw
            • -iat-»n:t jn tuvMumauitf
                             v u u n tab le w
                                            t o ■«
                                                Ms                     to ed    *■"— ........................
                                                                                CO u m il.                                                              r.                    .,,, I d             « l.« - » "                 J    S   S   i t S   '   1 S .T   .n H «   o f ihcce-
                                                                                                                                                               □ re unique hi«1 specialised. U           f>rotcc( somis of ihe m m vuluuble
            '
            I
                    £ ^ s S S ^ S S1 S1 & » s &
                     -;   -ii         lh v l " l u r i - 5 ‘   ,   M     1,,, c . [. r , , r i . m u l i h c r a i i y *   «f h i s    fu n c tio n s
                                                                                                                                                               tiumiers nf □ "uH'^n P ^ '5 - h be(n Forwj |Q develop in a very hifih
                                                                                                                                                                properly in the worid . and:it ha       technical fields, such as company
                                                                                                                                                               decree means of combi»ung cri            rosj(ivt.|y ,lwt ihese consuler:it«>ns
                                                                                                                                                                frauils, We should heslla e           a u i,|,oril¥ o r n separate pulii’e fiHrt.
                                                                                                                                                                necessarily call Tor a seJJ“ r“ , £ .            that the arrangements tor the

            r S ^ H S .t i^ r - 7 ^
                ii- I   .... ,,r ' r '        L udviscr oit research end technical develop-
                              v " l,cc' “"j ' ' \ Wll ihe Ituici dm/ should be transferred
                [ ^ 1 - U ^ S a r y , nut as roiicc uutl,ori.y for the Mel.opolls.buUa
                                                ,*•                ! . lt niditu iiuUiiiflly coJublinB of representative* of
                                                                                                M     m   omrla                                                    (» ■) M l n u t t s o f l i v W c n o J   tA, l«e» W --
                     < j ‘vUmiiCMit'                  24i Q-                                                                                                       K                                                           71

                                                                                70
684            C h . 43                 Police Act 1964


      Part I   maintain such veHcles, apparatus, clothing and other enu* '
               ment.as may be required for police purposes of the area.
                 (5) A combined police authority may, if so authorised bv £h*
               amalgamation scheme, make arrangements with any constitue T
               authority for the use by the combined police authority of th
               services of officers of the constituent authority and the making
               of contracts and payments on behalf of the combined polite
               authority by the constituent authority.

Chief            S.—(1) The police force maintained for a police area              .
constables.    section 1 of this Act shall be under ithe direction and control
               of the chief constable appointed under section 4(2) of this Act.
                  (2) The same person may, with ithe consent of ihe police
               authorities concerned, be appointed chief constable of more
               than one police force.
                  (3) The Secretary of State shall not approvej&e appointment ‘
               as first chief constable of a combined force of any person other
               than the chief constable of a police force which ceases to exist
               in consequence of the formation of the combined force nnf r a -
               the Secretary of State is satisfied, having regard to the size and
               character of the combined’force and any exceptional circum­
               stances, that some other person should be appointed.
                   (4) Without prejudice to any regulations under Part H of this
                Act or under the Police Pensions Act 1948, the police authority;
                acting with the approval of the Secretaiy of State, may .call,
                upon the chief constable to retire in the interests of efficiency!
                   (5) Before seeking the approval of the Secretary of State
                subsection (4) of this section the police authority shall give the
                chief constable an opportunity to make representations and &MI
                consider any representations so made,
                   (6) A chief constable who is called upon to retire as afore­
                said shall retire on such date as the police authority may specify
                or on such earlier date as may be agreed upon between him
                and the police authority.
 Deputy and        6.—(1) In every police force maintained under section 1 of
 assistant chief this Act there shall be a deputy chief constable, who shall
 constables.
                have all the powers and duties of the chief constable—           "
                      (a) during any absence, incapacity or suspension from duty-
                           of the chief constable;                                  $
                                                                                       1
                                                                                   il
                     (£>) duriijg any vacancy in the office of chief constable;
                but shall not have power to act by virtue of this subsection for
                any continuous period exceeding three months except with the •a
                consent of the Secretary of State. •                                4
                   (2) The provisions o£ subsection (1) above shall be in addition
                to, and not in substitution for, any other enactment which makes



                 852
   Part tit            47.— (I) Subject to the provisions of this section, a m em ber^
.X r tr-1           of a nolice force shall not be a member of any trade muon,
Membership          o{       associadon having f0r its objects, or one of its objects;-*;
anions.             to control or influence the pay, pensions or conditions of service -
                    of any police force:                                          ■ •*rto?v’
                       Provided that where a person was a member of a trade unipif"
                    before becoming a member of a police force, he may, with.;.;
                    the consent of the chief officer of police, continue to be a member^
                     of that union during the time of his service m the police force.
                      (2) If any question arises whether any body is a trade union,
                    or an association to which this section applies, the question,
                    shall be determined by the chief registrar of friendly societies-!tri-
                       (3) T E s section applies to police cadets as it applies to,
                     members of a police force, and references to a p o lic e force or ;
                     to service in a. police force shall be construed accordingly.
                       (4) Nothing in this section applies to membership of-tjie'.
                     Police Federations, or of any body recognised by the Secretary^
                     of State for the purposes of this section as representing members ,
                     of police forces who are not members of those Federations. ••• .

                                                        P a r t IV                         ,r
                                                                                            u
                                        M is c e l l a n e o u s   and   G eneral
                                   Remedies and com plaints against police
   . ... ,              jn    /i\ xtip chiefofficerof police for any police area shaflbe
  woneful             liable in respect of torts committed by
  o f constables.     tjon an(j control in the performance or purported p
                      of their functions in like manner as a master is liable m respetf
                       of torts committed by his servants in the course of.their“ g g j
                       m e n t, and acco rd in g ly shall in respect of any such tort be treated -
                       for all purposes as a joint tortfeasor.
                          (2) There shall be paid out of the police fund            _
                             (a) any damages or costs a w a rd e d against the clnef office* ■
                                  of police in any proceedings brought against him by
                                   virtue of this section and any costs incurred by hini :
                                   any such proceedings so far as not recovered by him
                                   in the proceedings; and
                              ib) any sum required in connection with the settlement of.
                                   any claim made against the chief officer of police by
                                   virtue of this section, if the settlement is a p p ro v e d by
                                    the police authority.                               ^
                           (3)     Any proceedings in respect of a claim made b y _ v i^ e ^
                        this section shaU be brought against the chief 0® **
                        the time being or, in the case of a vacancy in that
                        the person for the time being performing the functions of AW
                          Police Act 1964                    Ch. 48            707


chief officer of police : and references in the foregoing provisions P a r t TV
of this section to the chief officer of police shall be construed
accordingly.
    (4)    A police authority may, in such cases and to such extent
as they think fit, pay Tiny damages or costs awarded against a
member of the police force maintained by them, or any constable
for the time being required to serve with that force by virtue of
section 14 of this Act, or any special constable appointed for their
 area, in proceedings for a tort committed by him. any costs in­
 curred and not recovered by him in any such proceedings, and
 any sum required in connection with the settlement of any claim
 that has or might have .given rise to such proceedings; and any
 sum required for making a payment under this subsection shall
 be paid out of the police fund.
     49— (1) Where the chief officer of police for any police area investigation
  receives a complaint from a member of the public against a of comp aints.
  member of the police force for that area he shall (unless the
  complaint alleges an offence with which the member of the police
  force has then been charged) forthwith record the complaint and
  cause it to be investigated and for that purpose may, and shall if
  directed by the Secretary of State, request the chief officer of
  police for any other police area to provide an officer of the
   police force for that area to carry out the investigation.
      (2) A chief officer of police shall comply with any request
   made to him under subsection (1) of this section.
      (3) On receiving the report of an investigation under this
   section the chiei officer of police, unless satisfied from the
    report that no criminal offence has been committed, shall
   send the report to the Director of Public Prosecutions.
.      50 . Every police authority in carrying out their duty with information
     respect to the maintenance of an adequate and efficient police ra w manner
     force, and inspectors of constabulary in carrying out their duties
     with respect to the efficiency of any police force, shall keep compi3 jnts.
     themselves informed as to the manner in which complaints
     from members of the public against members of the force
     are dealt with by the chief officer of police.
                                  Offences
'■     51__ (1) Any person who assaults a constable in the execu- A s s a u lts on
     tion of his duty, or a person assisting a constable in the execution constat .
     of his duty, shall be guilty of an offence and liable- ■
          (a) on summary conviction to imprisonment for a term
               not exceeding six months or in the case of a second
               or subsequent offence nine months, or to a fine not
                exceeding £100, or to b o th ;
          (b) on conviction on indictment to imprisonment for a
                term not escccding two years or to a fine or to both.
                                                               LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT 1*172 sill                                   26”

                                                                PART VI1
              MISCELLANEOUS POW ERS OF LOCAL AUTHORITIES

                                                            SttbfidLiry pottrrs
111 S u b s id ia r y p o w e r s o f l o c a l a u th o r itie s
   ( 1 ) W ithout prejudice to any powers exercisable apart from this section but
   M e c ^ h e provisions o f this A ct and any other enactment passed before or after
   i A SIR local authority shall have power to do any tliiiij; (whether or not
involving the expenditure, borrowing or lending o f money or the acquisition or
disposal ot anv property or rights) which is calculated to facilitate, or is conducive
or incidental to, the discharge rtf any ot their functions.
   (2) For the purpost-s o f this section, transacting the- business ot -i parish or
community meeting or any other parish or community business shall be treated
a function o f the parish or community council.
    (3) A local authority shall not by virtue o f this section raise money, whether bv
 means o f rates, precepts or borrowing, or lend money except in accordance with
 the enactments relating to those matters respectively.
     (4) 111 this section “local authority" includes the Common Council,

 NOTES
     G eneral N o te- It was staicd ill IV pam nenr of the Environment Circular 121/72 llui iliis-section
 is a new provision which puts beyond doubt tliat loi’al authorities have power to *1” aiiythinii which
 is calculated lo facilitate. or in vioiiilucivc of incidental to. the discliarec ot .111y ol iheir luncttons, even
 If ihrrv have no specific statutorypower lor that action. Tills proposition had lout; represented tin* law
 (see, in particular. .‘1- C.' i» Xmi-thurrL' f'l’rpn 11*1321 Ch 5f'- . |l 'O - l All Ell. Kep ^ 1 C‘A), but (Ik’
 section was included lor the avoidance                 OciLihi which titiiiht hamper local niin.ici'.v.
    L o c a l a u t h o r i t y . For oKMiiinj:. see s 2711(1} post. and see tltt lio rri '•R esiduary bodies'' an d “Jo in t
  authorities; police au thorities" below-, and n in e also sub-s (4) above.
    'S h s ^ ^ i v c p o w e r tc» d o arty th in g , etc. Tlie powers of a local .mJu'ficy under this section and
      l e i t ^ f c post are subject to retaliations made under the Superannuation Act I‘172. ss 7 .2 4 , Vol .V.
* -u e l^SK ins and Superannuation: see ,*I/ki»/i ;■ .Wmli Tyitcsulc AW<. (                         ‘>(1 L t.K 4(.2. C-A
  (payments n«<is under ail enhanced voluntary redundancy .scheme in ail Jit'um to statutory payments
  found to be unbwfu]).
     C alculated to facilitate, o r is c o n d u c iv e o t in c id e n ta l to , e tc . A local authority has no power
  to enter into iprculauvt: interest rate swap transactions lor a protit since they neither “ beiliKite . nor
  are "conducive o r incidental to " the discharge o f its borrowing Junctions: see                        cNiimint'r-iiHih
  «nJ              £ . a C | l ‘>'ll| 1 All E R 5 4 5 . l l ' ) * ' ! ^ W L K ” 2. H L.
      A local authorin' cannot lawfully impose ,i charge tor pre-application plannini; consultations since,
   although the jjtfin'i: ol'pre-application plaiimni; advice facilitates or is conducive or incidental to n it
   council's piansint: functions. *a charge for that advice does not facilitate nor is it eonducive or
   incidental t<> :h;is« (unctions and it is therefore not witluii the authority's ancillary pnwerc under this
   section: see A!:C,jr:hy i - Siout' (IDivf/*'/Wimsl Lid i> R k lm nW «p*’» Thames          |I'W 2| 2 AC 4S.
   11'“J11 4 All Ei!. S'*7. HL.
      P arish: c o m m u n ity . As to the parishes in England and their councils and n'eetin£s..seess 1(M—i.11).
   9 et teq ante,       1. l*ts IV. V post. As to the communities in Wales and their co un cil and meetings,
   lec js 211(0.     ei seq ante and the note "t'oinnuinities"' to s 2l' anti-.
        C o m m o n C o u n c i l . For m eamiit;-sve ^ 2 7n(l) post.
       R e strain ts o n p u b licity . Tile W j ! C.ovcnuneiu Act 1W|,. l’t 11 post applies to publicity «tpre>slv
   ° r inipliedlv authorised by. inter alia, this section or s 1J I or 14p< l)(:i) post; -tee s f>l5) ol [li.it Act post.
       Saving. Th:*< wction !' s.iveil hv ' ■ ! ' ’! jM»st.
        C o v e n a n t s r tfU n iiitT        l a i n ! . 1"»»r tin.*                  l»v Kk m I mnnlu>i*iiics «»l ^iarr>i>n
    reuciii^                ,ct. (|| V            ^ •^vermiK‘iu .M i^ s ’lljiu^ms                         /Wc l".s 2. %?    \          mK»
  ^«ral lJrnpcnm  - !'*. I
     Rt*aiitlun.r}'                       h ' *ln* 1                           .\\i   1 * ^5 , * ” t,rV      1,’,                ,i»ui th e
i Lo.*4{l                                     A               s '*'«                  I" r^'i. .*J^uiiarx l*«Htv» " , i I h • ■»
                          : .,;ntliu* I s o J f i H r ^ ,ulv             ^^U" 1, m u i i ' r          •    »*t..unl V h
A c t l9 7 S 5 5 Sch 1 V c U l. dde Statutes The Secreaty of Saw here concerned a the Secretary of
Sqm for the Home Department. For the general duty of the Secretary o f Sate in the exerc.se of
                                                             <*th . w ta f c n in 4= n » n lw of , p o fa
authority’s members, s 5 post.
                                                                    instruments ^ r a t t y . -   the S t^ o r y

l^     n    “f o « l p ^ ^ e n t . a ForST e 5 n g . sec the Laying o f Documents before P a r e n t

(InS ^ t ^ L ArC^ 4$ccrion.' S ' m 1 j?n u ^ ri997 no orders had been
b u c . ^ ” ™ * of s 103(2), Sch 8 , Pt I. para 1(2) post, the Police (Number o f Members o f Police
 Authorises) Order 1994. SI 1994/2024, has effect as if made thereunder.
   As to the making of orders under this Act, sec s 102 post.



 5 Reductions in size o f police authorities
   (1) This section applies co any order under section 4(2) which, vanes or revokes
 an earlier order so as to reduce the num ber o f a police authority s members.
    (2) Before making an order to w hich this section applies, the Secretary of State
 shall consult—

           (b) the c o S u w h i c h are relevant councils in relation to the authority for
                 die purposes o f Schedule 2, and                _             i
           (c) any selection panel, constituted under regulations made m accordance
           ( 1 S E h se c tio n 21(1A) o f the justices o f * = Peace A ct 1979^ nch *
                 responsible, or is represented on a jo in t committee which is responsible,
                  for the appointm ent o f members o f the authority.
        m An order to w hich this section applies may include provision as to J e
     ,e ™ in a d o n o f the appointm ent o f the e*isrins members o f the a u t h o r s and 4 c
     making o f new appointments or re-appointments.


      This section contains provisions formerly in the Policc Act 1964. s ?B, as inserted by the Police and
     Magiitntcs’ Couro Act 1994, s 3(1),
        C o m m c ttc e m e u t. 22 August 1996; * «        n° “ to s 1 ante.
        P o lic e a u th o rity , fo e meaning, see s 101(1) post.                                                           ■i
                                                                                                                             A
                                                           • «* -      purp0scs ° f * * '* “ ' 2' s' ' sd‘ i p “
      26jo id c c , o f the Peaca A ct 1979, > 21(1A). S « Vol 27. tide


      6 General functions o f police authorities
                                                                                   secure the
        (1) Every police authority established under section 3 shall
      maintenance o f an efficient and effecrive police force for its area.
         (2) In discharging its timcrions, every police authority established under secuo
      3 shall have regard to—                                                        .    _
              (a) a n y objectives determined by the                State under section
                                                                      S e c r e t a r y   o   f                    J   / .


              & any objectives determined                      ^     j u & ^ e y , whether »

                 (d) any local policing plan issued by the authority under section
           (3) In discharging any function to which a code ot practice issued un er sec

                                                                                                                                  -3
                                              0 56                                                                           -
                                                                         POLICE ACT 19%             s8      1217

39 relates, a police authority established under section 3 shall have regard to the
code.
  (4)      A police authority shall comply with any direction given to it by the
Secretary o f State under section 38 or-40.


  This section contains provisions formerly in the Police Art 1964. s 4, as substituted by the Police
and Magistrates’ Courts Act 1994, s 4,
   C o m m e n c e m e n t. 22 August 1996; see the note to s 1 ante.                                         . .
   Shall secu re th e m a in te n a n c e o f a n efficien t a n d effectiv e p o lic e force- T he police authority
is obliged to keep itself informed as to the working o f ss 67-76 post; sec s 77 post.
   S e cretary o f S tate-S ee’ the note to s 4 ante.
  Definitions- For “police authority" and “police torce", see s 101 (1) post.


   L ^ k l policing objectives
    ( l^ ^ v e ry police authority established under Section 3 shall, before the beginning
 of each financial year, determine objectives for the policing of the authority s area
 during that year.
    (2) Objectives determined under this section may relate to matters to which
 objectives determined under section 37 also relate, or to other matters, but in any
 event shall be so framed as to be consistent with the objectives determined under
 that section.
     (3) Before determining objectives under this section, a police authority shall
           (a) consult the chief constable for the area, and
           (b) consider any views obtained by the authority in accordance with
                arrangements made under section 96.

  NOTES
    This section contains provisions formerly in the Police Act 1964, s 4A. is substituted by the olice
  and Magistrates' Courts Act 1994, s 4.
    Com m encem ent. 22 August 1996: see the note to s 1 ante.
    Financial year. Ic the twelve months ending with 31 March; see the Interpretation Act l y / V . s

   CH ^ m i i n e o b je ctiv es. In discharging its functions, every police authority established under s 3
  anteuto have regard to such objectives; see s 6(2) (b) ante. Particulars o f any such objectives arc to be
  given in the local policing plan; sec s 8(5)(b) post-                                               „„ ,
     C hief constable. As'to the general functions of chief constables, see s 10 post, and as to the
  appointment and removal of chief constables, see ss 11, 42 post.


   8   Local policing plans
       (1) Every police authority established u n d e r section 3 shall, before the beginning
   o f each financial year, issue a plan setting but the proposed arrangements for t e
   policing o f the authority's area during the year ("the local policing plan ),
       (2) T he local policing plan shall include a stacement o f the authority’s priorities
   for the year, of the financial resources expected to be available and o f the proposed
   allocation o f those resources, and shall give particulars of—
            (a) a n v objectives determined by the Secretary o f State under section 37,
            (b) anv objectives determined by the authority under section 7, and
            (c) anv performance targets established by the authority, w hether in
                compliance with a direction under section 3b or otherwise.
        (3) A draft o f the local policing plan shall be prepared by the chiet constable for
    the area and submitted by him to the police authority for it co consider.
        (4) Before issuing a local policing plan which differ; from the draft submitted
1266       V O L 33 POLICE

86 Admissibility o f statements in subsequent proceedings                                                      .. j-
   (1)     Subject to subsection (2), no sucement made by a person for the purpose of
the informal resolution o f a complaint shall be admissible in any subsequent
criminal, civil or disciplinary proceedings.
    P ) A statement is not rendered inadmissible by subsection (1) if it consists of or
includes an admission relating to a m atter which does not fell co be resolved
 informally.
    (3)     In this section “ complaint” and * disciplinary proceedings have the
 meanings given in section 65.


 N O TES
   Sub-ss (1), (2) contain provisionsformerly in the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 19S4, s 104(3),

                                      Up »                  ™ ?°“°         tad     mad,            . 10K2) p « togtog
 this section into force; see the note to s 50 ante.
    Inform al re s o lu tio n o f a c o m p la in t. See s 69(2)-(8) ante.
    Transitional provisions and savings. See s 103(2). Sch 8 , Pr III, para 13 pose.


  87     G u id a n c e c o n c e rn in g d isciplinary p ro c e e d in g s e tc
     m T h e Secretary o f State may issue guidance to police authorities, chief officers
  o f police and other members o f police forces concerning the discharge of their
  fiinctions under regulations made under section 50 m e la tio n to the matters
  m entioned in subsection (2)(e) o f thac section, and they shall have regard to any
  such guidance in the discharge o f their functions.
      (2)    Subsections (2) to (5) o f section 83 shall apply in relation to guidance issued
  under subsection (I) above as they apply in relation to guidance issued under
   subsection (1) o f that section.

   NOTES
    Sub-ss (1) contains provisions formerly in the Police and Criminal Eridencc Aer 1984 . l « g ) I f
   part), as amended by the Police and M auttnid’ Court* A «                            44. Sch 5, I t II■ p=^3




    this section into force; see die note to s 50 ante.
        S e c r e t a r y   o f   S ta te . See th e n o te to s 4 ante.                            force" se e s 101(1) post.
        Definitions, For"dntf officer ot police". "police™thonty and pohceforc^ , see                                  ^ JP
        T r a n s i t i o n a l p r o v i s i o n s and s a v i n g s . See s \ H3(-). Sch 8, Pt III. p a r a 13 p




       88 L iability fo r w ro n g fu l acts o f constab les
         (1) The chief officer o f police for a police area shall be liable in
       committed by constables under his direction and control m the p
       purported performance of their functions m like m anner as a                                                           d
       respect o f torts committed by his servants in the course o f t eir^emp ym^ ^                                           ^
       accordingly shall in respect o f any such tort be treated for all p rp
       tortfeasor.
          (2) There shall be paid out o f the police fund—
                     (a) an y d a m s * * o t costs aw a rd ed a p i r a ! ihe c h ie f officer
                     W)                  t o u g h ' .g a in st h im b y y i r o e o t d u . sectton a n d m y ' = o *
                              incurred by him in any such proceedings so tar as not reco
                              in the prtH.'cedinup; and




                                                           058
                                                                             I’OLICE A CT                s   m     12f>7


         (b) any sum required in connection with the settlement of any claim made
             against the chief officer o f police by virtue o f this section, if the
             settlement is approved by the police authority.
   (3) Any proceedings in respect o f a claim made by virtue o f this section shall be
brought against the chief officer o f police for the time being or, in the case of a
vacancy in that ofFice, against the person tor the time being performing the
functions o f the chief officer o f police; and references in subsections (1) and (2) to
the chief officer o f police shall be construed accordingly.
   (4) A police authority may, in such cases and to such extent as appear to it to
 be appropriate, pay out of the police fund-—
          (a) any damages or costs awarded against a person to whom this subsection
              applies in proceedings for a tort committed by that person,
          (b) any costs incurred and not recovered by such a person in such
              proceedings, and
          (c) any sum required in connection widi the settlement o f a claim that has
              or might have given rise to such proceedings.
     (5) Subsection (4) applies to a person w ho is—
         (a) a member o f die police force maintained by the police authority,
         (b) a constable for the time being required to serve with that forcc by virtue
             o f section 24 or 9S, or
         (c) a special constable appointed for the authority's police area.

 NOTES
     S u h-»             contain provisions formerly in ihe Polite Act 1%4, s 4<S(l)-(3). Sub-ss (4). (5)
  contain provisions formerly in s4tf(4) o f tlu t Act, as amended by the Criminal Jus title and l'uhlic
  O rder Act IV‘J4.s 168(2), Sell 10. para 13.
     C o m m e n c e m e n t. 22 August 1W(>: see the note to .< 1 ante.
      Shall b e liable in rc sp c c t o f to rts. As to liability in respect o f torts committed by police officers
  engaged on service outside tbeir force, see s V7(‘>) post. See further H ill v C h ir f C ioifhiblr e f
   Yorkshire [IW J] AC 53, (1W8| 2 All ER 2oH, HL [1 1 0 liability in damages for noilitience because o f
  failure o f police to detect criminal).
      S pecial c o n sta b le . As to the appointment ofspeei.il constables, see s 27 ante.
      D e fin itio n s. For "chief officer o f police", “ police authority” , "police force” and "police fund",
  tjSe s U1! (1) post.
iflh p T ransitional p ro visions a n d savings. See s 103(21, Sch S. Pi ill. p an 13 post.



                                                        PART V

                                 M ISC E L L A N E O U S A N D G E N E R A L

                                                          OJfcnccs
  $9 A ssaults o n constables
     (1) A n y p e r s o n w h o assaults a c o n s t a b l e in th e e x e c u t i o n o f h i s d u t y , o r a p e r s o n
  assisting a c o n s t a b l e in th e e x e c u t i o n o f h i s ducv, shall b e g u il t y o f an o f f e n c e an d
  liable o n s u m m a r y c o n v i c t i o n to i m p r i s o n m e n t for a term n o t e x c e e d i n g six
  m o n t h s o r t o a t i n e n o t e x c e e d i n g l e v e l 5 o n th e standard scale, o r to b o t h .
       (2) A n y p e r s o n w h o resists o r w ilf u ll y o b structs a c o n sta b le in th e e x e c u t i o n o t
   his d u t y , o r a p e r s o n assisting a c o n s t a b l e in th e e x e c u t i o n o f his d u ty , shall b e
   g u ilty o f an otF cnee an d liable o n s u m m a r y c o n v i c t i o n to i m p r i s o n m e n t tor a te rm
   n o t e x c e e d i n g o n e m o n t h o r to .1 tin e n o t e x c e e d i n g le v el •'> o n d i e standard scale,
   o r to b o t h .
      :3; T in s se c tio n also applies to a co n s ta b le w h o is .1 m e m b e r ot j p o lic e lo rce
   m a in ta in e d m S co tla n d o r N o r t h e r n Ire la n d w h e n he is e x e c u tin g a w a r ra n t, o r

                                                                                      >f‘
                                                                                    17 F e b r u a r y 199S
HOC -J/199S

THIS CIRCULAR. IS ABOUT:             FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO PO LICE OFFICERS IN
                                   . LEGAL PROCEEDINGS


FROM:     POLICE RESOURCES UNIT                     EXPIRY DATE:      NONE


l a st d a t e fo r
IMPLEMENTATION: IM MEDIATE                          THIS CANCELS HOC:      77ASS7


'O afcSORS IN t ORM aTION CONTACT:                   STEVESCH O LEY
  w                                                  POLICE RESOURCES UNIT
                                                     ROOM 610
                                                     SO QUEEN A N N E 'S GATE
                                                     LONDON S W lH 9AT
                                                     TEL: 0171 Z73 3S0S
                                                     FAX: 0171 273 37-52


THIS CIRCULAR ES ADDRESSED TO:                       CHIEF OFFICERS OF POLICE
                                                     (ENGLAND i Wa LES)

                                                      CLERKS TO TH E POLICE AUTHORITIES
 COPIES ARE ALSO BEING SENT TO:
                                                      RECEl'"ER FO R T H E METROPOLITAN
                                                      POLICE DISTRICT




                  C hief O fficer/C lerk,

           This circular:
           .   provides updated guidance to police authorities on fciancfel assistance to police
               officers in legal proceedings.

           .   distinguishes betw een officers involved in civil proceedings, crim inal
               proceedings and other types o f legal proceedings.-

                replaces HO C ircular 77/19S7.




                                                   060
U6 i
    rn tro d u ctin n

    1.     It is important that police officers should be able to carry out their duties in
    the confidence that their police authority w ill support them , if they a d in good faith
    and exercise their judgem ent reasonably. T he following guidance ,^\>hich has b—-n
    oreoared in consultation w ith A C PO , the Superintendents Association, the,PoIice
    Federation and the Association o f Police Authorities , should be read against this
    principle.

    C i n l P r o c e e d in g ?                                                     ■. x v ^


    2.      U nder section 8S (1) o f the Police A ct 1996 which re-enacts section 48(1) of
    the Police Act 1964, chief officers axe liable for torts cocamicted by ofncers under
    their direction and control. Section SS(2) provides that any damages or costs
    aw arded against the chief officer and any costs they incur themselves (which are not
    recovered) should be m et from police authority funds.

     3.    A l t e r n a t i v e l y , a c o u r t may award damages against individual police ofticera.
     Section 8S(4) of the Police Act 1996 empowers a police authority ‘‘to such 211 extent
     as appears to it to be appropriate" to pay a i y damages o r costs awarded against
     ofucers (this includes both officers o f other forces serving in the poiice area under
     m utual aid arrangem ents and special constables), any costs incurred by the 0 facets
     them selves and anv sum paid in connection with the settlement of a claim . It is ror
     D dice authorities to decide when to make assistance available, taking account o f the
      circum stances o f a particular case.

      4.           Police authorities are rem inded that the discretionary powers in sections
A     SS(-) and (5) o f the Act, enabling them to provide financial assistance to officers ^
W     involved in lesal proceedinas, aoply to civil proceedings only. Sections SS(4) ana
      SS(5) may also apply to police officers who were members at the time or the acuon
      w hich gave rise to the claim but who are no longer m em bers.

       C rim in a l Pm ceedinffg

       5.     Section SS(4) does not apply to criminal proceedings, but police authorities
       m av w ish to consult their legal advisers as to whether they h a \e any other pow er to
       o rovide such assistance (whether in respect o f private prosecutions or prosecutions
       b rought by the CPS). In this context, they may wislt to note that section 111(1) ot
               ^                                     *                          .■      f       •.?_ _ __ V —^   W aA m ^ 1 I   1C




        f u n c t i o n s '. T h e p r o v i s i o n a p p lie s to p r o v i                     ^                      _
        o r Cirv of London police) by virtue of Section W6A 01 the 19/2 Act (as mserieu
        bv Schedule 14 to the Local Government Act 19S5 and amended by Schedule ^ ot
        tlie Police and M agistrates' C o u i t s Act 1994). It could be argued ir.2i to allow



                                                                                0 62
   paym ent to be made to ofncers (either former or serving) involved in criminal
   proceedings would in some way facilitate o r be conducive 1 0 j polios M o r a y 's
   3^oad functions. F o r example, failure to provide financial assistance could
   a v e r s e ly a u e c t the morale ot the force if officers had to meet their ou.-n costs after
   an acquittal.


   6.^     It is for individual police authorities to decide in the particular circumstances
   C: a case, and^on the basis o f legal advice, whether to make financial assistance
   available Co officers in crim inal proceedings.

   Other type? nflpc^ ] prnefwTmgc

   7. ^       Sim ilarly, there is no express statutory authority- for providing financial
   assistance in proceedings brought against police officers h i tribunals other than the
jj^ p u n s . It is for police authorities outside London (bearing in mfnd the
   ‘ecom inendations o f chief officers) to decide whether to m ake financial assistance
   available to officers (either form er o r serving) involved in Public Inquiries and
   irib u o a ls. Police authorities will therefore need to consider w hether section 111(1)
   Oi the Local Governm ent Act 1972 provides sufficient scope to enable financial'
   assistance to be given in any particular case. In this respect tribunals may include
  certain industrial tribunals where it is clear that officers have acted in good faith in
  pursuance o f their duties and the interest o f the force as a whole is involved. It is to
  be expected that, where appropriate, the service’s grievance procedure
  arrangem ents should be exhausted before there is recourse to lesal proceedings.
  These arrangem ents are set out in Home Office C ircular 16/93, issued 10 M arch
   1993.


  8\       "There      specific provisions in the Race Relations Act 1976 and the Sex ' '
                     A ct 1975 for compensation, costs and expenses aw arded against the
 ctuef o m c e r o f police and any sum required for-settlement, if approved bv the
® 0l~ authority, to be paid from the police fund.

           T here is no express statutory authority for providing financial assistance to
  an o u ic e r w ishing to initiate court proceedings. The considerations set out in
  paragraphs 5 to 7 above apply to such cases.



 ^ \/^                         —.

  LY N D A L O C K Y E R ■ v 7 "                                                  -■ : :      '
  P O L IC E R E S O U R C E S U N IT




                                                          063
                                       ■027/1/2




Tns C ie r k         to     the     P o lic e A u thority

The C h ie f O f f i c e r            of P o lice                                     ' , W ■’•
                                                                                          ■   .■> 7       • 4 D e c e s b e r 1SS7




             * -


ko^       ctjice          c i r c u l a r n o i i / zi

                     ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFJICZHS XK LEGAL PROCEEDINGS


-•"--“ 5 - s $zzz-j.zo~y a u t h o r i t y ir. s e c t i o n 4 3 o f t h e P o l i c e A c t 1964 f o r
p a y r . e r . z s t o b e x a d e f r o - t h e p o l i c e f u n d t o n e e t e x p e n d i t u r e in c u r re d "
by p o l i c e o f f i c e r s in d e fen d in g p r o c e ed in g s in t o r t .           A ls o , a c tin g in
pursvLe.r-.ee o f ■ i t s g e n e r a l - s t a t u t o r y d u t y t o 1m a i n t a i n ‘ a n a d e q u a t e and
e fficien t            p o lice    force      for    its      area,       the    p o lic e     a u t h o r it y has
d i s c r e t i o n t o - e e t e x p e n d itu r e in c u r r e d by o f f i c e r s i n a l l kinds o f
i - ^ a l p r o c e e d i n g s where t h e o f f i c e r s h a v e a c t e d i n good f a i t h in
 ^j^suar.ce o f t h e i r d u t i e s , o r th e i n t e r e s t s o f t h e f o r c e a s a v h c ie
--S in v o lv ed .            The p u r p o s e o f t h i s ‘ c i r c u l a r i s t o g i v e g u id a n c e t c
p o l i c e a u t h o r i t i e s t o h e l p t h e n i n c o n s i d e r i n g r e q u e s t s on b e h a l f o f
o f f i c e r s for fin a n cia l a ssista n ce.               T h is g u id a n c e h a s ’ been d iscu ssed
and. a g r e e d          w ith    the     lo ca l  au th o rity       and w i t h t h e p o l i c e s t a f f
a sso cia tio n s.

2.            The     central          p rin cip le            which s h o u l d                gu id e      c o n s id e r a t io n o-
i r . d i v i d u a l c a s e s i s t h a t , w h e r e a p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y c o n s i d e r s t h a t an
o f f i c e r h a s a c t e d in- g o o d ; f a i t h . ‘ i n : p u r s u a n c e .‘o f , h i s “ " d u t i e s " o r - t h a t
- h e i n t e r e s t s o f a ’ f o r c e a s a w hole a re i n v o l v e d , t h e o f f i c e r . s h o u l d
h a v e - t h e s u p p o r t o f . t h e ■ p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y t o e n s u r e "t h a t - h e ...has ‘ t h e
s e r v i c e s ; -of        l a w y e r . rand . t h a t l - h e ^ / s h o u l d - ' n o t - b e r‘o u t X o * f . -‘p o c J c e t ' i ^ T h e
f o ll o w i n g .p a ra g ra p h s          p r o v i d e . ' ' g e n e r a l ".'1- 1 g u i d a n c e . • -to^-'the'- ' d i f f e r e n t
c l a s s e s o f p ro ceed in g s.              P a y c e n ts - s a d e ‘ t o o f f i c e r s in a ccord an ce w ith
t h i s g u i d a n c e w i l l be e l i g i b l e f o r p o l i c e grant'.
CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS



                            ~ r v “ ° f s t h e s u b j e c t o f a. p u b l i c p r c s s c u - ; o r . f o r a -
                   ~      e r-" £ c c r j r . i e z e d v h i l e c a r r y i n g o u i h i s d u t i e s a s £ s o l i c *
=                          "f- '--''4e sarr.» p o s i t i o n a s a n y o t h e r c s i e r . d a n t an d - j 5 - ^s
s.-.psc"e"             i o D&s.r t h e c o s t s o f h i s d e f e n c e .              I f h e i s a c q u i t t e d , ;*5
                         Xl.-:e      any         cth ar       defendant,           loo!-:    to' the       court       for
                                        h i* :    0       orcDtf            v -c   4-T-.     ———a . —   ~           ^        ^




   -------                                                 w c c ii     vcri        .nit-j    u u u '* Ci                        m ,
a p p r o v e d o f b u t i s found g u i l t y as a r e s u l t -of t h a t p r a c t i c e
             u n la w f u l by t h e c o u r t in th e l i g h t o f t h e •c ir c u m s ta n c e s                                     c ’
    3» , - . i c u l £ r c a s e .


.- r - v a u S     ? r o 5 s c i:T ;in r ! g

 ^ ■ _‘T\^:Q“ “ c e o f f i c e r s n c u l d b e a b l e t o c a r r y c u t h i s d u t i e s i n t h e
.T1**".1-i c s n c e %_nat,       if    he a c t s      in good f a i t h        and e x e r c i s e s h i s
ju d g e m e n t r e a s o n a b l y , h i s p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y v-i.il s u p p o r t h i * .  if,
       a c —s s v r . a r e a teir-ber o f t h e p u b l i c b r i n g s a p r o s e c u t i o n a g a i n s t
^       c ^ -lC er, th e a u th o r ity i s s a t i s f i e d th a t th e o f f i c e r has acted
         *-nlF ''a v       t h e a u t h o r i t y s h o u l d p r o v i d e o r funo. l e c a l a - d v i c s
ar.d /cr r s p r e s e r .z a tio n .

- • _ ""-Ere a c o u r t d e c i d e s t h a t a p r o s e c u t i o n b r o u g h t , ' a g a i n s t ar.
c - f i c e r v £ s n e t b r o u g h t in good f a i t h , i t n ay o r d e r t h e p r o s e c u to r
t o p a y t n e w h o l e o r ar-v p a r t o f t h e c o s t s i n c u r r e d b y t h e d e f e n c e ;
a g a i n , i f t h e o f f i c e r i s a c c u i t t e d o n i n d i c t m e n t , h i s c o s t s Stay be
         --c ^v c e n t r a l f u n d s .   In e i t h e r o f t h e s e c a s e s , t h e q u e s t io n c f
  ~ ° " c e a u t h o r i t y p r o v i d i n g f i n a n c i a l s u p p o r t t o t h e o f f i c e r ££y
                       H o v e v e r , where t h e c o s t s o f an a c q u i t t e d o f f i c e r are
n e t ' a w ard ed by t h e c o u r t o r awarded o n l y i n part:, t h e p o l i c e
a u th o rity      sh ou ld       co n sid er  whether t o          reiz^burse         any c o s ts not
covered,         ta k in g in to account the reason s,                     i f a n y , g i v e n by th e
c o u r t f o r f a i l i n g t o avard a l l c o s t s c la i c e d -


CI V IL PROCEEDINGS .

Civj.1           A ctio n s        Acra i n s t - ~ t h e          C h ief         O fficer         for       W rongful          ^cts   of
C o n s t a b l e s ,           . : -.•.■> _   i.* .. ;      v ■ ■ ;:. v - ..   t.t-v .                 -r.             ..




                                                                                065
vr,*"har o r ~ o ;             to    approve a p rop osed                              s e t t l e r . 2 r.; c f   t r . e c - a '-~-


C iv il     . - . c t i o r . s Acs^riSti ^ r . d i v i d ^ s l P o l i c s Q^^i-C^trs




P o lice       Act:     1964        sp ecifica lly             s^poveirs                   2. p o l i c e     authoiri'-y



T h is        p ro v isio n        a n o lies     to     action s        ££f 2 ! i n s w O -iicers         ol. ^r,e
             i t y 1 s own f o r c e , o f f i c e r s o f a n o t h e r f o r c e s e r v i n g t h e ^ p o n c a
           u r . d e r s u t u a l a i d a r r a n g e m e n t s , a n d s p e c i a l c o n s t a b l e s ^ c r tr.e



rea.sor.ab lv.       w h e r e t h e c o u r t f i n e s f o r t h e o f f i c e r , h e &ay see.-: r.is
ccsts        fro-   the      p la in tiff;     should th e _ c o s t s            n e t b a a v a r c ^ or
avardec. o n lv in c a r t, th e p o lic e a u t h o r it y s n c u ld c o n s id e r -nether
        reim b u rse     any     costs      not covered,            t a . 5c 2.ng' i n t o account      wne
r e a s o n s , i f a n y , g i v e n by t h e c o u r t f o r f a i l i n g t o a v a r d a i l c o s ^ s
claim ed .
S.         J o i n t a c t i o n s n a m in g b c ^ h t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r a n d a n i n d i v i d u a l
■ c o l i c s o f f i c e r r.av b e b r o u g h t i n s o „ e c a s e s .        i n s u e r , c a s e s ^.i_^«s
i —p o r t a n t . t h a t a n y d i s c u s s i o n o f t h e t e r i t s a n d cuar.tura c ~ >-n.s
■ s r o o c s e d s e t t l e m e n t s h o u l d i n v o l v e a l l t h e p a r t i e s r . a s e d J.n^ ^.ns
c la i“         together         w ith a d v isers even           if   they       are     r e p r e s e n t e d =y
d iff e r e n t a d visers.


          E. A c t i o n s     U n der t h e Data P r o t e c t i o n                         ?.ct 19S4

 9.        U n d e r s e c t i o n s 22 and 23 o f t h e D a t a P r o t e c t i o n                                            -L- ° a "
 i n d i v i d u a .1 who s u f f e r s d a - a g e a s a r e s u l t ’ o f t h e i n a c c u r a c y , l o s s
 or       u n au th orised              d isclo su re                of      personal           data         is      e n tit.e e         s-
 c o s o e r . s a t i o n f r o a t h e d a t a u s e r / I n t h e a b s e n c e o f a n y c a s e l a t cn
 th ese         p ro v isio n s,            it     is:     u   n   c   l   e   • whether f-the ••a c t s >: c o v e r e u oy
                                                                               a   r


 sectio n s            2^ 2£. a
                              C HnU d
                                    . ' 23
                                        JLJ ‘ taUnWo Uu ini wt - ' t o - 'wtwo—r t s , 1 t—o - w h i c. .h '. t h e ■ X
                                                                                                                      g u,i -d a n c e :_.n
                                                                                                                                         ro
 u a r a c r a t i h s S " a n d 7 a b o v e ' a p p l i e s .• - I f n o t , s e c t i o n 4S o f _ t h e . -


                                                                                                                                         5
 o f f i c e r s ^ a l H n g " w i t h i n " s e c t i o n s 22 a n d 23 i n ' t h e ‘ u k = a ' v a v a s ^ h e i s
 I ’ abTe f o r t h e i r t o r t s under s e c t i o n < 8 ( 1 ) .             The p o s i t i o n c -
 c o l i c e o f f i c e r s i s le s s c le a r but i t i s p o s s ib le th a t in sc “ a
 t h e c h i e f c o n s t a b l e n ig h t be regard ed a s h a v in g l i a b i l i t y
 acts.         I t f e l l o w s t h a t i t would be p r o p e r f o r t h e p o l i c e autr.cr^-j




                                                                                   066
 tc     = fis_ a__ i c s i s , i r . c l ” d i - = a - v a - a r d c f c s - = s .-.s s : is r ., i r i s {-




                                                                                                                           < hi
            tr.is - l a b i l i t y .       i - s ; - . ~ / l d •-£ - c t e d t h a t t h - l i a b i l i t v z -




                                                                                                                          ■M
              .'^s a r ' - r,CL“_~ t h e A.ct i s                  net: v i c a r i o u s    but h is        tsrstr.f
 ~rf ~7~7            •   *-’ s r e f c r e r . i s c - ’ c a r e i n h a v i n g - i n s t i t u t e d a s y s t e - =
 c ~ - £ - i n i n g , cr.ec.-;i,-.g a.-.d r ^ r t r d i n g d a t a , w h i c h w o u l d r e a s o n a b l y r u a r




                                                                                                                         i), 11 it
 a g a i n s t e r r o r _ and l o s s , u n d e r s e c t i o n 2 3 ( 3 ) c : t h e Ac" s h o u l d ’ - a s
 “ 7 s , - e s ? ° “ S i b i l i t y u n d e r s e c t i o n 2 2 ( 3 ) a n d h e s h o u l d r. 2 1 be ha !
 - - a b l e 1 ^ c ”e c - h is o f fic e r s d isregard s th e s y s t e s e sta b lish e d .

 10- ^     Where            cO i.pensation        is   sought      froa    an     in d iv id u a l      officer,       the




s h o u l d a p p l y t h e s a n e brtpad p r i n c i p l e s " a n d ‘i r J p a r t i c u l a r r e e t t h e
CoSwS ° 7 a n y c o m p e n s a t i o n a w a r d e d a g a i n s t a c h i e f c o n s t a b l e w h e r e a
!‘ c r * " p ° l i c e o f r i c e r i s a t f a u l t a n d t h e c h i e f c o n s t a b l e i s f o u n d t o
   .’ "1 ^ 1 l a b i l i t y f o r t h e a c t i o n s p e r f o r m e d .


rci.ice         C frica rs         B ringing C iv il      .-.ctions       for   D e f a —.a t i o r .

  - •       T n er e ^ i^av b e o c c a s i o n s w h en f i n a n c i a l a s s i s t a n c e i s s c u c h t
r r o - a p e l i c e a u t h o r i t y t o e n a b l e an o f f i c e r t o b r i n e o r c o n s i d e r
b rin g in g         a   c iv il action          for   d efam ation .           An       a u th o rity   has
c i s c r e t i c n t o g i v e such a s s i s t a n c e but i t w i l l be e l i g i b l e for
p o l i c e g r a n t o n ly i f the f e l l c v i n g c r i t e r i a are a l l r .e t:-

          (a)      t h ee d e f a r . a t i o -   is   seriou s;

          (b}        i t - s l a t e s to the a c t i o n s o f an o f f i c e r a c t i n g                    cr
          sa id    t oo b e a c t i n g i n t h e d i s c h a r g e o f h i s d u t y ;
                    -I 4-
          (c)         t      has   a ttr a c te d p u b lic     a tten tio n ;

          (c)          re      b rin g    the a ctio n        is     co n sid ered         t o be i n th*
                                             :orce c r        of     the p o l ic e         s e r v i c e as a


          (e)      the        action     stands a rea so n a b le ch an ce o f s u c c e s s .

c ^ 7 e - - 0 ^| ( d ) i s c e n t r a l .             I f on ly th e r e p u t a t io n o f th e in d ivid u al
o f f i c e r i s . i n q u e s t i o n , he i s i n t h e s a s e p o s i t i o n a s any o th e r
c i t i z e n ^ a n d E u s t , be e x p e c te d t o s e e k h i s                     own r e s e d y .       3 u t an
a l l e g a t i o n a g a i n s t a p a r t i c u l a r o f f i c e r . c a y v e i l r e f l e c t on t h e
r e p u t a t i o n o f , t h e w h o l e f o r c e o r , b e an. e x a m p l e o f w i d e r a l l e g a t i o n s
a g a i n s t - ^ t h e ^ - f o r c e :o r ; a ’ s i g n i f i c a n t s e c t i o n o f i t . • I n s u c h c a s e s
t h e p . o l i c e a u t h o r i t y , -.c r e v i c e d - - t h e • o t h e r . ’c r i t e r i a a r e s a t i s f i e d ,
nay r e a s o n a b l y • be iex p ected ^ t o ■ h e l p ; t o ■ d e f e n d t h e r e f u t a t i o n o f the
fo rc e .;                                 . V. ’; V-




                                                                0 67
                  ?'J3LIC EN'QuIHIES             _\'D 7 i   xrx?.:s




      ——  ■ —n s _n . . e r e s . t o t t r . s n o r c s i s a ^ f e c t e c , i t * 1 ^ 1 c e app_,cpri.a
- c - t h e p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y t o p r o v i d e at: i t s e x p e n s e f o r t h e c h i e f
c ; f l e e r t o ba l e g a l l y r e p r e s e n t a d on b e h a l f c f t h e force^


L scal     P .s^ ressr.tation         fo r In d ivid u al o f f i c e r s
                                                                           ’*±
12.        S e p a r a te r e p r e s e n t a t io n for in d ivid u als-" .officers c h o s e in t e r e s t
is in v o lv ed sa y be necessary.                     Tor e x a —p l e , ' ’t h e r e v i l l b e o c c a s i o n s
when (a) t h e c h i e f o f f i c e r ' s l e g a l r e p r e s e n t a t i v e c a n n o t r e a s o n a b ly
        e x p e c t e d t o r e p r e s e n t the s e p a r a te i n t e r e s t s o f such o f f i c e r s
^.z. ( b ) t h e p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y c o n s i d e r s t h a t s u c h i n t e r e s t s s h c u i d
:s represented.                  In s u c h c a s e s t h e a u t h o r i t y s h o u l d g i v e f i n a n c i a l
a ssista n ce           to    the       o fficers-         In    co n sid erin g         ( b)    above,        the
a u t h o r i t y w i l l w ish in p a r t ic u l a r t o a s s e s s w h eth er th e o f f i c e r s
a r e a t ris>: c f b e i n g h e l d t o b la n e f o r a c t i o n s i n c o n n e c t i o n v i t h
t h e d e a t h t o w h ich th e in q u e s t r e l a t e s and w h e th e r any such fin d in g
r . i q h z c i v e r i s e ~o l e g a l p r o c e e d i n g s f o r t h e c o s t s o f w h i c h t h e
p c l i c e a u t h o r i t y would be l i a b l e und er s e c t i o n <8(1) o f t h e P o lic e
.-.ct ! ? £ - ; c r f o r w h i c h f i n a n c i a l a s s i s t a n c e t i g h t b e a p p r o p r i a t e
- i - h i n t h e ~arr.s c f t h i s c i r c u l a r .


    PI^ZCATIONS FOR FIKA.VCIAL ASSISTANCE

-14.          An o f f i c e r w i s h i n g t o s e e k f i n a n c i a l         a s s i s t a n c e fr o - his
 p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y sh o u ld have th e o p p o r t u n i t y i n advance c f as w all
 a s c n th e c o n c l u s i o n o f th e p r o c e e d in g s t o subm it t o th e c h ie f
 o f f i c e r an a p p l i c a t i o n t o r f i n a n c i a l a s s i s t a n c e .     The c h i e f o f f i c e r
i ^ k o u l d p u t t h i s , t o g e t h e r w i t h h i s own r e c o r _ n e n d a t i o n t o t h e p o l i c e
^ K th o rity for d ecisio n .                The o f f i c e r s h o u l d n o r m a l l y b e c i v e r . t h e
 o p p o r t u n i t y b y t h e p o l i c e a u t h o r i t y t o r.a>:e r e p r e s e n t a t i o n s t o tr.er.
 i f ha w ish e s t o co so.

15-           I f i t d ecid e* to g iv e fin a n c ia l a s s is t a n c e ,               th e authority
should, inform t h e o f f i c e r concerned t h a t ,                         i f t h e i n f o r m a t i o n or.
w h i c h t h e y b a s e d t h e i r d e c i s i o n t o g r a n t t h e a s s i s t a n c e i s shown i n
s u b s e q u e n t l e g a l n r o c e e d i n c s t o b e i n a c c u r a t e o r i n c o m p l e t e , tr.e
a u t h o r i t y w i l l norm ally ex p ect to r e c o v e r t h e aoney u n le s s i~
s a t i s f i e d t h a t n o c u l p a b l e n i s r e p r e s e n t a t i o n w a s i n v o l v e d and
t o - r e c o v e r t h e n o n e y would i n v o l v e t h e *a p p l i c a n t i n substantie^.
h a r d s h i p ! ..'..On t h e ' o t h e r h a n d , i ' f ^ a n a u t h o r i t y r e f u s e s f i n a n c i a l
a s s i s t a n c e ‘a n d t h e n d i s c o v e r s i n t h e l i g h t o f . s u b s e q u e n t e v e n t s
th at        s u c h a s s i s t a n c e would have b e e n w a r r a n t e d ,            then fin an cial
a s s i s t a n c e s h o u l d be g r a n te d in c r c e r t o n e e t t h e r e a s o n a b le ccs-S
i n c u r r e d bv t h e o f f i c e r in s e e k in g l e g a l a d v i c e c r a s s i s t a n c e .
                                                                                                                                    <



                                                                                                 :




: r 1",k c r : r j ; s           c r rakir.g a v e h i c l e                         a u ir .o ri-j'; , c r : cr
: ; ; ' ^ " . c s s c f c = u s ir.g “h e d e a t h c r i n j u r y o f a n y o ' a r s o n , c r : : r ar.y
' s s a . i ' , c r i n ccr.r.ectior. - i t h h i s a c t i o n f o r l i b e l o r s l a n d e r .                  i-
s f i i c a r s e e k i n g f i n a n c i a l a s s i s t a n c e i n c i r c i i r . s v a r . c e s c o v e r e d by
- e m u l a t i o n 15 s h o u l d s e e k s u c h a s s i s t a n c e ' zro:r. t h a p o i i c ' e a u t h o r i t y
In t h e f i r s t i n s t a n c e .          I f the p o l ic e a u t h o r it y does not con sid er
            request          to    fa ll   v ith in     the      teres       of     th is         circu la r,      the
  <11 'tl tP’-O




        e r a t i e r , - a y t h e n c o n s i d e r “h e a p p l i c a t i o n w i t h i n t h e t e r n s c f
        u la ~ icr. 19.          I f t h e o f f i c e r r e c e i v e s 1 e.ga 1 a s s i s t a n c e £ rot; t h e
        araticr.         the     ;e" S     o f Her. s O f f i c e        circu la r        i'O 2 6 / IS 67          11 -
:cr.w inua t o a p p l y .




                                                                                                                     <p> Li'
   . ^ G e - a r a l e r . b u i r i a s a b e e n t h e c o n t e n t : c f t h i s c i r c u l a r r.ay
i —d r e s s e d t o Mr V a r h o m , Hcr.e O f f i c e , 71 D i v i s i o n c n ( C l ) 212 420

                                                                                 "curs      fa ith fu lly




                                                                                                                               fi
(1) 8 08 1989 Police committee erred in relying on a report from a paneF in legal costs
application; Law report
 The Times (106:Q1)


Queen's Bench Division. Regina v Derbyshire Police Authority, Ex parte Wil
son and Another
Before L ord Justice Ralph Gibson and M r Justice Nolan
(Judgm ent July 20)
M embers o f a police committee deciding whether to indemnify police officers
and/or the Police Federation for the costs o f legal representation at a
district auditors inquiry should all be fully aware o f the evidence and the
representations made by the officers and should exercise their own judgm ent
 and not rely on the report o f a panel.
 There w as a presumption that where an officer could be shown to have acted
 in good faith in pursuance o f his duties, any refusal to reimburse would be
 a bad decision unless there were some relevant factor which could reasonably
justify the refusal.
 T he Queen's Bench Divisional Court so held when allowing the application o f
 Inspector W ilson and Sergeant Dalton for a w n t o f certiorari to quash the
 Derbyshire Police Authority’s decision o f July 26, 1988 refusing to
  indemnify them out o f police funds for legal expenses.
  M r Nicholas Underhill and M r Benedict Patten for the applicants; M r Alan
  Newman, QC and M r Jacques Algazi for the police authority.
  LORD JU STICE RALPH GIBSON, delivering the judgm ent o f the court, said that a
  complaint w as made by two ratepayers concerning expenditure on the Chief
   Constable's offices when w ork to convert one o f them into a conference room
   w as carried out.
   That w as intended to be paid for by an authorized change in the purpose o f
   sums in the annual estimates. The authorization o f the police committee was
   not obtained and the spending was therefore contrary to law.
   The auditor found that no one had made any personal gain, that none o f the
   officers had been shown to have been guilty o f wilful misconduct and in the
   circumstances it would not be proper to seek an order for repayment from
   them.
   T he services o f solicitor and counsel had been made available for the tw o
    officers by the Police Federation with no stipulation as to personal
    contribution.
    W hen the result o f the inquiry was k n o w n , the federation applied to the
    police authority for the legal costs to be paid. The authority had pow er to
    make payment out o f police funds but decided to make no payment.
    The decision o f the authority had been attacked on three main grounds. It
    was said that the police authority, a committee with a full membership o f 24
    had left the decision to a panel o f five members appointed to do no m ore
    than hear submissions and report; that they had made the decision on an
incomplete report from the panel; in particular the panel had failed to tell
the authority what the applicants' submissions were.
Hom e Office Circular No 77/87, dated December 4, 1987, provided guidance for
the police authority as to the circumstances in which police funds might be
used under section 48 o f the Police Act 1964 to meet expenditure 'incurred
by officers in all kinds o f legal proceedings where the officers have acted
in good faith in pursuance o f their duties'.
The circular was not a regulation and did not have the force o f statutory
law. It contained guidance with reference to a pow er to m ake payments but
had not created a specific duty to make payments.
The panel, all members o f the police committee, w as set up to hear
representations and report. It was entitled to add a recommendation. B ut if
it w as to do what it had been instructed to do, it was essential to report
fairly the substance o f the representations it had heard. It was useless to
recite that 'all the arguments have been carefully considered'.
N o further report o r explanation o f their recommendation was intended upon
the submission o f the report to the police authority. The applicants were
entitled to have their representations considered by the police authority
itself.
The task given to the police authority under the 1964 Act, in the context o f
the guidance given in the circular, was o f considerable difficulty similar
to that which courts had to perform in deciding w hether a successful
litigant, should despite his success, not be awarded his costs.
The panel, if it w as to have made a decision, needed guidance on matters o f
law relevant to the exercise o f its discretion. In particular the authority
had to make its decision with reference to any ground o f application put
forward.
The authority had full pow er to delegate but did not use that power and the
discretion being exercised while administrative was not purely
administrative.
The pow er to consider and, if thought fit, to award reimbursement o f costs
arose under the general administrative powers given under the statute; but
 once a particular claim was made, in dealing with it, the authority was
 deciding a claim for financial redress based on a reasonable expectation o f
having the claim considered in accordance with the principles set out in the
H om e Office circular.
 The authority had decided to retain to itself the decision on the
 applications, but having done that the members o f the authority were
 required to decide them by their own decisions.
 His Lordship accepted M r Underhill's submission that the central principle
 in the circular meant that there was a presumption that if an officer was
 shown to have acted in good faith in pursuance o f his duties he should be
 entitled to reimbursement.
 A refusal to reimburse would be a bad decision unless there was some
 relevant factor which could reasonably justify the refusal.
      Solicitors: Russell Jones & Walker; Kingsford Dorman & Routh Stacey.

      The Times
      Issue 63467.
      Copyright (C) Times Newspapers Ltd, 1985-1997




■ «




                                                072
