                                                                                   xm xx xxx x x m m m m
                                                                                    e-mail; cnquiries@poIiccsupeis.com




Ref: PW/WAC

03 August 2000


Chief Superintendent Tom Moran
West Yorkshire Police
Discipline & Complaints
PO Box 9
Wakefield
WF1 3QP .




Dear Tom ,

DAVID DUCKENFIELD

Thank you for your letter o f 1 August 2000.

I have discussed its content with David Palmer and agree that there is merit in having David Duckenfield share with
the Association his recent experiences in terms o f lessons to be learned1.

I believe that there should be the passage o f some rime from the end o f the trial, before David makes any formal
presentation to the Association. I further believe that the lessons are more for the Panel o f Friends members than
National Executive Committee members.

I would recommend, therefore, that David be invited to address a meeting o f the Panel. David Palmer tells me t-h-ar
you have had a recent cancellation o f the guest speaker at the Panel’s December meeting. Perhaps that would be
an appropriate time to invite David.

Would you please consider this suggestion and if you agree contact David Palmer to make the necessary
arrangementS-

Yours sirn




       y
Peter Williams
Superintendent
National Secretary
                                                                      Chairman's Office
                                                                      Discipline & Complaints
             WEST YORKSHIRE                                           Police Headquarters

             POLICE                                                   Laburnum Road
                                                                      Wakefield, WF13QP
                                                                      Tel:   (01924) 292206
      SUPERINTENDENTS’ ASSOCIATION                                    Fax:   (01924)292122
         West Yorkshire Police Branch
                                                                      l August 2000




Peter Williams
National Secretary
The Superintendents' Association of England & Wales
67A Reading Road
Pang bourne
Berks
RG8 7JD




Dear Peter

I know David Duckenfield has been in touch with you since the culmination of the
Hillsborough trial and no doubt he has raised this issue with you. I highlight it however to
make sure we do not lose track of the matter.

May I refer you to paragraph 'A' of the letter he sent to me recently (and attached). David
has been fairiy passionate throughout about seeking the opportunity to address (in closed
session), members of the NEC concerning lessons which may be on offer to us as a
consequence of the experiences which he and Bernard Murray 'enjoyed'.

You know David well enough to appreciate that his motives are totally honourable and
constructive. He is devoid of any arrogance in this arena; in fact the contrary is true and he
is keen that every benefit possible for the future should be derived from his 11 years
nightmare.

Perhaps you may wish to put it as an agenda item at the next NEC or indeed to take
unilateral action as you and the President see fit - 1 personally would be happy with either
approach.
Ynnrc rinramlu




Tom Moran
Chief Superintendent
Chairman
                                                                                  wesT yorks.
                                                                                    POLICE

                                                                               3 1 JUL 2000
                                                                               Dj* ^ lJN E A N C
                                                                                ccwr.,
                                                    Tel/Fax
                                                    E-mai


                                                                              m

Tom Moran
Chief Superintendent
Discipline & Complaints Department
West Yorkshire Police
Police Headquarters
PO Box 9
Wakefield
West Yorkshire


Dear Tom


HILLSBOROUGH


At this moment what ever I say to you seems totally inadequate. After 11 years and an
almost 8 week long trial I am tired and need to recover but in doing so I feel the need
to say a few words to those who took an interest in the welfare of          and myself. I
have written officially to the association but this letter whilst not private is more of a
personal nature. Your kindness and understanding gave strength to us all under very
trying circumstances and as a family we wish to say thank you.

I wish to confirm my willingness to offer any help I can to others feeing similar
circumstances to myself but I would prefer this to be in some private forum amongst
my trusted friends but you know I wish to return favours and ensure ‘we’ do not find
ourselves in unnecessary difficulties in future.

Will you speak to Steve Mathews at Holbeck for me and thank him for his help on the
last day. I think I caused him more ‘sweat’ than Elland Road but if he wants me to
pay for lunch in the canteen he’d better send me a bill.

For the record I have written to the divisional commander at Millgarth for their help,
South Yorkshire Police Authority for the funding, and the Chairman of the
Superintendents Association and if I have missed anyone please tell me
Yours sincerely




David Duckenfield
