 PCA
 POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY                                   X     \   10     Great   George Street
                                             2 9                    )2j/London          SW1P     3AE
                                                                   VwV
                                       itA                 "             Telephone: 020 7273 6450
                                                    "’         —         Eax:^      020 7273 6401
 SIR A LISTA IR GRAHAM
 Chairman                                    !r


                                             L________
                                                                     %        April 2002

Dear CKifiV?>upt Gammai
PO L IC IN G A CUTE BEHAVIOURAL DISTURBANCE New Edition

I have pleasure in sending you the revised edition o f our publication Policing Acute Behavioural
Disturbance.

As you know the first edition was issued last year. We are indebted to forensic pathologist Dr
Richard Shepherd o f St George’s Hospital Medical School for the revisions that he has made for
this edition.

The changes are on pages 7 to 11. The major changes relate to the guidance for forensic
medical examiners (p 9) and the suggested guidelines for pathological examination o f suspected
excited delinum / restraint (pp 1 0 and 1 1 .)

This document can be accessed on our web site www.pca.gov.uk or can be supplied as a Word
attachment to an email by our Press Office. The Press Office can be contacted on 020-7273
6402.

Yours sincerely




A L IST A IR ^R A H A M
       PCA
      POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY




Policing Acute Behavioural
        Disturbance

         Revised Edition




                                    March 2002
Policing Acute Behavioural Disturbance

Published by:

Police Complaints Authority
10 Great George Street
LONDON
SW1P3AE

© Crown Copyright 2002

This material may be freely reproduced except for sale or advertising purposes

ISBN 0-9533157-7-0




                                         2
                                       CONTENTS




                                                                Page No.



1.      Introduction                                               4




2   .   Police Management of Acute Behavioural Disturbance         7




3.      Custody Officer to bring to the attention of treating
         Physicians                                                9




4.      Pathologists - suggested guidelines                        10




        References                                                 12




        Glossary                                                   13
INTRODUCTION


Some of the most distressing and high profile cases of deaths in police custody in
recent years have been those where the detainee has died following police restraint,
which has often been applied in response to an acute behavioural disturbance. In
these tragic cases there may be no anatomical evidence found at post-mortem
examination to establish why the person died. Yet the culpability or otherwise of
police officers involved in restraining the individual may hinge on the cause of death.
If the phrase "restraint asphyxia" is used this will raise serious questions about the
reasonableness of the force used. At its most extreme such a death may lead to a
murder charge against a police officer.

The PCA, a body of lay Members and staff, relies entirely upon the evidence of
pathologists, medical consultants, forensic medical examiners and the toxicology tests
to determine the cause of death. However, time and again in these cases there is no
agreement between the medical professionals. In a handful of cases, up to five
opinions have been sought in an attempt to resolve the conflict. Instead of helping to
resolve matters, the family become suspicious of the motives of the PCA Member.

The aim of this paper is to set out some straightforward guidance for police officers,
forensic medical examiners and pathologists which, if followed, would greatly assist
in preventing some deaths and identifying the causes of others.

ACUTE BEHAVIOURAL DISTURBANCE

The individuals who are most at risk of sudden death during restraint appear to be
those exhibiting an extreme form of acute behavioural disturbance which goes far
beyond the "distressed" state often encountered by the Police.

Presenting features

The main features of the extreme state are a period of agitation, excitability, perhaps
paranoia, coupled with great strength, aggression and non-pain compliance. Sudden
collapse and death may follow.

 Causes

 There are many possible causes. These include head injury, brain tumours, delirium
 from high temperature, heat exhaustion and endocrine disorders such as high blood
 sugar or low blood sugar and thyroid disease. Therapeutic (anti-psychotic) drugs and
 others (cocaine etc) can also precipitate these episodes.

 It is not clear whether restraint does increase the likelihood of death of a detainee
 suffering an acute behavioural disturbance. Exertion, exhaustion and the sheer act of
 resisting restraint carry a sudden death rate.




                                            4
Enlargement o f the heart can be found as a result of natural disease (high blood
pressure) or following abuse of drugs (cocaine). Such enlargement o f the heart also
increases the risk of sudden death from the development o f abnormal cardiac rhythms.
It is thought possible, though not yet proven, that cocaine can also affect the
dopamine receptors and the kappa 2 receptors in the brain, thus increasing the risk
level.


Signs post-mortem

Very high temperature at the time of death.

Petechiae around the eyes may be present. However they are not diagnostic and they
have also been recorded in cases of individuals with heart failure, where there is no
question of strangulation. (Karch) Petechiae can also occur as a result of resuscitative
attempts.    They may not be apparent until some time has elapsed after death.
Photographic documentation of the absence of petechiae is just as important as
documentation of their presence.

Neurochemical abnormalities in the brain - affecting dopamine transporters, kappa2
receptors, serotonin receptors. These can only be detected by specialised analysis in
samples taken very quickly after death. Tests do not yet form part of the 'standard'
post-mortem protocol.

An enlarged heart, abnormalities in the ultra structure and in the blood vessels that
supply the heart. A concentrically enlarged heart, which may be associated with
cocaine use, has a relative under-supply of blood vessels to heart muscle at all times
leading to a relative decrease in blood supply and the risk of the development of
arhythmias or to hypoxia.

If present, blood level of cocaine will be either low or moderate but will generally not
be of a toxic level from overdose.



POSITIONAL ASPHYXIA

Definition

Death which results from a body position that interferes with the ability to breathe.
Positional asphyxia is a recognised cause of death.

Why does positional asphyxia occur?

Compression of the trunk limits chest movement and may splint the diaphragm
preventing the diaphragm moving up and down between the chest and the abdomen.
These diaphragmatic movements are essential to the breathing process. We know
that people who have their chest squeezed die because they are unable to breathe
adequately.    Such individuals die due to traumatic asphyxia. The Hillsborough
tragedy was an example of this. Such deaths are more likely to occur in the context of


                                              5
either "cocaine induced bizarre or frenzied behaviour,... or drugs and alcohol
in to x ica tio n ,..(P etty and McDonough).

Some forms of police restraint may increase the risk of asphyxia though the degree of
risk associated with different holds is far from clear. The position of a person’s body
may also contribute to asphyxia though again the degree of risk associated with the
position of the body remains uncertain. Nat Cary pointed out that "if you put
someone with a beer belly on their front, you will squeeze their abdominal contents,
such that their diaphragm is relatively ineffective." (Cary p.31)

Further, the individual may hold their breath in an attempt to lift their body in order to
be able to breathe. This is akin to a weight lifter tensing their abdominal muscles and
holding their breath in order to lift a weight. Nat Cary's research indicated that a
sequence of breath holding, in a situation of high exertion could cause potentially
dangerous heart rhythm disturbance.

Exhaustion may also play a part. There may have been a chase before the individual
has been detained. In a struggle with six or more police officers that describe
becoming exhausted, the individual will certainly be exhausted. Underlying ischemic
heart disease, if present, could lead to a sudden cardiac death.

Post-mortem signs

Petechiae around the eyes. It is possible, however, to die in a crushing situation
without there being many signs at autopsy. (Cary p 30)

Nat Cary argued that there is likely to be no anatomical cause of death. (Cary p.39).




                                             6
POLICE MANAGEMENT OF ACUTE BEHAVIOURAL DISTURBANCE

We are not concerned here with the management of a detainee displaying a violent
temper. Such an individual can be controlled using tried and tested police restraint
techniques. Anyone displaying an acute behavioural disturbance should, however, be
treated as a medical emergency. Such individuals may be dangerous to others or to
themselves. Management is therefore difficult.         Officers are unlikely to know
whether the patient has a cardio vascular problem or a psychiatric disorder or indeed
whether the patient is abusing drugs. All these factors may increase the risk of death.
The cause of the acute behavioural disturbance should not affect the response of
officers.

Police officers are used to dealing with difficult, often abusive and disruptive
individuals. They should be aware of the more extreme situations discussed in this
guidance paper.

For example: if a member of the public is naked and acting strangely in a public
place; or if they are talking incoherently and failing to respond to simple commands
or to respond to questions intelligibly, the risk of sudden death may be very great.

GUIDANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS

        • If possible contain rather than restrain:
        • summon an ambulance immediately ;
        • Make every effort to ensure transportation to hospital by ambulance, not in
          a police vehicle if possible. (The public perception will be that officers
          used force in the police vehicle). However, care should not be delayed
          waiting for an ambulance:
        • Do not use CS spray. It may not subdue the individual and it could create
          needless liability,
        • Do not hogtie victim, (i.e. do not lie the person on their front and tie their
          hands and feet together behind their back) It is not an approved procedure
          and may cause death;
        • If possible ensure attendance of medical or paramedical personnel during
          transportation of an 'acute behavioural disturbance' patient;
        • Always take such a patient direct to an A & E department of a hospital -
          NOT to a psychiatric unit unless specifically authorised;
        • Clear protocols are needed as to how to restrain such an individual and
           training is essential;
        • Notify doctor immediately of any death of a detainee with an acute
           behavioural disturbance.




                                            7
Guidance when restraint is unavoidable

If the person has a knife or gun, taking them down to the prone position may be
absolutely necessary. However, "the prone position should be avoided if at all
possible, and the period that someone is restrained in the prone position needs to
be minimised." (Cary p. 38)

The amount of time that restraint is applied is as important as the form of
restraint and the position of the detainee. Prolonged restraint and prolonged
struggling will result in exhaustion, possibly without subjective awareness of this,
which can result in sudden death.

If possible, avoid the situations in which prolonged restraint and prolonged struggling,
become necessary.

If the person has to be restrained, avoid pressing down on the trunk. Use the limbs.
Binding the ankles and wrists will be considerably safer than kneeling on the back of
someone's chest.




                                           8
CUSTODY OFFICER - BRING TO THE ATTENTION OF THE TREATING
PHYSICIANS THE FOLLOWING CHECK LIST OF RECOMMENDED
ACTIONS

To assist the patient

Ensure rapid transfer to hospital. Accompany the individual to hospital and 'hand
over' formally to A & E staff.

Rapid tranquillisation should only be performed where equipment for cardio­
pulmonary resuscitation is present and where staff are trained to undertake such
activity.

To determine the cause of Death

AUTOPSY NEEDS TO BE DONE WITHIN 12 HOURS OF DEATH,
The FME or other treating physician should tell the police and coroner of the
importance of an early autopsy. The needs of the relatives to have a representative
present will need to be taken into account, however.

The following tests will need to be undertaken if the cause of death is to be
established in cases of agitation and restraint followed by sudden death.

Guidance to FME and other treating physicians

1. Take aural or rectal temperature; ideally this should be recorded hourly so that
   you can extrapolate backwards. If there is a possibility of sexual abuse then take
   a swab first before taking the rectal temperature.

2. Ensure ambient temperature is recorded by SOCO as early as possible.

3. Record whether thyroid/cricoid pressure is used when trying to intubate.

4. Record number of times intubation attempted and name the person who undertook
   the attempts.

5. Record oxygen saturation (using pulse oximeter) during transportation




                                          9
                  Suggested guidelines for pathological examination of
                          Suspected excited delirium/restraint

                 Prepared by Dr R T Shepherd Forensic Medicine Unit
                         St. George’s Hospital Medical School

1.        Ambient temperature of the scene should have been recorded as early as
          possible by SOCO.

2.        Ideally core body temperature should also be taken at the scene by pathologist
           but if pathologist does not attend scene then the core body temperature should
           be taken as early in post-mortem examination as practical. If the body
           temperature has not been taken at the scene and if the post-mortem will be
           unduly delayed then every effort should be made to take the body temperature
           before the body is placed in a refrigerator.

3.        Post-mortem should be performed as speedily as possible after death and
          should not be delayed for more than 1 2 hours except in most unusual
          circumstances

4.        Mortuary facilities MUST be adequate (eg mortuary MUST have scales for
          body & organs) - consider moving body if facilities not suitable.

5.        Record core body temperature (again) at post-mortem.

6   .     Specifically document clothing.

7.        Specifically document height and weight of body

8    .    Full external inspection of body surfaces and documentation of injuries, marks
           and abnormalities.

9.        Collect routine scientific external samples: eg head hair, pubic hair, sexual
           swabs etc.

10.       Collect any other specific samples dictated by events/scene/or examination: eg
           possible semen stains etc.

11.       Collect additional external samples specifically for drug
           screening/quantification:

                   head hair (pubic hair if no head hair) - for chronic drug use
                   finger nails/ toe nails                - for chronic drug use
                   nasal swabs                            - acute drug sniffing / snorting
                   injections sites                       - acute intravenous injection

    12.   Full internal examination with specific dissection of neck after allowing for
           drainage. Additional internal/subcutaneous examination of limbs and back to
           exclude or confirm injuries.




                                               10
13.   Documentation of all injuries, marks and abnormalities.

14.   Collect any routine scientific internal samples : blood in EDTA for
      identification, deep muscle for DNA etc.

15.   Collect internal samples for toxicology :
          blood fluoride     -         femoral veins
                                      (collect 20 ml samples from both legs if
                                     possible)
                                      fluoride preservative (final conc should be
                                      2%w/v)
          blood fluoride     -        right side of heart
                                      fluoride preservative (final conc should be
                                      2%w/v)
          urine fluoride              2 x 25mls (if available)
          stomach contents (all)
          deep muscle                 approx 20 g
          vitreous humour -           (sample from each eye in separate fluoride
                                      bottles)
                   brain              (20 g white matter - should be snap frozen asap)

          Ensure correct and complete labeling.
          Cool as soon as possible
          DO NOT LEAVE AT ROOM TEMPERATURE
          Store at 4°C unless frozen


16.   Take full histological sampling of all internal organs and consider specialist
      examinations of heart and brain.




                                          11
                                 REFERENCES



From the Pathology of Drug Abuse, 3rd Ed. S B Karch. PCA Seminar May 2000.

(Petty, C. andE. McDonough (1995) Positional asphyxia-sudden death.

Chan, Vilke et al. 1997 "Restraint position and positional asphyxia" Ann. Emerg.
Med. 30(5): 578-86.

Chan, Vilke et al. 1998 "Reexamination of custody restraint position and positional
asphyxia". Am J. Forensic Med. Pathol. 19(3): 201-5.

Schmidt and Snowden 1999) "The effects of positional restraint on heart rate and
oxygen saturation". J. Emerg. Med. 17(5): 777-82.

Elfawal 2000 "Sudden unexplained death syndrome" Med. Sci. Law 4)(l): 45-51.

Positional Asphyxia, N Cary. PCA Seminar May 2000.

Excited Delirium and Positional Asphyxia, S Winbery, Ph.D.M.D.. PCA seminar
May 2000.



NB The Metropolitan Police have produced an excellent training video ‘Preventing
Deaths in Custody’ which includes useful sections on restraint deaths.




                                         12
                                   GLOSSARY




Ambient temperature                    Surrounding temperature (eg cell
                                       temperature)


Cricoid pressure                       Pressure over the front of the windpipe


Hypoxia                                Low oxygen


Ischemic heart disease                 Heart disease due to poor blood supply to
                                       the heart


Petechiae                              Minute areas o f bleeding looking like
                                       very small red spots in the skin or eyes


Receptors in the brain including       Cells which receive messages from
Dopamine, kappa2 and serotonin         chemicals causing alterations in
Receptors                              behaviour


Ultra structure                        The heart structure as seen under the
                                       microscope




                                      13
