                                                        FAB(90) 2ND MEETING

     POLICE ADVISORY BOARD FOR ENGLAND AND HALES
     MINUTES OF A MEETING HELD IN ROOM G15, HOME OFFICE, QUEEN ANNE'S
     GATE ON 3 DECEMBER 1990
     Present:
         Chairman:   The Rt Hon Kenneth Baker MP   Home secretary
                     The Rt Hon The Earl Ferrers   Minister of State
         Members:    Mr S Day
                     Mr J Meir                     Association of County
                     Mr F Keen                     councils

                     Mr G Bundred
                     Mr D Axe                      Association of
                                                   Metropolitan Authorities

                     Mr J F Evans
                     Mr J Grieve                   Association of Chief
                     Miss M Barton                 Police Officers

                     Mr T Hewitt                   Superintendent *s
                     Mr P Golding                  Association


                                                   Police Federation




                    Sir Clive Whitmore CVO
                    Sir John 'Woodcock QPM         Home Office
                    Mr I Burns
                    Mr s Boys Smith
                    Miss J Rumble
                    Mr R Kornicki
         Secretariat:    Mr M Stephens             Home Office
         In Attendance: Mr C Grenyer               Association of County
                                                   Councils
                          Mr P Michaelson          Association of
                                                   Metropolitan Authorities

                         M r -M Cahill             Police Negotiating
                                                   Board - Independent
                                                   Secretary

                         Mr M Cann                 Police Negotiating
                                                   Board - Official Side
                                                   Secretary

                                                    Police Federation

          INTRODUCTION


CAS,10
                 1.   The Home Secretary welcomed everybody to the meeting, and in
                      particular those attending for the first tine. He was pleased
                      that one of his first duties as Home Secretary was to chair
                      the 32nd meeting of the Police Advisory Board. He explained
                      however that he would have to leave during the course of the
                      meeting, as he was due to speak in the House of Commons. When
                      he left, Lord Ferrers would take the chair.
                 2.   Apologies for absence had been received from Mr Gillies who
                      was represented by Mr Axe; Mr V Jones who was represented by
                      Mr Golding; Mr Owen and Mr Laterer who were represented by
                      Mr Meir and Mr Keen respectively; Mr W Jones who was
                      represented by Commander Grieve; and Mr Addison.
                 ITEM 1:    Minutes of the meeting held on 27 February 1990
                 3.   The minutes of the meeting held on 27 February were approved.
                 ITEM 2:    Matters arising
                 4.   The Home Secretary said there were two matters arising from
                      the last meeting, firstly special constables, and secondly the
                      report of the Working Party on Police Recruitment and
                      Population Changes.
                 ITEM 2As Special Constables
                 5.   Mr Kornicki said that considerable progress had been made
                      since the last Police Advisory Board meeting on a range of
                      issues which affected the Special Constabulary. -HThese were
                      a)     A major recruitment campaign was to start early in 1991
                             and run for three years. This would begin with a
                             national awareness programme and move towards providing
                             support and material for local recruitment campaigns.
                      b)     a one day conference had been held at Hutton Hall in
                             September to discuss with forces the management
                             strategies needed to derive the most benefit from
9                            specials.
                      c)     Agreement had been reached on an amendment to the sick
                             pay regulations to bring the sick pay of Special
                             Constables into line with their actual earnings rather
                             than the national equivalent earnings of a regular.
                                    **
                      d)     It had been proposed that members of the medical
                             profession should be eligible to serve as Special
                             Constables. There were, however, some difficulties over
                             this with the Department of Health and discussions were
                             still continuing on this matter.
                       e)    Decisions on protective headgear were to be a matter for
                             Chief Constables taking account of operational
                             requ irements.
                       f)    At the Conference in September, it had been announced
                             that an annual trophy would be presented for the most


    Q A 5 .1 0
r



                        outstanding contribution to policing by a special in that
                        year.
             6<    Mr Kornicki explained that guidance on all these matters would
                   be included in a new circular which was being prepared.

             7<    The Home Secretary said that at the last meeting of the Police
                   Advisory Board, there had been a full discussion of the Home
                   Office proposal to pay Special Constables a bounty on an
                   experimental basis in two or three areas. Careful
                   consideration had been given to the views expressed by members
                   on that occasion. The decision was that pilot projects should
                   be set up to see whether a bounty, in different forms, could
                   be an aid to recruitment and retention — Special Constabulary
                   Regulations would be amended to allow for this. The projects
                   would be established in the Metropolitan Police and two other
                   forces.
             8.               said that the Police Federation regretted the
                   decision to impose a bounty, and asked why a trophy had been
                   introduced. She understood that the proposal was floated by
                   the Home Office but what was the reason behind it? Another
                   issue was proper training for Specials. This would have
                   considerable resource implications, what was the additional
                   cost involved?
             9.    Lord Ferrers explained that a trophy had been introduced to
                   offer some encouragement to Specials in recognition of their
                   service and show that they were valued. It would be awarded
                   to those who had contributed the most. The pilfJt scheme in
                   provincial forces would cost between £50,000 anH £100,000
                   which would qualify for 51% police grant.
             10.   Mr Kornicki said that training was very important. There might
                   be some resource implications, but those that wfere recruited
                   should be properly trained. Miss Neild asked how all the
                   administrative costs for the pilot, including the payment of
                   the bounty and the resources for training, could come out of
                   the existing police budget.
                   Mr Kornicki said that 51% grant would be available.         —
             ITEM 2b:   Report of the Working Party on Police Recruitment and
                        Population Changes
             11.   Miss Rumble explained that following endorsement of the report
                   at the last jpeeting, a copy had been sent to all Chief
                   Constables.- Regulations which abolished the height and upper
                   age limits had been introduced in September and a common
                   physical fitness test had been introduced. A new Police
                   Initial Recruitment Test was currently being drawn up. At the
                   last meeting it had been agreed to reconvene the Working Party
                   to look at part time working and job sharing. The Working
                   Party had subsequently met on three occasions, agreement had
                   reached to proceed with pilot projects in six forces for a
                   period of three years. The next step was to write to
                   Chief Constables and to the Police Negotiating Board where
                   negotiations would take place to secure the necessary changes
                   in regulations.


    QA5.10
                 12.      The Home Secretary said that the proposals on job sharing were
                          very welcome. They would particularly help women.

                 13.                expressed concern that the wppc had started to
                         consider amendments to regulations, and asked for an assurance
                         that any changes to regulations would be discussed in the
                         Police Negotiating Board. She also referred to the Police
                         Federation's preference for a separate set of Regulations on
                         this subject. Miss Rumble confirmed that any changes to
                         regulations would be a matter for the Police Negotiating
                       ■ Board. Entirely separate Regulations were not possible but
                         Home Office legal advisers had indicated that in preparing
                         draft Regulations every effort would be made to ensure that
                         provisions on 'part time working would be easily
                         distinguishable from those relating to full timers.
                 14.      Mr Goldina asked what feedback there would be from the pilot
                          projects. Miss Rumble explained that monitoring arrangements
                          would be introduced whereby the project team would report back
i                         after six months and produce an evaluation every year.

                 ITEM 3:      Early Retirement on the Grounds of Inefficiency

                 15.      Introducing Paper PAB(90) 6 Miss Rumble explained that at
                          present there was no procedure for the compulsory retirement
                          of police officers on the grounds of inefficiency. This
                          subject had first been discussed in the Standing Committee
                          back in 1988. As yet no consensus had been reached as to the
                          way forward.                                   •[»* -
                 16   .               agreed that no consensus had been reached but said
                          there was no evidence of a need for such a system. The 63
                          examples cited by ACPO were examples of poor management and
                          implied a lack of management training in forces. The
                          procedure could only possibly be of application to a small
                          percentage of cases, less than 1% and if a system were needed
                          an amendment to the discipline code would be the best
t                         approach.              asked for the Paper to be rejected.
                 17.      Mr Hewitt agreed that no one had come up with good examples of
                          cases where the discipline code was failing. There were
                          questions about the assessment of officers and the proposals
                          put forward were full of anomalies. Another problem was the
                          absence of an adequate appraisal system. Mr Evans said that
                          this matter, had been raised by ACPO because it was felt there
                          was a need for a procedure separate from the discipline code.
                          It was not, however, only a system for Constables as the
                          Police Federation appeared to suggest.
                 18.      Mr Bundred agreed that a procedure was necessary in the
                          interests of value for money.               said the system
                          would mean that a Constable would lose m s job where other
                          ranks could be demoted. Mr Day said that a mechanism should
                          exist and he supported the Home Office proposal to develop
                          one. Mr__Srieve said that the Commissioner believed there
                          should be a procedure but shared the concern of the Police
                          Federation that there should be safeguards.


    Q A S .1 0
t


             19.    The Home Secretary expressed suprise that there was no
                    procedure to deal with poor performance. There was a
                    mechanism in the Civil Service and a system was being
                    introduced into the teaching profession. In a force of over -
                    120,000, he would be surprised if there were not some
                    inefficient officers. The mechanism would also help those who
                    were under-performing. Linking a mechanism to the discipline
                    code could be ultra vires. but whatever the system the
                    procedures must be fair and be seen to be fair. The first step
                    in any action would be to see how performance could be
                    improved.
             20 .               referred to the Audit Commission's comment that it
                    was very difficult to assess police performance, because of
                    the rank structure and the fact that police officers were not
                    employees but officers under the Crown. Mr Hewitt said that
                    the superintendents Association had legal advice to the effect
                    that linking the procedure to the discipline code was not
                    ultra vires. Mr Cadmore said that constables had a lot of
                    discretion in their work about how to proceed in a particular
                    matter and if a procedure were introduced whereby they might
                    be dismissed, their judgement may be affected.

             21 *               asked whether a Working Party would be set up to
                    look at this matter or how would the matter be taken further.
                    Mr Hewitt said that there was a need for further discussion on
                    the mechanism. The Howe Secretary said that he would
                    carefully consider all the proposals before coming to a
                    decision on the matter.
             ITEM 4:    Flexible Postering and Shift systems
             22.    Introducing PAB(90) 5 the Home Secretary said he understood
                    that the Police Federation had asked for this item to be
                    removed from the agenda. He asked if they would like to
                    comment.              said that she was amazed that the PAB was
                    intending x.o ao tne ^NB's work. Her letter of 27 November had
                    set out the reasons why the Federation wanted the item
                    removed. This had been sent to the then Home Secretary and
                    Lord Ferrers. The Police Act 1964 clearly set out what could
                    be discussed in the PAB. The Paper now before the PAB could
                    have been circulated to the PNB at any time during the last
                    12 months. The Staff Side would have been obliged to consider
                    it and would have had more opportunity to discuss it. The
                    Police Federation would have been supportive of this approach.
                    The PAB was rrpt the appropriate forum for the discussion and
                    Miss Neild asked for the Paper to be withdrawn.

             23.    The Home Secretary said that as flexible rostering was
                    fundamental to the efficiency of the police service, it would
                    be useful to have a discussion. In response,              asked
                    the Home Secretary to give an assurance, by way of a formal
                    ruling, that as required under the Police Advisory Board
                    Constitution, the Police Act 1964 and the Police Negotiating
                    Board Act 1980 discussions would be non specific, and if
                    relating to conditions of service, on general questions only -
                    any specific proposals being put by the official Side to the
                    Police Negotiating Board for consideration in that forum.


    SA5.10
             24.   Mr Day and Mr Hewitt supported the Federation in seeking an
                   assurance that details would not be discussed. Mr Bundred
                   said he would nevertheless welcome a discussion on the Paper.
                   Mr Evans said that ACPO believed that the present regulations
                   were too inhibiting: the sooner the matter was discussed the
                   better.

             25.   Mr Boys Smith said that specific proposals that were for the
                   PNB should go to the PNB: the Home Office was not seeking to
                   undermine the PNB or go behind its back. But changes to
                   rostering would be significant in terms of flexibility and
                   efficiency. These were matters for the PAB. He also said that
                   the current arrangements did not always meet the wishes of
                   officers and were difficult to sustain particularly as there
                   were schemes operating outside the system. Against this
                   background the issue should be discussed in the PAB though
                   everything proper to the PNB would go to the PNB.
             [The Home Secretary left the meeting at this point and Lord Ferrers
             took the chair],
9
             26.               said that the Official Side had set up a Working
                   Party. The Staff Side's offer of a Joint Working Party was
                   still on the table. But no reply had been received. Any delay
                   in dealing with the subject was not of the Police Federation's
                   making, the matter could have been discussed in the PNB at any
                   time and the Police Federation would have been obliged to
                   reply, on top of that the Paper before the PAB today was
                   numbered incorrectly. [Secretary's Note: Papers 90(1) Flexible
                   Roster ing and Paper 90(2). Early Retirement shc^-ldmow be
                   renumbered Papers 90(5) and 90(fc) respectively]. She went on
                   to say that the Police Federation was unable to continue with
                   the discussion.
             27.   Lord Ferrers said that the duties of the PAB andi PNB were
                   different. A discussion in the PAB would not preempt or
                   prevent discussion in the PNB and that it was reasonable for
                   the PAB to discuss flexible rostering. He regretted that the
                   Police Federation felt unable to continue with discussion as
                   he would like everybody's views so that he could properly
                   advise the Home Secretary.
             28.   Mr Hewitt said that the Superintendent's Association supported
                   the Police Federation in principle. They were keen to look at
                   rostering but the PAB was not the appropriate forum. There
                   were Home Office officials in the PNB. Mr Evans said he was
                   concerned that ACPO did not have a proper role in the PNB.
                        ACPO would like this opportunity to put views forward.
                                     said....that
                          __________ _|            she
                                               -- --
                                                   — ^ — —would not be involved in any
                                                       ‘ t x       * W   A   » V   W   A i l

                        discussion on specifics, particularly when the Home
                        Office start talking about changes to regulations. She
                        also pointed out that PNB Committee C was advised by ACPO
                        and that ACPO did have the facility to ask the Committee
                        to take a particular path. In addition the PNB covered
                        England, Wales, Northern Ireland and Scotland and neither
                        Northern Ireland nor Scotland were represented in the
                        PAB.



    4A5.10
*

                 29.   Mr Bundred said that the independant Chairman of the PNB had
                       offered to chair a Working Party and that the proposals needed
                       to be discussed. J t a s k e d whether the offer of a
                       Joint Working Party was still on the table.
                 30-   Lord Ferrers stated that the proposals for change set out in
                       paragraph 6 of the Paper and the views of the Board would be
                       helpful. Mr Day said that the PAB was not the right place for
                       a discussion. Mr Evans said that the current rostering
                       arrangements were causing difficulties. ACPO would support any
                       move to advance discussions.
                 31-    L-Ord Ferrers said he would advise the Home Secretary that a
                       ■ number of Committee members felt the matter should be
                        considered solely in the PNB and that the PAB was not the
                        appropriate forum. Therefore only a limited discussion had
                        taken place.
                 ITEM 5:   Anv other Business

                 32.   Mr Evans asked what the latest position was on the
                       recommendations of the Working Party report on the provision
                       of future chief officers. Mr Burns said that the report had
                       been received, but the machinery to consider it further had
                       not yet been established. Mr Grenver asked to receive a copy.
                 33.   Mr Bundred said he was concerned about the financial
                       difficulties faced by Metropolitan Authorities in 1991-1992 as
                       a result of the Department of Environment's proposals for
                       standard spending assessments and charge capping/- .The
                       authorities needed a 30% increase in funds and urgent
                       discussions were required Mr Burns confirmed that the AMA had
                       written on the subject. The Home Office was disturbed about
                       the situation. Arrangements were being made for a meeting with
                       the Department of Environment.
                 34.   Mr Bundred said that as the Home Office was responsible for
                       policing they should be involved. Mr Burns said that the two
                       departments needed to be consulted at the same time.
    i                  Lord Ferrers said that a number of dates had been put forward
                       for a meeting. Mr Bundred said that problems arose because
                       the Department of Environment maintained it was a Home Office
                       matter and vice versa. Lord Ferrers said it was important for
                       the issue to be discussed and Mr Burns agreed to take matters
                       forward. Miss Neild said that as the Home Office was always
                       talking about,effectiveness and efficiency it was important
                       that sufficient money was available,
                 35.   Mr Hewitt expressed concern about legal costs for police
                       officers. Since Hillsborough, six officers had had to give
                       evidence to the inquest: and if an officer was acting in good
                       faith doing a public duty, and if as a result any officer had
                       to seek legal advice or representation then there should be
                       some mechanism to meet the costs. The Superintendent's
                       Association had been given leave to seek a judicial review
                       against South Yorkshire Police Authority, but the PAB should
                       do something for future circumstances.



        QA5.10
                   Lord Ferrers said it would be a bad state of affairs if police
                   officers were not represented but the Board should await the
                   outcome of the judicial review. If a change was needed,
                   primary legislation would be required. Mr Hewitt said that it
                   was one thing for the Police Authorities to have discretion
                   but a proper system was needed. Mr Bovs Smith said that the
                   wording of Home Office Circular 77/87 would be looked at. Sir
                   John Woodcock said that the Superintendent's Association had
                   written to him: regional inspectors did make enquiries of
                   Police Authorities; they also shared their great concern but
                   must await the outcome of the judicial review. Lord Ferrers
                   said that at the present time the Home Office did not have the
                   power to compel   police authorities to pay.




             37.   There was no other business and Lord Ferrers closed the
                   meeting.




                                                                  w
             Home Office
             Queen Anne's Gate
             LONDON SWIH 9AT




i




    CAS.10
                                                                                        ACTIO** MAH



       AGENDA ITEM                                                    ACTtOH REQUIRED                                             BUM                  DATE REQUIRED


       2.   Kbtter* Arising
                                                                                              r*'

            A. Special Constable*                                     Guidance (a Chief Com tables in the fora of a               Hr Koralcki          Hid 1991
            (Paras 6 »nd 7)                                           c irc u la r on developments concerning specials            FI Division

                                                                      P ilo t p ro jects for the Introduction of a bounty         Hr Komickl           Early 1991
                                                                      for specials                                                f t Division

            B.   Reports of the Working P a r t/ on Police            Draft regulations to Police Negotiating Board and           Hiss Aunfcle         January 1991
            Recruitment and Population. Changes (Para 13)             the 6 forces pilo tin g ttia proposed scheme.               FI Division

                                                                      C larifica tio n concerning te ja l advice on separate
                                                                      regulations

       3.   Early Retirement on the Ground* of Inefficiency           Kane Secretary to reach decision In the lig h t of          Hiss Rurfale         Early 1991
            (Para 21)                                                 w aters* views                                              FI D ivisio n


       4*   Flexible Roataring and S hift System                      Proposals to be discussed In the Police                     PUB O fficial Side   Early (991
            (Para 31)                                                 Negotiating Board

       S.   Any Othar Business

            A. Working Party Report on the provision of               To consider reconmendatlons of report and re la te d        Kr Kornicki          1991
            future chief offic ers                                    consultation arrangements                                   f l Division

            B.   Financial D iffic u ltie s faced by Association of   To arrange discussions between Home Office and              Nr Eggleston         Hid 1991
            Metropolitan Authorities                                  Department of Environment to resolve issue                  Fin Dtv 2

            C.   Guidance on Legal Costs fo r Police Officers         Subject to outcome of current Judicial review to            Hr Kornicki          Dependent upon
                                                                      consider whether there Is e need for fu rth er              FI Oivision          judlclel review
                                                                      guidance or le g isla tio n regarding o ffic e rs 1 legal
                                                                      costs




DQ.1
                                                          ~ w
POLICE ADVISORY BOARD FOR ENGLAND AND WALES

MINUTES OP A MEETING HELD IN ROOM 263, HOME OFFICE, QUEE;
GATE ON 27 FEBRUARY 1990

Present:
Chairman:     The Rt Hon David Waddington QC MP, Home Secretary
Members:      Mr S J Day                      Association of County
                                              Councils
              Mr G Bundred         )          Association of
              Mr R W Gillies       )          Metropolitan Authorities
              Mr G W Jones QPM                Metropolitan Police
              Mr C R Smith CVO QPM            Association of Chief
                                              Police Officers
              Mr L Stowe MBE       )          Superintendents'
              Mr T Hewitt          )          Association


                                              Police Federation


              The Rt Hon The Earl Ferrers )
              Sir Clive Whitmore GCB CVO )
              Sir Richard Barratt CBE QPM ) Home Office
              Mr J A Chilcot
              Mr S Boys-Smith
              Mr M j Addison
Secretariat: Mr R C Yeates     )
             Mrs B Grice       )              Home Office
In
Attendance:   Mr Grenyer                      Association of County
                                              Councils
              Mr P W Michaelson               Association of
                                              Metropolitan Authorities
                                              Police Federation
              Mr C Rayner                     Police Negotiating Board
                                              -Independent Secretariat
INTRODUCTION

1.   The Home Secretary explained that he would have to leave
during the course of the meeting, as he was due to speak in the
House of Commons. When he left, Lord Ferrers would take the chair.
Item 1 : MINUTES OF THE MEETING HELD ON 25 OCTOBER 1988
2.   The minutes of the meeting held on 25 October 1988 were
approved.

Item 2 : MATTERS ARISING
3.   The Home Secretary suggested that any matters arising from the
last meeting should be dealt with under "Any Other Business".

Item 3 : POPULATION CHANGES AND POLICE RECRUITMENT
4.   Introducing the report of the Working Party on Population
Changes and Police Recruitment, which had been circulated with
PAB(90)1, Mr Addison thanked:

     a.   the Superintendents' Association, who had first brought
     the problems which were likely to arise from demographic
     changes to the attention of the Board;
     b.   the members of the Working Party, whose report had been
     agreed virtually unanimously, and who had produced 34
     recommendations of considerable significance;
     c.   all police forces in England and Wales, who had replied
     to the questionnaire circulated by the Working Party and so
     had provided' them with an invaluable starting point.
5.   Mr Addison went on to say that, although the report was
confined to recruitment and retention, it had implications for such
matters as equal opportunities, career development and police
leadership, on which work was being done separately. Section B
contained a good deal of detailed statistical information, which
should be useful to forces. This indicated that, although the
numbers of school leavers would decline steadily, the numbers of
graduates were not likely to diminish. The Working Party's
recommendations were summarised in section F and paragraph 4 of
PAB(90)1 invited the Board to endorse them-
6.   The recommendations fell into four main categories:
     a.   two required early amendments to the Police Regulations;
     b.   over 20 required action in forces, mainly by chief
     constables;
     c.   a few called for consideration by the Home Office;
     d.   six related to issues on which the Working Party could
     not reach final conclusions and recommended that further work
     should be done.
7.   Particularly significant recommendations were that:
     a.   the minimum height requirement for appointment as a
     constable should be abolished. This requirement was now very
     difficult to justify. The Metropolitan Police had announced
     that they would no longer be applying a minimum height
     requirement and other forces had set lower requirements than
     those provided by the Police Regulations. The Working Party
     took the view that the most significant consideration was
     whether or not a candidate was physically fit to do the job of
     a police officer. It was hoped that a test of physical
     fitness, capable of being applied by all forces, could be
     devised in due course, although further work would have to be
     done on this;

     b.   the eyesight requirements for appointment should be
     standardised: there was no case for different requirements to
     be set by individual forces;

     c.   the maximum age limits for appointment should be
     abolished: many forces were now ignoring them and were
     accepting suitable candidates aged 40 or over;

     d.   further work should be done on the possibility of making
     arrangements for part-time working and job-sharing and on the
     need to improve the image of the police service.

8.   Of the recommendations which required action in forces, two
were likely to present particular difficulties. These were those
dealing with the provision of child-care facilities (Recommendation
16) and career breaks (Recommendation 18). Others were designed to
ensure that practices which might serve to deter potential recruits
were eliminated. In particular, forces should seek to reduce
delays during the selection process and should look carefully at
the need for home visits, which were resented by many candidates.
9-          _    felt that further research was needed before the
recommendations on the minimum height and eyesight requirements
were adopted. There was no urgent need for change, since chief
constables already had discretion to accept candidates who did not
meet the present requirements. Mr Addison said that the Working
Party saw no need for delay in implementing these recommendations.
It was desirable to produce a test of physical fitness, which could
be applied nationally, but every force already applied its own
physical fitness test and amendment of the Police Regulations
should not be deferred until a national test had been developed.
10.             said that she was also concerned about
Recommendation 17, which dealt with the re-appointment of officers
in their previous rank after a prolonged break of service. The
OSPREY promotion arrangements were still being developed and it was
not clear how long a qualification obtained under OSPREY would
remain valid. An officer returning after a prolonged break of
service might no longer be qualified for his previous rank.
11, Mr Stowe said that he was concerned over the references in the
report to "reduced standards". These might create potential
problems for the future. Mr Addison said that these references
occurred in Appendix D, which summarised the responses to the
questionnaire. The Appendices were designed only to provide
information and did not necessarily reflect the views of the
Working Party.
12, Mr Smith said that ACPO welcomed the report but its
recommendations should be seen as a totality and it would be wrong
for specific recommendations to be considered in isolation, in his
view, the issues identified by the Working Party should be pursued
energetically now: nothing would be gained by delay. In
particular, further work should be done on:
     a.   the possibility of setting up an emergency reserve.
     There were surges of work in the police service and an
     emergency reserve could be very useful in helping to cope with
     these surges (eg in helping to run HOLMES incident rooms);
     b.   improving the status of the service in the eyes of the
     employment market. The service needed to be seen as a
     possible career for people with a wide range of abilities.
"13* Mr Bundred said that the AMA also welcomed the report, which
contained a large number of sound recommendations. He believed
that the recommendation on cadet schemes provided an ideal
opportunity for a working group to be established to consider how
cadet schemes might be strengthened.

14. Commenting on the recommendation on police housing stocks,
Mr Day asked whether it was still the Government's policy to
encourage the discount sales of surplus police houses. Mr Addison
said that the Government's policy remained unchanged. They did not
want police houses standing empty and those which were surplus to
requirements should be sold at a discount to police officers. But
it was for police authorities to determine which houses were
surplus to requirements, having regard to possible future demands.
If there seemed likely to be an increased demand for provided
accommodation over the next few years, it would clearly not be
sensible to sell off all the houses which were at present
unoccupied, since they might be needed in the future.
TS. The Home Secretary asked whether the Board endorsed the
recommendations in the Working Party's report.             said
that the recommendations had to be seen as a totality. There was
further work to be done and the Working Party would have to be
reconvened. The recommendations should not, therefore, be endorsed
until this further work had been completed, though the Working
Party might, perhaps, report to the Standing Committee, rather than
to the main Board.

16. This view was not generally shared. The Board felt that there
was much in the report over which there was no disagreement and
that the speediest possible progress should be made with those
recommendations which required no further work to be done.
The Board -

Conclusion 1 :   endorsed the proposals in paragraph 4 of PAB(90}1.

Item 4 : GRADUATE ENTRY SCHEME

17. Introducing PAB(90)2, Mr Addison explained that it had been
agreed in discussions in the Working Party that the title of the
Graduate Entry Scheme was misleading. It was not a scheme for the
recruitment of graduates generally, but one which offered
accelerated promotion for graduates assessed as having the
potential to reach the highest ranks of the service. It was
therefore proposed that the name of the scheme should be changed to
the Accelerated Promotion Scheme for Graduates.
18. Hr. Smith agreed and suggested that the name of the Special
Course should be changed at the same time. Mr Chiloot said that
this would be a matter for consideration by the Police Training
Council.

"19•             wondered whether an officer who had been appointed
under tne Accelerated Promotion Scheme would have an entitlement to
accelerated promotion, rather than the opportunity to attain it.
Mr Chilcot said that this would be determined by the prospectus for
the Scheme - which would remain unchanged. It would not be
affected simply because the name of the Scheme had been changed.
The Board -

Conclusion 2 :   agreed that the name of the Graduate Entry Scheme
                 should be changed to the Accelerated Promotion        ^
                 Scheme for Graduates.

Item 5 : SPECIAL CONSTABLES
20. Mr Addison said that PAB(90)3 reported the action which had
been taken as a result of the discussion of the Special
Constabulary at the Board's last meeting. As paragraph 7
indicated, there had been a pilot recruitment scheme in Suffolk;
the script for a recruiting video had been prepared; a Home Office
circular on allowances had been issued; and a slot had been found
in the CPTU development programme for a review of training. The
review would be on the basis of the report of the 1981 PAB Working
Party as far as the duties of special constables were concerned.
It would be preceded by a needs assessment.
21 . The number of special constables was still falling: at the end
of 1989 there were 200 fewer than there had been a year earlier.
Two main measures were proposed to address the problem: a national
publicity campaign, for which the Government had allocated £1.5m,
and further consideration of the case for introducing a bounty.
22. Hitherto, the payment of a bounty had always been rejected but
there was now a greater readiness in forces to give it a try. The
payment of a bounty had been recommended by the Metropolitan Police
scrutiny into the Special Constabulary and it was now proposed that
experiments should be conducted by the Metropolitan Police and one
or two provincial forces from April 1991 onwards.
23. It was proposed that the Metropolitan Police should run an
annual award scheme, with payments being made to officers who had
served for at least 2 years and had worked for a minimum number of
hours. The provincial forces would pay a long service bonus after
4 years' service and a further bonus after 9 years.

24.   The paper also made a number of miscellaneous recommendations:
      a.    (Paragraph 30) The list of ineligible occupations should
      be reconsidered, to permit the appointment of members of the
      medical, nursing and midwifery professions, it being
      understood, however, that priority would have to be given to
      those professions.
      b.   (Paragraph 31) Chief constables should be encouraged to
      use their discretionary powers to retain special constables
      who had reached the upper age limit, if they still had useful
      service to offer.
      c.   (Paragraph 32) Practice seemed to vary widely over the
      question of political restrictions. The Board's views on this
      would be welcome.
      d.   (Paragraph 36) Chief constables should be encouraged to
      consider whether special constables should be given the
      protection of reinforced headgear. The Metropolitan Police
      had already decided to adopt the scrutiny recommendation that
      helmets should be issued to male'special constables and
      reinforced bowlers to women.
[The Home Secretary left the meeting at this point and Lord Ferrers
took the chair]
25.   Mr Smith made the following points:
      a.   Home Office Circular No. 64/1989, which dealt with
      allowances for special constables, did not cover the question
      of sick pay. Problems arose over the entitlement to sick pay
      of special constables who were injured on duty and this needed
      to be pursued as a matter of urgency.
      b.   ACPO accepted the case for experiments with the payment
      of a bounty and would be interested in the results. It
      should, however, be borne in mind that most chief constables
      were operating under severe financial constraints.

      c.   ACPO would look favourably on a relaxation of the
      restriction on the appointment of members of the medical and
      nursing professions. In an emergency, however, the first duty
      of such people would clearly be to their professional
      occupation.

      d.   There might be a case for some relaxation of the
      political restrictions.

      e.   Although a case could be made for providing special
      constables with protective headgear, there were valid
      arguments against doing so. These were that:
           i.   the public needed to be able to distinguish clearly
           between fully trained police officers and part-time
           amateurs; and
           ii. protective headgear might give special constables a
           false sense of security.

      It would be unfortunate if this encouraged them to become
      involved in situations with which their training did not equip
      them to deal.

26. Mr Stowe said that over the years there had been considerable
discussion of the duties of special constables and a point which
had emerged very clearly was that they were dependent for their
efficiency and effectiveness on the co-operation of regular police
officers. He doubted whether at the present time there would be
much support in forces for the payment of a bounty to special
constables.

27•             said that the Police Federation were totally
opposed to the payment of a bounty. The morale of police officers
was at an all-time low: they felt that money was being taken from
them by the Home Secretary's decision on rent allowance. This was
not the right time to be proposing the payment of a bounty and the
issue of protective headgear to special constables. The majority
of special constables did an admirable job. They were not always
treated as well as they would like by regular police officers and
the relationship would become even worse if these proposals were
implemented. The public wanted to see more regular police officers
on the streets. Recruiting more special constables would not
address the problem.

28. Sir Clive Whitmore said that all that was being proposed was
an experiment in two or three areas for a period of 2 years. The
results of the experiment would need to be evaluated, so no final
decision would be taken for some time to come. The object was
simply to reverse the present downward recruitment trend and the
proposal did not seem unreasonable.
29.              said that, nevertheless, the timing of the
proposals was unrortunate. The Government's willingness to spend
money on special constables, at a time when it was taking money
away from police officers, would be bound to attract criticism.
30*            said that the idea of a bounty had been considered
and rejected by Police Advisory Board working parties in 1976 and
1981. It had also been rejected by the special seminar in 1987.
The money for the payment of a bounty would have to come from the
budgets of police authorities and this inevitably meant that less
would be available for the regular police. There was a role for
the Special Constabulary but they could not operate effectively
without the full support of the police service. Surveys in 1986
and 1987 had shown that special constables were being used by
middle management to cover up for manpower deficiencies on the
beat. The present proposals would encourage them to be used in
this way: they were a recipe for disaster.
31. Mr Hewitt supported the Police Federation's comments. Special
constables needed the full support of regular police officers. If
the aim was to recruit more special constables, it made no sense to
antagonise the police service.
32. Mr Bundred was concerned about the cost of a bounty to police
authorities. Once a bounty system was introduced, it could
scarcely be withdrawn without serious effects for recruitment* If
police authorities had a choice between employing one regular
police officer or paying a bounty to 10 special constables, they
would opt for the police officer every time. The provision of
protective headgear was a different matter, if special constables
were to help patrol the streets, it was only fair that they should
be properly protected.

33. Mr Jones said that the Metropolitan Police valued the
contribution made by the Special Constabulary and they were
concerned over the present recruitment and retention problems.
Special constables were now of better quality but numbers were
declining. A bounty might help to prevent premature wastage. All
that was being sought at this stage was the Board's agreement to a
pilot study. As to protective headgear, if special constables were
required to patrol in inner city areas, it was only right that they
should be given proper protection. The Metropolitan Police would
therefore be issuing helmets to male special constables and
reinforced bowlers to women.
34. Summing up the points which had been made, Lord Ferrers said
that there was general agreement that the Special Constabulary made
a useful contribution but there was a divergence of views as to how
the recruitment and retention problem might best be addressed.
Mr Jones had suggested that a bounty should be paid for an
experimental period of 2 years. If it did not produce the desired
results, it could be discontinued. He wondered, therefore, whether
the Board could agree to the proposed experiment,
35. Mr Smith said that he could support the proposed experiment,
provided that the results were carefully evaluated.
said that the Police Federation was totally opposed to it. Rank
and file feeling was running high against the Government and they
saw the use of special constables as a way of reducing overtime.
The principle of a bounty would be bitterly attacked and the
present rapport with the Special Constabulary, which had taken a
long time to build, would be seriously damaged.
36. On the question of headgear, Sir Clive Whitmore wondered
whether it would be feasible to design a special helmet for the
Special Constabulary, Mr Smith said that only the normal police
helmet and the reinforced bowler were available. There was a
delicate balance between giving special constables adequate
protection and giving them a false sense of security. Ultimately,
this would be a decision for chief constables to take. Mr Addison
added that some forces already issued helmets to members of the
Special Constabulary. The Home Office was not making a specific
recommendation that protective headgear should be issued: it was
simply suggesting that chief constables should be invited to
address the issue, albeit with a bias towards helmets and bowlers.
37. Mr Chilcot asked whether the Board wished to address the
question of political activities or whether this should be put on
one side. It was agreed that this should continue to be left to
the discretion of chief constables.
38. Mr Smith stressed the need for the question of compensation
for injuries sustained on duty to be addressed urgently.
Mr Addison said that progress was being made as quickly as
possible in a very complex area.
The Board -
Conclusion 3 :   Took note that -
                 1.   a national publicity campaign was to be
                 conducted;
                 ii. the preparation of a training package by the
                 Central Planning and Training Unit was to go ahead
                 in the Spring.
Conclusion 4 : Invited the Home Secretary to consider the views
                expressed by the Board on the proposal to run pilot
                schemes on the payment of a bounty.
Conclusion 5 : Agreed that guidance should be issued as proposed in
                PAB(90)3 on the questions of ineligible occupations,
                age limits, and the provision of protective
                headgear. The appointment of people engaged in
               political activities should be left to the
                discretion of chief constables.

Item 6 : CERTIFICATES OF SERVICE
39. Introducing PAB(90)4, Mr Addison said that the point at issue
was whether or not certificates of service should show the reasons
for leaving the service. The Working Party had concluded that
there were no strong reasons for this: the certificate needed to
show only the length of service. The Home Office Legal Adviser's
Branch had doubts about the vires of Regulation 21 of the Police
Regulations 1987 and were concerned that any attempt to tinker with
the regulation would draw attention to this. However, they were
prepared to accept that Regulation 21, if amended as recommended by
the Working Party, would be arguably intra vires if the Police
Advisory Board took the view that this was a matter of sufficient
gravity in relation to the administration of police forces to need
to be addressed in legislation. The Board therefore needed to
address the two questions in paragraph 8 of PAB(90)4. The Standing
Committee's answer to both questions had been "Yes", subject to
reservations which had been expressed by the Association of County
Councils.

40. Mr Dav said that the view of the ACC's Police Committee was
that, if an officer was dismissed or required to resign, that
should be shown on his certificate of service.

41 - j ^ a i d        that it was unfortunate that the ACC were now,
in efrect, submitting a minority report after there had been
unanimous agreement in the Working Party. The certificate of
service was not intended to serve as a reference: it was a record
of an officer's service, to which members of the Federation
attached considerable importance. The rules governing its issue
should be in regulations in order to ensure that all Chief Officers
acted consistently. Mr Dav replied that the ACC's elected members
could not support the views of the officer who had represented them
on the Working Party.

42. Mr Smith said that, so far as he was aware, apart from the
police, only the armed forces attached any importance to
certificates of service. He was by no means convinced that there
was a need for a statutory provision requiring certificates of
service to be issued, though he accepted that certificates should
continue to be issued, in a suitable form, as a memento of an
officer's service. Mr Addison said that these arguments had been
carefully addressed by the Working Party but they had accepted the
Police Federation's view that, because of the value traditionally
placed on the certificate in the police service, and of the need to
ensure consistency between forces, issue of the certificate should
continue to be governed by statutory regulations. He asked whether
ACPO had now changed their position on this. Mr Smith replied that
he was expressing a personal view. ACPO would not object to the
proposed amendment to Regulation 21.
        I


43. Mr Bundred said that the AMA supported the proposed amendment
but Mr Dav said that he could not withdraw the ACC's reservations.
44.           asked whether guidance would be issued to chief
constables, as envisaged by the Working Party. Mr Addison
confirmed that this would be done in a covering Home Office
circular if the regulations were amended.
45. Summarising the discussion, Lord Ferrers said that he would
draw the ACC's reservations to the Home Secretary's attention but
he felt bound to advise him that Regulation 21 should be amended as
agreed by the other members of the Board.
The Board -
Conclusion 6 : Noted with approval, Lord Ferrers' summing up of the
               discussion.

Item 7 : ANY OTHER BUSINESS
46. Mr Dav said that the ACC took the view that the problems
arising from the medical retirement of officers who were the
subject of disciplinary proceedings were of sufficient importance
to warrant consideration by the main Board. Mr Chilcot agreed but
said that there was a lot more work to be done in the Standing
Committee before proposals could be put forward for consideration
by members of the Board.
47.              said that a PRSU Working Group on Organisational
Health and Welfare had produced a document aimed at changing
existing shift patterns in the police service. The
recommendations f which were to be considered at the next meeting of
the Working Group, referred to the need for changes in Police
Regulations and proposed the setting up of pilot studies. The
Police Federation needed to examine these proposals in detail. If
it was proposed to accept all, or any, of the recommendations, the
issue should be considered in the Standing Committee. The matter
should not be progressed at the next meeting of the Working Group
on 9 March.
48. There was general agreement that this was a matter either for
the Police Advisory Board or the Police Negotiating Board; the PRSU
Working Group was in no position to give effect to any
recommendations which might emerge. Mr Chilcot added that he
understood that the Working Group was only doing preparatory work
because it was not a deliberative or decision-making body.




        March 1990

Home Office
Queen Anne1s Gate
LONDON SW1
POL/89 70/3/1
Cr. 1
