                                   Police Superintendents                                             67 A. Reading Road
                                                                                                             Pangbourne

                                         Association                                                 Berkshire RG8 7JD

                                                                                                      T el: 0118 984 4005 .
                                             of                                                     • Fax: 0118 984 5642

                                     England and Wales                                  E-mail: PaliccSupetJ @BTIateraeLcom
                                                                                         Website: http^/wvrtvJoliceSupere.cora

 Ref. DCP/WAC

 8 February 1999

  Mr M.LL Hedges, QPM, LL.B
  Chief Constable
  South Yorkshire Police
" Police H eadquarters
  Sm gHill
f? ' ^ffield- S3 SLY


 Dear

 FINANCIAL SUPPORT FOR FORMTER POLICE OFFICERS DAVID DUCKENFIELD AND
 BERNARD MURRAY

  It has come to my notice that at a meeting of the South Yorkshire Police Authority on 5 February it was
  decided to discontinue financial support for the two above named officers. As I understand it that
  decision w as based upon independent legal advice which they had received as to whether there was
  a pow er in law for them to make such financial assistance available, and in particular whether that
  power was available under the Police Act 1996, sections 6 and 88, and the Local Government Act 1972,
  section 111 (1).

   Hom e Office Circular 4/1998 deals w ith the issue of when police authorities can provide financial
".'•■assistance to police officers in legal proceedings and in its introduction says " It is important that police
     Jtcsrs should be able to carry out their duties in the confidence that their police authorities will support them if
    they act hi good faith and exercise their Judgement reasonably,".

  The decision by the South Yorkshire Police Authority has therefore come as a considerable surprise tq>
  the Superintendents' Association and would appear to run counter to all previous beliefs and practices
  of police authorities in supporting both serving and former police officers. I understand th at your
  position, as advised by your Counsel, is that there is clear authority in law for such an action and that
  you intend to seek a determination of this matter by way of Judicial Review.

   This m atter is clearly of national importance for the Police Service and certainly from the perspective
   of the Superintendents' Association I would ask you to take this forward w ith ail due despatch and
   diligence and seek as early a hearing before the High Court as you can possibly arrange.

   .Yours sincerely.


    Des P ark in so n
    C hief S u p erin ten d en t
    M ational Secretary
                                                       03 G
                                                                                           *     • • •




                            Hillsborough Family Support Group

Des'Parkinson
Chief1Superintendent
National Secretary
Police Superintendents Association o f
                                                                                                     ENGL
England and Wales
67 a Reading Road
Pangboume                                                                             SCANNED       -I
Berkshire RGB 7JD


 Ref: DCPAVAC.                                                                       OrUv>!N4L           scakheo




 25 February 1999

 Dear M r Parkinson,

 «           , WA Y orW re M e . Authority, „ parte CM efComtato c (S ~ * f a * * * M ic e


                                                                        SSSK SS:
  which I am the Respondent prosecutor.

  1 am preparing evidence for ,he court. I should be grateful if could answer ,h e f o llo w *
  questions;




                 to provide further details.

     2           Why is this a matter o f national importance, given that the tw o fbrmer officers have the
                 same rights to apply for legal aid as any other citizen.




                  the practice o f Police Authorities to fund proceedings such as these.

         5        The Police Federation has power to fund the defence o f its members in criminal



                      Phone 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151.2361936. E Mafl info@hfsg.org
                    1st Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR
                                                                                                                   j
       proceedings. In what circumstances does it do so, and why, in your experience, does it
       have the power if it is the practice o f Police Authorities to fund the defence?

Given that the case is said to be o f such importance, I do hope you feel prepared to answer
these questions, so that the court can be given as much information as possible.

Yours sincerely




Ann Adlington
Solicitor
