                                                                H o m e O ffice
                                                               QUEEN ANNE'S GATE
                                                               LONDON SW1H SAT




      Our Ref: FEP/90 35/48/167 (S)                                           lAJfsQ.




                  u    u                                   1 1 SEP 1990
                  ^        ,



      In his absence from the office Lord Ferrers has asked me to
      thank you for your letter of 13 July to Mr Moynihan which was
      passed to him because of the transfer of responsibility
      for the Football Licensing Authority to the Horae Office in
      May.  I am sorry for the delay in replying.

      We do, of course, fully share your Association's concern that
      Lord Justice Taylor's important safety recommendations should
      have been quickly implemented. Since the publication of his
      interim report, and subsequently following the final report,
      we have liaised closely with all the responsible authorities
      concerned to ensure that the necessary action has been taken.

      The establishment of the Football Licensing Authority has,
      regrettably, but for practical reasons, taken longer than we
      had hoped. The appointment of the C h a i r m a n , Mr Norman Jacobs,
      was, however, announced by the Home Secretary on 12 July, and
...   I enclose a copy of a Press Release of 29 August announcing
      the appointment of a further six members.         I am sure you will
      agree that this membership provides a good spread and balance
      of relevant expertise; but we have left open two vacancies to
      be filled at a later date when the Authority has established
      itself and we can judge, in the light of experience, what
      other additional qualities and skills could most usefully be
      added to its Membership.
      In the meantime, we have made it clear to the football
      authorities and the football clubs that the primary
      responsibility for implementing Lord Justice Taylor's
      recommendations lies with the clubs themselves, and that the
      delay in setting up the Authority must not be perceived as a
      reason for delay or inaction on their part.




                                                    /The Football



       Chief Superintendent Hewitt
The Football Spectators Act, and Lord Justice Taylor's report,
do, of course, focus on those high risk grounds at which
improvements to safety measures can reasonably be made.
However, it is expected that all those responsible for
ensuring spectator safety at any sports ground will continue
to be vigilant, and follow the advice in the Guide for Safety
at Sports Grounds (the Green Guide). A revised edition of the
Guide is currently out for consultation with interested
parties, and will be published later this year.  If you or the
members of your Association are aware of cases where safety
requirements have not been satisfactorily implemented, these
should, in the first instance, be drawn to the attention of
the local authority responsible for issuing the safety
certificate for the sports ground in question.

An important function of the Football Licensing Authority,
once it is fully operational, will, however, be to keep under
review local authorities' exercise of their safety functions
under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 at sports grounds
at which designated matches are played.  It will be for the
Authority itself to decide how this function should be
exercised, but no doubt it will be in touch, in due course,
with the various authorities involved with football ground
safety, to advise them of the arrangements and procedures
which it proposes to adopt to enable it properly to exercise
its regulatory and advisory function




                                    B NICHOLSON
                              Assistant Private Secretary
      m
                                                   DEPARTMENT
                                                                              * W U | * !/?y   t     ,s
                                                   2 MARSHAM £                ON SWIP 3EBy.;^
                                                                              r=~~-r5ft'^v-
                                                                                          ■
                                                   My ref
                                                   Your ref:   PGW/TGH/W AC
                                                                                               ■i.
                                                                                                     A**±C._.



                                                                         r i 9 JUL f e         J&,

                 Chief Superintendent Trevor G Hewitt Esq
                 Secretary
                 The Police Superintendents Association
                  of England and Wales
                 67A Reading Road
                 Panqbourne     _ ____________
                 Berkshire   RG8 7JD




                 You wrote to Mr Moynihan on 13 July about Lord Justice Taylor's
                 report.
                 However, as the matter seems to be primarily for the Home Office,
                 I am passing your letter to that Department asking them to reply
                 to you direct.




                 A L IS O N W H ITE
                 P R IV A T E SECRETARY




    1004


PtC^CtED FAPen
                              THE POLICE SUPERITITEriDEHTS' ASSOCIATION
                                        OF ENGLAND AND WALES
                                                                                 67A Reading Road
                                                                                 Pangbourne
                                                                                 Berkshire
                                                                                 RQ8 7JD

                                                                                  Tel: 0 7 3 4 8 4 4 0 0 5
                                                                                  Fax: 0 7 3 4 8 4 5 6 4 2
O ur Ref:   ra » /T O V » C
Your Ref:



July 13, 1990



The Hon. Colin Moynihan, Esq, MP
House of Commons
London.   SW1A OAA



□ear Mr Moynihan,

On the 15th April 1989, 95 people died at Hillsborough. Lord Justice Taylor was
appointed on the 17th April 1989.    The Superintendents' Association of England
and wales sought report and comnent from all their Branches and Districts, held
workshop meetings, debated the matter at its Annual Conference and submitted
written and oral evidence to Lord Justice Taylor and his colleagues.

 After a detailed inquiry Lord Justice Taylor produced his report on the 18th
 January 1990. The opening paragraph of Chapter One of the Final Report commences
 with the words "Previous Reports Unheeded" and ends "... there is no point in
 holding inquiries or publishing guidance unless the recommendations are followed
 diligently."-     Since 1924 there have been nine inquiries into deaths and
 disorders at football stadia.    Branches and Districts of this Association have
 registered concern to ensure that positive action should be taken to ensure that
  the Taylor Report does not simply join the list to gather dust!

 The survey of Branches has again been carried out over the last few weeks and
 seventy officers with responsibility either for a Force or a particular club have
 now responded. There are some general views that can be drawn from the responses
 as a whole.     The first major point is that there is still a lack of clarity
 concerning the action which is required from clubs which are not major league and
 occupy designated stadia. The second point that is evident is that whilst some
 clubs have approached the recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor with energy and
 enthusiasm, others have not. We are disturbed to hear that in some clubs, even
  the simplest and cheapest tasks (such as painting gangways a conspicuous colour)
 have not yet been complied with. The seventy responses received indicated that
  in general terms many Forces and areas reported the clubs they werE working with
 were co-operative and progress had been made as planned.               However, problems in
  connection with Statements of Intent. Safety C e r t i f i c a t e s and many other items,
  continue to b e of concern.

                               S e c re ta ry ; Chief Superintendent T. 0. Hewitt
                        A s s is ta n t S e c re ta ry : Chief Superintendent F. G. Wall
                                       2   -




The patchy response that the football industry has given urgently needs central
direction and monitoring.   We are concerned to see that the Football Licensing
Authority is still not in effective operation, nor is it apparently expected to
be so for some months.    We are also disturbed that one of the results of this
will be that the timetables to reduce standing capacity are now thought to be
impossible to be met. The targets to introduce all-seater stadia appear to be
fading into the future.       Even Hillsborough is now to re-open its standing
 terraces we hear.

As far as we can understand from comments in the press, the Home Office have
failed to proceed with the establishment of the Football Licensing Authority for
"administrative reasons” . Our members express the view that the establishment of
the authority as an effective overseeing body and the appointment of its Chairman
is of the greatest urgency, We are totally convinced that it should be headed by
a prominent lawyer or some other independent person and not by someone from
within the football industry or with close associations with it.

It may well be that clubs are doing what they can within the limits of their
finance, but we note from within the responses cases of some clubs displaying a
chilling complacency. Some are clearly unwilling to spend monies on improvements
unless those improvements are required, imposed and failure to provide attracts
sanction.

I should be most grateful of any information that you could give me to enable me
to inform my members of the planned progression to establish an effective
Football Licensing Authority,

Yours sincerely,




 T. G. Hewitt
 Chief Superintendent
 Secretary
