                THE POLICE SUPERINTENDENTS' ASSOCIATION
                         OF ENGLAND AND WALES
                          AH correspondence should be addressed to the Secretary
                                                                              67A Reading Road
                                                                              Pangbourne
                                                                              Berkshire RG8 7JD.
                                                                              Tel: 0734 844005
                                                                              Fax: 0734 845642




16 November 1993



D ear Chief Inspector Beckley.


       POLICE RESEARCH GROUP RESEARCH PROJECT


T h an k you for your le tte r regarding th e above .


I am sorry to h ear th a t you were disappointed w ith m y response to

your original letter. However you will no doubt appreciate th e am ount

of work involved in providing detailed replies to th e five questions you

raised. In addition th ere is th e question of confidentiality. It would be

wrong of me to release any nam es w ithout first getting auth o rity to do

so from th e individuals concerned.


I am quite happy to m eet you here a t a convenient tim e to discuss th e

problem s th a t have been raised so far in you research. If you still th in k

such a m eeting would be beneficial please contact me by telephone to

m ake th e arrangem ents.

                          Yours sincerely,
    I!!**?        W EST M ERCIA CONSTABULARY
                  in partnership with the Home Office




                                        Police Headquarters
                                         Operations Branch
                                                Hindlip Hall
                                                     Hindlip
                                                 Worcester
                                                  W R 3 SSP
\
                         TeL No. 0 9 0 5 -7 2 3 0 0 0 ext. 2521
                                            Date;- IS /1 0 /9 3

             Dear Mr. Parkinson,




           Thank you for you letter of 7th October 1993 in
      reply to my earlier letter. I was very disappointed in
      your reply because I have had many of your
      members express concern to me on the issues
      contained in my research project.
           May I ask if you can spare the time for a
      meeting between us [which should take no longer
     "than one hour] when I can 'explaTrr'irra nutshell the
      problems which have been raised thus far.
           I look forward to a favourable reply,
                         Vours sincerely,




                        Alan Beckley LL.B
                          Chief Inspector
                        Operations Branch

      Superintendent 0 .0 . Parkinson I—
                                       I B.,
      The   Police    Superintendents*  Association          of
      England and W ales
      67 a Reading Road
      PA N G B O U R N E
      Berks.
      RGS 7JD.
                THE POLICE SUPERINTENDENTS' ASSOCIATION
                         OF ENGLAND AND WALES
                     AH correspondence should be addressed to the Secretary
                                                                         67A Beading Road
            >                                                            Pangbourne
                                                                         Berkshire RG8 7JD
                                                                         Tel: 0734 844005
                                                                         Fax: 0734 845642

Our Ref:
Your Ref:


7th October 1993



Chief Inspector A Beckley., LL.B.
Police Headquarters
Operations Branch
Hindlip Hall
Hindlip
Worcester
WR3 8SP


Dear Chief Inspector Beckley

Thank you for your letter of 3rd October.

I note with interest the research project you have e m b a r k e d
upon.  Unfortunately, I am unable to reply in detail to the
five questions you pose because of time constraints.     As you
will appreciate the amount of research involved in providing
detailed answers would be considerable.

 I note that you are contacting individual members of this
 Association and no doubt they will be able to help you collect
 the information you require.

 I am sorry I have not been able to be more helpful, however,                                '■
 may I wish you every success with your research.

 Yours sincerely




 D C Parkinson, LL.B.
 Superintendent
                 W EST M ERCIA CONSTABULARY
                 in partnership with the Home Office
 Srmnn.ffi




                                                                               Pless* rtp lf h>;~
                                                                     Police Headquarters
                                                                      Operations Branch
                                                                            Hindlip Hall
                                                                                Hindlip
                                                                              Worcester
                                                                               WR3 8SP

                                                        TeL No. 0905-723000 ext. 2521
                                                                      Date;- 3/10/93

        Dear Sir/madam,
                 PO U C E RESEARCH GROUP RESEARCH PROJECT
        May 1 introduce myself to you? I am a serving police officer and I am currently
organising a research project I am writing because I believe that you may be able to
assist me. Already, my experience is that in speaking to many o f your members in the
course o f my research, there is widespread concern about the subject o f personal
liability in the area o f public safety.
         1 have been fortunate enough to have been awarded a research grant from the
Police Research Group under the Home Office. Grants are awarded on an annual basis
to stimulate new ideas from police officers and civilians in the police service. The
objective o f die research should be to address any police related problem or develop a
solution, the outcome of which is expected to benefit the police service.
         The research is entitled;-
     'Personal Liability of Police Officers following m ajor or critical incidents/
         The objectives of my research have been defined as follows;-
         1.      Research and document case studies of major incidents and critical
                  incidents where issues of personal liability o f police officers have
                  been raised
         2.      Specify die nature and extent o f liability and related personal issues to
                  police officers involved in policing major incidents and critical
                  incidents, in the following dimensions;-
                  i.      Legal
                  ii      Career
                  Hi      Health
                  iv      Family
                  v       Social
         3.      Identify and develop self-defence strategies and document ways of
                  malting them available to officers.

                                                                                  Contd...
        My reason for writing is to ask i f you have any ideas or case studies for my
research. I have written to all Chief Officers o f Police in this country, the Police
Federation, ACPO Secretariat, and various other contacts and agencies inside and
outside police organisations, including in U.S.A
        Also, I am seeking to compile a record o f case studies o f major incidents and
critical incidents (firearms or fatal incidents) involving police officers and incidents
where police officers have been subject o f personal litigation for events whilst they
were on police duty. I would also ask for details o f persons affected or other contacts
who may be able to assist my research, which I will follow up confidentially.
        To summarise my request, I am asking for,-
         1,     Your views on the subject matter o f my research.
         2~     Case‘'stu3ies ot major incidents in your orgamsatlon. (Brief details)”......
         3.     Case studies of critical incidents in your organisation, (brief details)
        4.      Names o f persons affected by above incidents, or
         5.     Contact points/persons for further details.
         As part of the validation of my research, I have linked up with Wolverhampton
University Legal Studies Faculty, and hope to gain credits for the research to convert
my degree into an MA (Legal Studies). I am looking for sponsorship o f this part o f the
research and ask if you have any suggestions for likely sponsors.
        I hope that the final research report document will assist all police officers in
the U.K. in this vitally important area of their responsibility to have sufficient
information to make reasoned judgements on their responsibility and liability when
faced with dealing with major incidents and critical incidents.
         Finally, as you are one of the organisations most directly affected in this
 specialised field, if you deem it appropriate, I would very much like to meet you to
 discuss the contents o f the research and any other matters you think are worthy of
 consideration, at a mutually agreeable time, date and place,
         I look forward to a favourable reply,
                                 Yours sincerely,




                                   Alan Beckley LL.B
                                     Chieflnspector
                                   Operations Branch

For the attention of the Secretary,
The Police Superintendents’ Association of England and Wales
67a Reading Road
PANGBOURNE
Berks.
RG8 7JD.
"The views expressed in this document are those o f the author and not
     necessarily those o f the author’s force or the Rome office."




            Personal liability of police officers
            following major or critical incidents
                          Research project by
            Chief Inspector Alan Beckley LL.B
                West Mercia Constabulaiy
                          Completed June 1994.

               © 1994 'Crown Copyright (Home Office)1
                   Personal liability of pollcc officers following major or critical incidents




                  Personal liability of police officers
                 following major or critical incidents


Thanks
While I compiled the research, many persons contributed information and advice; general
thanks to them and specific thanks to:


       N o ttingham Trent University libraiy
       BiamshiU Police Staff College Librarians
       Easingwold Emeigency Planning College librarian
       West Mercia Constabulary Training School Librarian
       Mr M. Scoggins, Davies Arnold and Cooper, Solicitors, London.
       Mr A. Barrell, West Mercia Constabulary
       Mis A. Hancock
       Mr G. Hyde, The Police Federation, Surbiton
       Confidential interviewees - Police Officers, Lawyers, other organisations
       The longsuffering family of the author

For reading, checking and suggesting amendments:

       Mr C S. Porteous CBE, Mr P. Sbawdon, Metropolitan Police Service
            Solicitors Department
       Mr L. Martin, Force Solicitor, West Mercia Constabulary
       Mr G. Patrick Gallagher, President, The Gallagher-Westfall Group Inc,
            Virginia' USA
       Dr LK* McKenzie PhD, Institute of Police and Criminological Studies,
            University of Portsmouth
                           Personal liability o f police officers following major or critical incidents




                       Personal liability of police officers
                       following major or critical incidents
Executive overview/contents...........................................................................                                                                      3
         The research report is written in the following format;
Summaiy of recommendations....................................................................... 5
CHAPTER ONE                  Introduction................................................................ *....................                                             8
KvaTmnft<i the lack of information and printed material on the subject, which is, in fact, a vital area of policing
         operations affecting every policc officer in the country. The staggering number of major and critical
         incidents in the recent past is noted and the ways that the police service organisation injures its own
         employees.

C H A PTER TW O              C o ip o n ite L i a b i l i t y .......................................................................................................11
Splits into three major headings;
         •        Corporate liability
                  This section looks briefly at corporate liability of organisations relating to major incidents. The many legal and quad-
                  legal tribunals are listed which may result following a major incident or critical incident- The discussion then turns
                  to the treatment which policc witnesses can expect at such tribunals whose terms o f reference are, oiteisibly, cot to
                  find individual fault Finally, some suggestions to improve the system are listed.
         •        Vicarious liability
                  Vicarious Liability in the police service is a relatively recent legal phenomenon. Before 1964, cadj Constable was
                  individually liable forthe toits (legal wrongs) he/she committed. This section sets out the cumnt legal situation in
                  relation to major incidents «&d critics! iocidfflts, the issues patm ttt to polic® ofiloen, and Bss&Stt the prote&iOQ it
                  affords to the individual.
         •        Health and Safety at Work
                  Health and Safety at Work legislation has been in existence for over twenty years, but bas had little effect on police
                  working practices and procedures. This sertion highlights some relevant issues and suggests a method of
                  implementing safe place o f work procedures for all employees, police and civilian siqiport staff.

CH A PTER TH REE               P e rs o n a l L ia b ility           ....................................................................................................... 3 1
Examines the liability and responsibilities of the individual police officer - an area of the law where information
is sadly lacking. It breaks down into four specific subject areas;
         •        Public Safety
                  This segment looks at -which organisations are responsible for public safety under specific circumstances. Police art
                  as the 'safety net' where an appropriate organisation is not available or is ineffective, but there are few, if any police
                  powers to msuxe that safety measures are adequate and commensurate wfeh the nsks.
         •        Firearms incidents
                   Firearms incidents are becoming more common and occur an a daily basis. Lethal weapons should beissued and used
                   sparingly in police operations. Whm they are used, there is a thorough examination o f the process. Police officers
                   authorised to cany firearms and firearms incident commanders must be prepared to answer in tribunals and courts for
                   the actions ihey take in operational policing incidents. This papa- sets out the legal issues and suggests methods of
                   dealing with or mitigating legal and operational problems associated with injuries and deaths from sudi incidents.
                   Contingency planning
                   This section looks at the legal liability o f police officers relating to Contingency Planning. It covers the area o f civil
                   law liability, criminal law liability, the objectives of contingency pluming, and a 'sclf-protection’ guide to policc
                   officers.
          •       Legal representation and individual problems
                   Police officers, since 1964, have been protected by their Police Authorities in respect o f legal actions taken against
                           Personal liability o f policc officers following major or critical incidents




                  them. This segment seeks to examine the extenU scope and problems associated with that protection. Individual
                  problems arise to police officers following their involvemoit in major or critical incidents. Some o f these problems
                  are listed which inelude legal reprcsmtation cover from the police authority after retirement, separate legal
                  representation, recovery from the officer, punitive damages, and malicious abuse o f power.


CHAPTER FOUR                 Effects of major and critical incidents on careerf social/ family . , 4S
Covers two specific areas;
         •       Grievances
                  Policc officers' careers have suffered merely becausc they were involved in major or critical incidaits. However,
                  the officers rarely complain or submit to 'grievance procedures'. This section looks at the types of discrimination,
                  and why police officers do not become 'whistleblowers’.
         •       Police Discipline Procedure
                 This part looks at Police Disciplinary procedures which are about to be dianged by legislation, and suggests the
                 possible outcome. Police Disciplinary enquiries arc discussed along with policc officers susp^ided from duty. It
                 concludcs with discussion on the cfifeds on the families of police officers who are affected by major or critical
                 incidents.


CHAPTER FIVE                Police officers' health                         .....................   ,                              . . . . 58
Examines the provision of 'Critical Incident De-briefing' for police officers following major or critical
       incidents, to prevent the onset of psychological injury.

CHAPTER SIX                 Findings and recommendations . ............................                                           66
Discusses the findings o f the research, and lists the main areas of concern along with recommendations on
        the following;-
        •        Law of corporate liability to be codified and brought into line with European principles.
        •        Many tribunals dealing with major incidents combined into one hearing.
                 Public safety - clear liabilities/responsibilities of organisations.
        •        Risk assessment for contingency planning - more scientific methods of assessment.
        •        Retired police officers should be covered for legal representation.
                 Criminal Injuries Compensation Board - to operate an equitable award system.
        •        To increase the credibility of Grievance Procedures in police forces.
                 Police Disciplinary proceedings should be fair and just,
        ■        Critical Incident De-briefing procedures should be adopted by all police forces.
        •        Police officers of all ranks should ensure they are adequately insured for legal protection
        •        The effectiveness of Staff Associations
        •        Role/responsibilities of the policc - is a Royal Commission required?
        •        Police training to be enhanced to include specific instruction On personal liability of police
                 officers.

Appendix A       Recent disasters in the United Kingdom . . .                                                                     76
Appendix B       Symptoms of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder                                                                       77
Appendix C       Cases and references        .................                                                                    78
                 Personal liability o f policc officers following major or critical incidents




           Personal liability of police officers
           following major or critical incidents

                  Summary of Recommendations


1   Law of coiporate liability to be codified and brought into line with
    European principles.
            The management of companies, apparently, cannot be prosecuted or brought
    to book for 'sloppy' management practices when they are responsible for major
    disasters that resulted from poor safety procedures and lack of preventive measures,
    except a few successful prosecutions under the Health and Safety at Work Act. In
    extreme cases, poor management has led to serious injury and deaths. Employees low
    down in the management line have been criticised, but the overall policies of a
    company or organisation should instill the quality of safety into all aspects of the
    company business. This is not being done at present and top management is not held
    accountable for its negligence in this area A fundamental overhaul of coiporate
    liability law is required to bring English law in line with that in Europe.


2   Many tribunals dealing with major incidents combined into one hearing.
            Following a major or critical incident, up to five legal or quasi-legal courts will
    be sitting to hear, ostensibly, the same evidence, and come to separate conclusions.
    It would be more logical to combine all these procedures into one hearing with the
    responsibility to decide all the issues simultaneously. This would greatly reduce legal
    costs, reduce the psychological burden on witnesses, injured parties and victims, and
    finalise the enquiries without the present lengthy delays.



3   Public safety - clear liabilities/responsibilities of organisations.
            Because the law in relation to public events is unclear, and leaves the problem
     (by default) to Police, this subject should be the subject of legal debate and statutory
     intervention.



                                                 5
              Feisonal liability o f policc office is following major or critical incidents




Retired police officers should be covered for legal representation.
        There exists a loophole in the provision of legal representation to police
officers in that it ceases upon retirement. This is an unjust burden on men and women
who have given good service to the police force and community over a period of
many years. If the retired officer can prove he/she was acting in good faith, legal
representation ought to be provided, as a matter of course, by the Police Authority.


Criminal Injuries Compensation Board - to operate an equitable awaid
system.
       Now, it is proposed that the system of reckoning awards should be changed to
a fixed 'tariff scheme. This is unfair to victims who have lost their livelihood.


To increase the credibility of Grievance Procedures in police forces.
        So that discrimination and wrong practice is uncovered in police forces,
'whistleblowers' must be encouraged to come forward. It will be necessary to promote
a trusting and caring climate within the police service before this can be fully
achieved.


Police Disciplinary proceedings should be fair and just
        In the proposed changes to the Police Disciplinary Regulations, the position of
individual police officers will be considerably worsened. A system promoting the
rules of natural justice and fairness is required.


Critical Incident De-briefing procedures should be adopted by all police
forces.
       Following major and critical incidents, in the interests of the individual police
employee and the organisation, the process of Critical incident De-briefing should be
adopted by all police forces.


Police officers of all ranks should ensure they are adequately insured for
legal protection.
        For reasons stated in the body of the research report, every police officer
should consider his/her individual situation and would probably conclude that legal
protection insurance is necessary.
                  Personal liability o f policc officcis following major or critical incidents




11   The effectiveness of Staff Associations
            In interviews with police officers who have been victims of major or critical
     incidents, apparently police Staff Associations should look at the provision of support
     for their members. Also, training in aspects of support may be necessary for staff
     association personnel at Force level.


12   Role/iesponsibilities of the police - is a Royal Commission required?
            Many areas of police responsibility and liability are not covered by relevant
     law or codes of practice.   It is time that this situation was rectified by a Royal
     Commission examining the roles and responsibilities of the police service.


13   Police training to be enhanced to include;-
            Legal aspects of major and critical incidents
            Health and Safety at Work legislation
            Legal liability/responsibility relating to Firearms incidents
            Effects on police officers of major and critical incidents
            These                       spring from the many reasons and justification
     contained in the body of the research report.
                       Peisonal liability of police officcis following major or critical incidents




                                         CHAPTER ONE


                                      Introduction

        The motivation for commencing the research project was the lack of information and
advice available in a crucial area of police operations. Police officers are ignorant of their
legal liabilities and responsibilities in relation to major and critical incidents. Major incidents
are rare occurrences, but when they happen, police officers, of necessity, have to learn very
quickly what is expected of them. Whenever a major incident is studied or debriefed, there
is always a statement to the effect that 'there was a steep learning curve'
        This should not be. The public have the right to expect experience and expertise from
their police service when it takes the role of coordinating emergency services at the scene of
a major incident. Training plays its part and should not be decried, but there is a worrying
lack of expertise and an even worse lack of information available to build that expertise in
this specialised field. This report attempts to redress this dearth of information and hopes to
encourage and motivate others to contribute.
        There are many police officers with experience of dealing with major incidents and
skills which would be of use to others, but it seems they are jealously guarded. We need to
uncover those skills, talk about them and train police officers of all ranks to know and use
them. Once the skills have become standard and familiar to all, the safety of the public will
be enhanced by means of the more effective coordination of emergency services.


Literature Review
       The research project apparently started with a knowledge base of nil. With such a
general title as 'the personal liability of police officers following major and critical incidents',


                                                   8
                     Personal liability o f police officers following major or critical incidents




it might be supposed that police libraries would offer a long and varied bibliography list. Not
so. There is not one volume on the subject in the major police libraries in this country. The
research has been completed through painstaking investigation of law libraries, periodicals,
maoa7ini«; and what is most important, through personal interviews. Having performed the
process of searching for information, it is not surprising that police officers are uninformed
on the subject. Without persistence, travel, and time, the completion of the research would
have been impossible. Information is available, but it is just hard to obtain and still harder
to collate into an easily understandable format.


Relevance to the individual police officer
       This document will be of use, and should be of interest, to every police officer in the
country. It is about how they can expect to be treated by the police service if they are
involved in a critical or major incident, and how they should react. Although every police
officer may not be involved in a major incident, almost everyone will know another officer
who was, or someone involved in a critical or firearms incident Special treatment is given
in this study to firearms incidents, as they are becoming more commonplace. That section
will tell the reader what to expect to happen at the incident and after.                     More general
information is given on major incidents and contingency planning where procedures vary
between police forces.      Individual police officers ought also to be aware of how their
organisation should be reacting towards their personal welfare.


Relevance to the police service
        This research has been completed in virgin territory, but its topic is essential subject
matter to every police force in the country. If policies are not in place for the welfare of
police officers who are expected to give their best endeavours under testing circumstances,
it is the fault of the police force. Individual police officers are entitled to expect that their
welfare will be of paramount importance to the police organisation - if for financial reasons
alone. Quality of service can only be achieved with a well-trained, well-motivated, healthy
                      Personal liability o f police office is following major or critical incidents




and happy workforce. Welfare for police officers is the starting point to achieve this,


Injmy to the workforce.
       It does not take long to compile a list o f ways that the organisation injures the police
workforce because of contact with major or critical incidents. The reader will learn o f many
as a reward for persevering with this text. Add to that injuries received on duty by way of
assaults and accidents and we can quickly see that this is an area that management should
consider carefully.


The way forward
       Because of the dearth o f information on this subject, it will be necessary to consider
some background law and procedures relating to major and critical incidents. All topics will
be discussed at two levels, that of the organisation and that of the individual. In this way,
at the end of the document, both parties should know what to expect of each other, and what
are good and bad practices.       The findings of the research are set out along with some
recommendations. Findings and recommendations are no use without ACTION.
                      Personal liability of police officers following major or critical incidents




                                        CHAPTER TWO


                             Corporate Liability

Overview
       This chapter deals with the background into the law in relation to corporate liability.
It does not seek to go into legal argument or detail, but attempts to give an overview of the
subject. The chapter is split into three main areas,
               •       general coiporate liability
               •       vicarious liability
               •       health and safety at work
       These areas have a major influence when a critical or major incident occurs in respect
o f the police force and the individual police officer.


                                 General Coiporate Liability
Introduction
       This section will examine the responsibility o f commercial companies and police
forces after their involvement in major and critical incidents. There are a multitude of legal
stages through which an individual case progresses before it reaches its conclusion. The
process may take many years and it is difficult to predict the outcome of cases. Corporate
liability and the various legal and quasi-legal tribunals are listed, along with a suggestion for
simplifying the process.


Corporate liability
       The term ’corporate liability' covers an extremely wide range of risk as far as


                                                    11
                      Personal liability o f police officers following major or critical incidents




 commercial companies are concerned and is a branch o f 'vicarious liability' which is dealt
with later in this chapter. This section seeks to give an overview into the complex legal
issues relating to the subject which is an area of the law in which some solicitors practices
specialise.
        There is a recognised hierarchy of solicitors' partnerships that form into a management
and organisation structure to produce 'group actions' on behalf of victims of a disaster. Group
actions are formed to join the legal actions of individual victims together into a combined
legal force to counteract the financial and legal resources of large companies, thereby
balancing the rights and increasing the chances of success to gain compensation for victims.
        A Manchester based law firm, Pannone Napier, has acted on behalf of plaintiffs being
the victims of disasters, their own clients and also solicitors representing other victims, at
almost every disaster since the early 1980s. This has the distinct advantage of building up
expertise and experience in this unusual field of the law. Police should be aware that this
expertise exists and be prepared to interact and cooperate as far as possible. The group action
will move very swiftly into action to become one powerful organisation and mouthpiece for
many victims.
       Law in this area is not dormant and, in fact, following several disasters in recent years,
has developed considerably. It seems that, when a disaster happened in the past, the workers
who, possibly by fault or omission, were partly to blame were held wholly and exclusively
responsible for injuries and deaths.
       Following several highly-publicised cases, the current strategy would be to involve
management at the highest level of an organisation to answer allegations of fault or
negligence. Legal doctrine is gradually being formulated in the area of corporate liability
since the start of this century, but one area of certainty is that a corporation could not be
charged with murder, as life imprisonment is the punishment for conviction. A corporation
could be found guilty of most offences of 'strict liability'.
       There has been little success in the way of establishing responsibility and/or liability
at the highest level of management, but this is the direction in which the law is developing.


                                                  12
                        Personal liability o f police officere following major or critical incidents




It has been suggested that there should be a change in the law to reflect current European
practices, and that it is grossly unfair to blame low-level operatives for the failures of higher
management for 'sloppy' practices or nonexistent safety measures.
       Research work has been completed in the area of 'management culture' which reveals
little or no regard for safety measures. Further research is being carried out by Disaster
Action, an organisation formed from survivors of disasters, in the Corporate Responsibility
Project. The objective of this work is to raise the general level of corporate responsibility
awareness within government, Parliament, sectional interest groups, the regulators and the
corporate sector.


Corporate Manslaughter
       It is possible that a commercial organisation could be involved in allegations of
corporate manslaughter if the company had taken responsibility for public safety and a
disaster occurred. It is doubtful whether a police force could be accused, as a police force
is not a corporation.
       I f a police force could be charged with an offence of corporate manslaughter, there
may also be liability where an event takes place without the active support of the police force.
The police are exposed to liability as they are the 'safety net' o f society when the organisers
o f the event are found wanting, (see chapter three * Public Safety.)
       The law relating to corporate manslaughter is being examined constantly, but at
present, there are no concrete proposals or legislation.


Other developments
       Besides the developments in the field of corporate manslaughter to track down poor
management practices and punish them, there are moves to make management more
accountable in two other areas. First, in the field of Health and Safety at Work, management
will be criminally liable for offences committed against the Act involving unsafe working
practices as described later.          Second, it has become apparent that Police Discipline
                      Personal liability o f police office re following major or critical incidents




Regulations will be aimed, not only at the operative level, constable and sergeant, but also
at the middle management level where management policies or strategies have led to the
alleged shortcoming of the police, (see chapter four - Police Discipline Regulations)


Many Tribunals
        Persons implicated in major incidents or critical incidents, including police officers,
should be aware that there are many interests involved following such an incident. In view
of this, witnesses, 'actors' and other participants should prepare themselves to give evidence
in many courts and tribunals, for many years to come. It is not unusual for legal proceedings
to last six years after a major incident. There is a possibility of all o f the below listed courts
or tribunals to participate in the legal processes encompassing a police officer's duties;
                       Public Enquiry
               *       Criminal Trial
                       Health & Safety investigation
                       Inquest
               *       Police Disciplinary Hearing (Police Complaints Authority)
                       Civil Court claim.
       Each process takes a toll on the officer, and gives clever banisters opportunities to
establish blame or shortcomings. Frequently, attacks are aimed at police officers.


Public Enquiries
       Although much has been said by the legal profession that the role of a public enquiry
is not to apportion blame, nor allow self-incrimination, experience shows the reverse is true.
The forms of 'public enquiry' are; Royal Commission, Select Parliamentary Committee of
Inquiry, Departmental Enquiry,        Security Commission, Statutory Inquiry, and finally, an
inquiry under the provisions of the Tribunals of Inquiry (Evidence) Act 1921. Each of the
forms have different attributes and terms of reference, and are chosen at the outset for being
appropriate to the particular circumstances of the incident in question.                    There is some


                                                   14
                          Personal liability o f police officer; following major or critical incidents




    assistance, in the form of written documents, to aid the police force that faces the first public
    enquiry.
           Senior politicians have suffered recently at the hands of a closed tribunal, when the
    presiding judge and his counsel were described as "detective, inquisitor, advocate and judge."

I   The Scott 'Anns to Iraq' Enquiry was not, however, a public enquiry, nor a statutory tribunal.
           Public enquiries offer greater scope to participants to cross-examine witnesses and

9   protect themselves. Evidence given in good faith to a public enquiry will come back to haunt
    the helpful witness through the legal chain to the final link o f the civil claims court. In fact,

5   there are over 650 civil claims resulting from the Hillsborough disaster, and legal action is
    not yet finalised.
           The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, the police force covering Hillsborough,
    requested a public enquiry. Current legal advice would be not to request one on the grounds

9   o f cost alone. Clear guidelines were issued on the conduct of tribunals o f inquiry by the
    Salmon Commission that were endorsed by a Government White Paper in 1973. Judging by
f   some cases, the 'six cardinal principles' to minimise hurt and injustice in inquiries are not
    being complied with.


    Criminal trials and Health and Safety investigation.
9           Police officers are well aware o f the objectives o f criminal trials, and should foresee,
    that where they are the direct cause of bodily injury or death during the course of their duty
I   in a major or critical incident, they may be charged with an offence o f assault, manslaughter
    or murder.
I           There are few examples, in this country, of this happening. There may be a worrying
    wait for officers while evidence is considered by the Director of Public Prosecutions. Police
    officers will also have to suffer the indignity of being investigated and possibly suspended
    from duty, (see chapter four - Police Discipline Procedure.)




                                                        15
                      Persona] liability o f police officers following major or critical incidents




Inquests
       The role of an inquest is a fact-finding exercise, and not a method of apportioning
guilt. However, the verdict of 'unlawful killing' from involuntary manslaughter which may
be brought in by a jury, despite possible legal advice to the contrary, will indicate that the act
of an individual who had a duty to act was a substantial cause of the death. Conversely, a
finding from the inquest of 'accidental death' will surely indicate no possible criminal charges
of manslaughter. Relatives of loved ones who perished in a disaster will therefore pin much
hope on the verdict of an inquest


Police Disciplinary Enquiries
       Police officers should be well aware of the objectives and process of police
disciplinary enquiries.   Injuries or deaths resulting from police action will be subject of
mandatory referral to the Police Complaints Authority (PCA), and enquiries will be supervised
by that authority.
       In the case study of the Hillsborough Football Stadium disaster, there were no police
disciplinary proceedings. This was not because there was lack of a 'prima facie1case against
police officers; it was because the officer in charge of the incident had retired on medical
grounds. In fact, there was a joint allegation of neglect of duty against two officers, one of
whom had retired. The PCA decided that the allegation against the remaining serving officer
could not be 'fairly heard' and was therefore dropped.
       In critical incidents involving discharge of police-issued firearms, a similar process
would take place.
       During research, little information has been found to show that police officers have
been unfairly treated when investigated under the Police Discipline Regulations, following
major or critical incidents. However, information has been forthcoming that officers, who
have been found to be acting in the execution of their duty and even commended on their
actions, have been treated unfairly by being 'posted' for no apparent reason.
                        Personal liability o f police officeB following major or critical incidents




Civil Courts claims
       Civil Court claims for damages may take many years to come to fruition. It is not
unusual for six years to elapse before a claim for negligence or personal injury is heard.
Police officers will usually be a witness and not a defendant in such cases, but it is possible
for a police officer to be held negligent. The police officer will, of course, suffer the shock
o f recalling and reliving traumatic events when giving evidence and may be questioned on
his/her acts or omissions many years after the event.


Other problems during litigation.
       There may also be problems for police officers relating to proper legal representation,
and support from staff associations, colleagues and his/her police force, (see chapter three -
'Legal representation'.)
       One issue that may affect the number o f civil court claims is the introduction of
'contingency' funding for lawyers. Research has shown that legal advice is divided on the
effect this will have on the number o f contested claims in court. The scheme has not been
commenced at the time of writing, as the Government has yet to put through the commencing
order, however, the statutory framework is in place. This is a similar system to that in the
United States o f America o f a 'nO'win, no-fee' representation. In this country the plaintiff
would be responsible for the costs o f the defendant if his/her case was lost, but insurance is
available to cover that eventuality. The system brings the availability of a legal remedy into
the financial range o f the average person, but also may lead to an increase in spurious or
vexatious litigation.


Suggested improvements in the system
          As stated above, this area o f the law is changing and evolving. There is also pressure
from European jurisprudence to instill an element of corporate liability into the English legal
system.
          Looking at the problem from the victim's view, there are five things that the survivors,
                     Persona] liability o f police officers following major or critical incidents




bereaved relatives and the public want to know following a disaster;-
       1      how it happened;
       2      how each deceased met his or her death;
       3      how the disaster could have been avoided;
       4      health and safety factors;
       5      assessment and apportionment of blame.
       It is difficult to piece together the answers to those questions in the fragmented
proceedings of the English legal system, which appears to thrive on inconsistency and
complexity.
       There has been a suggestion from a leading lawyer in this field that all the legal
tribunals resulting from major incidents or disasters should be combined.                    Thus all the
tribunals listed above, except the Police Disciplinary procedure, would be dealt with by One
court at one time and place.
       This suggestion makes eminent sense for the many reasons. Above all, it would take
away the pain and trauma for witnesses relating their horrific evidence on several occasions,
and would make for certainty of the outcome of a case. The system of the Tatal Accident
Enquiry' under Scottish law equates well to the suggested procedure. The Scottish system
appears to work well in practice, under the supervision of the Procurator Fiscal. This would
also take away the inconsistencies that occur when the several investigating agencies put
different emphases on safety and criminal offences.




                                      Vicarious Liability


What is it?
       Vicarious Liability is a well-established legal doctrine following a line o f decided
cases in civil law. The doctrine sets out the liability of the employer (master) for the torts
(civil wrongs) o f the employee (servant) committed while in the course o f employment.
                      Personal liability o f policc ofGccrs following major or critical incidents




Before 1964, the office of constable was not covered by this legal doctrine, in fact, the total
opposite, that constables were not employees had been established in decided cases.
       The office o f constable, as every police recruit well-knows, is an ancient one.             It is
not classed as an 'employee', a fact which has caused some embarrassment when introducing
European Community legislation. Resulting from this, no-one was the 'master', a phrase
usually used in the employer/employee relationship, of the constable; he/she was therefore
responsible for his/her own actions and liabilities. When a constable committed a civil wrong
or tort, such as assault or wrongful arrest, he/she could therefore be personally liable for
damages in the civil courts.
       During the Royal Commission on the Police in 1962, the Willink report, the matter
o f the legal position o f the constable was discussed, and it was recommended that *the
peculiarly personal nature of the constable’s responsibility' should remain. The 'responsibility'
is the very wide discretionaiy powers, responsibilities and independence the office exercises.
However, the Commission reported that a person who was wronged or injured by a constable
had no means o f redress against anyone other than the individual constable, who was
personally liable for torts committed by him/her.             This caused problems in that proper
damages or compensation could not be awarded to successful litigants due to the limited
financial means o f the individual constable.
       In view o f this, the Commission recommended that the Police Authority should be
liable for the tortious acts of constables while acting in the execution of their duly.
Constables would be viewed in the same way as Crown servants, who had been similarly
personally liable before The Crown Proceedings Act of 1947. The recommendation was
translated into law in Section 48 of the Police Act 1964. For the purposes of legal actions
against a constable, the chief constable is 'vicariously liable’ for the torts o f the constable
while he/she is acting in the execution of duty.
       Any damages, legal costs or charges for legal representation will be payable from the
Police Fund, after sanction by the Police Authority. Advice and guidance on the operation
of this section was given to police forces in England and Wales in Home Office Circular
                      Personal liability of police officers following major or critical incidents




77/1987. The scope and protection offered by this provision is discussed in chapter three and
reveals that police officers should not rely solely on its protection, (see chapter three - Legal
representation.)


The extent of vicarious liability
        The extent of the vicarious liability of the chief constable for acts committed by
constables, is dependant on many factors, which will be covered. There are also a number
of issues on related matters that are o f interest to the discussion. The format will be as
follows;-
                       Extent of liability - restrictions by the courts
               *       Civil claims - general information
                       Duty of care - the law of negligence
                       Insurance - areas of concern
               *       Training of officers - adequacy/sufficiency
                       Constables acting outside the execution of their duty


Extent of liability - restrictions by the courts
       Research into decided cases in the area of vicarious liability and liability in general
reveal that the courts have been kind to chief constables. This is not because judges have a
particular benevolence towards police officers, it is became of the practical nature of policing.
Police officers cannot be forced to concentrate on detecting specific crimes to the detriment
of others as this would open up a floodgate of responsibility and liability. Nor can police
officers be directed to deal with particular types of crimes or to patrol particular areas as this
would take away the discretionary nature of the office.
       However, police officers do have a restricted 'duty of care' towards members of the
public. A significant factor, when courts are deciding on police responsibility in negligence
cases, is the aspect of public policy It may be necessary for example, occasionally, for police
officers to cause damage in the public interest.
                        Peisonal liability o f police officers following major or critical incidents




          la deciding a case of alleged negligence by police, the civil court will ask whether it
is in the best public interests to find the police liable and whether it will reduce the
effectiveness of the police in their public duty. It is difficult to predict what a court will
subsequently decide when first considering taking legal action or defending an allegation.
Historically, courts have generally decided it is in the interests of public policy that powers
o f police are used with discretion and that chief constables have the right to decide how to
deploy police resources operationally.
          In addition, the responsibilities of managing policing operations may mean that senior
police officers, on behalf of their employers, are not liable to individual officers under their
command if the officers are injured in attacks by rioters.




Civil claims - general information.
          The research project by Superintendent Brian McCargo, entitled 'C ivil A ctions
Against the P o lice'is probably the only work which is specifically relevant to the police, in
this area of the law. This is an excellent publication that lists all the relevant factors, but
should be compared to the vast number o f publications for would-be litigants against the
police.
          It appears that lawyers who specialise in this area are increasingly advising their
clients, who believe they have a grievance, to sue the police rather than use the police
complaints system. According to a multitude o f sources, suing the police is a growth industry
which may be fuelled by the introduction of the system of 'contingency funding' of lawyers.


Duty of care - the law of negligence
          An individual police officer will never be liable for purely accidental circumstances.
However, all police officers have a ‘duty of care' to protect members of the public, their
colleagues, and themselves against personal injury arising from foreseeable events. The 'duly
of care1is a well-recognised legal rule which a line of decided cases has built into a whole
                      Personal liability o f police office is following major or critical incidents




doctrine of the law under the heading of 'negligence'.
        To establish liability, it is first necessary to prove the existence of a legal duty of care.
This, due to several decided cases, is more difficult than it would appear. The plaintiff must
first ensure that the claim does not fall foul of 'public policy' restrictions, (see Extent of
liability - restrictions by the courts)
       Second, it is necessary to prove a breach of that duty of care, once established. The
courts have again been reluctant to grant wide interpretation of this rule. Strict interpretation
of location and connection known as 'proximity' with the incident is necessary. To satisfy this
rule, it is necessary for the plaintiff to prove causal connection with the incident.
       Third, it is necessary to prove that damage resulted from the breach of duty.                  Where
major or critical incidents are concerned, the 'damage' will usually consist of personal injury
or death. However, there is an extension to physical injuiy under which psychological injury
can be compensated under the 'nervous shock’ line of cases. This area of the law relating to
negligence is a specialism in its own right, and a recent case decided the limits of possible
claimants who suffer because of watching a traumatic incident on the television.
       The following two important points should be remembered:
               (a) liability springs only from what is foreseeable, and
               (b) as operational effectiveness increases, vulnerability to civil action decreases.


Insurance - areas of concern
       This aspect, on an individual level, will be discussed in chapter three, but police forces
should be aware of several issues.
First, the involvement of insurance companies Can take many forms; public liability,
       employers liability, professional indemnity, personal accident, legal expenses.
Second, there will be an 'aggregate indemnity limit'. That is, the insurance cover will only
       cover to a pre-specified financial level. Police forces must be sure that claims will not
       exceed that level.     Also, insurance policies may be subject to an 'excess' sum of
       money in respect of each claim.


                                                   22
                        Personal liability o f police officers folkm ing major or critical incidents




Third, the coverage o f police officers must be examined to discover whether all contingencies
          are covered by insurance.
Fourth, whether the possible costs o f defence or enquiry costs are fully accounted for and
          covered by insurance.       Legal representation is expensive for the high quality of
          advocacy required.
          Most police forces (or police authorities) will be insured against legal liability. This
may remove the power o f decision making from the chief constable and pass it to the
insurance company. In cases o f high liability, this does not appear to have caused a problem,
but it is a possibility. Insurance companies are operated on a commercial basis and look at
a legal case dispassionately to establish an 'economic point of settlement' (EPS). This point
is arrived at when it is financially cheaper to settle with the plaintiff ’out o f court' rather than
take the case to trial. The EPS may be arrived at, but die chief constable may not wish to
dispose o f a case in this manner because he/she wanted the legal liability issue or surrounding
issues o f accountability to be decided in court. There may be a clash of interests if this
occurs.     Settlements out o f court may also lead to loss o f morale in police officers.


Training o f officers - adequacy/sufficiency
          Legal cases relating to law enforcement in this country frequently follow patterns
which have been established in the United States o f America In view of this, police forces
should be aware of legal trends involving policing operations in that country at State and
Federal court level.     One area of the law is that of 'failure to train’. There have been
numerous awards for failing to train police officers which emanate from two decided cases.
The cases concluded that, where personal injury results from a police activity, liability will
result to the police department when they have failed to train their officers adequately. This
area of the law is already being tested in this country in relation to firearms incidents. In
legal proceedings firearms officers and firearms incident commanders will always be
questioned as to their experience and expertise. Probably, the first case o f 'failure to train'
is not far away in this country.
                      Personal liability o f police officers following major or critical incidents




       This chain of litigation includes the other areas of: negligent appointment, negligent
retention, negligent assignment, negligent entrustraent, negligent failure to direct, negligent
failure to supervise. There is no shortage of categories o f liability to establish a case against
a police force.
       Of course, police officers in the United States o f America are also liable for failing
in their 'duty of care', including a ’failure to provide equal protection1. There is advice
available to law enforcement agencies in the USA regarding protection from lawsuits. Not
surprisingly, the advice is the same as that which would be pertinent to this country.




Constables acting in purported performance of duty.
       The only aspect of this law which has not been covered yet is that o f 'acting in
purported performance of duty'. There are few decided cases to assist interpretation of the
law in this area. However, where the act of the constable is clearly unlawful, and could not,
under any circumstances, be regarded as normal police practice, it will not come within the
protection of vicarious liability.    Not only will the constable be personally liable for the
unlawful behaviour, but also the chief constable will not be vicariously liable for the wrongful
act.


Other areas of possible liability
       There may be liability under the law of contract where police services have been paid
for as there will be expectation of performance. Also, where police hold themselves out to
do a specific task and fail to do so, they may be liable. There may be questions of criminal
liability, but police officers should be conversant with this area.
                      Personal liability o f police officers following major or critical incidents




                                 Health and Safety at Wodt

Your responsibilities.
        Health and Safety at Work affects everyone. Under the principal legislation, health
and safety is not only the responsibility o f management; an employee also has general duties
to take reasonable care for him/herself and other persons who may be affected. Employers
are also responsible for ensuring the safety of persons other than their employees. Managers
may be individually liable for offences committed under this legislation, or may be charged
jointly with the organisation.
        On the face of it, the police manager may therefore be liable to ensure the safety of
hixo/herself, subordinates, and members of the public at police organised events and police
buildings.   This factor has fundamental effects on the responsibility and liability o f police
officers in charge o f public events.


Police - a special case.
        Although the intention o f the government and the European Commission was to
include every employee in the country and every organisation that employs people (including
self-employed persons), the unique status of constables as 'office holders' has temporarily
defeated the legislators. In fact, the main Act (Health and Safety at Work etc. Act 1974) does
not directly apply to police officers, but provisions under other enactments do enforce certain
responsibilities.
        Civilian employees, whether employed by the police authority or the local authority
are covered by the Health and Safety at Work Act and are fully liable under its provisions.
The reality of the situation is that, in most forces, it is the civilian support staff who see the
need for, and respond to, safety in the workplace. Research reveals that knowledge on this
vital subject is sketchy in the police staff associations to the point of nonexistence.
                        Petsonal liability o f police officers following major or critical incidents




Hie spirit of die law
       Once it was realised that the safety o f police officers was not encompassed in the law,
the Home Office directed that the law should be honoured 'in the spirit'.                  This is a positive
interim solution but, of course, there are no sanctions available against individual police
officers to enforce the law. In fact, the Home Office is in the process of negotiating with the
Health and Safety Executive, the overall enforcing body o f health and safely legislation, with
a view to include police officers within the existing legislation. This process should be
complete in mid-1994.
       Many police forces, including the largest, have already taken one provision of the
legislation into their Standing Orders and have issued a Safety Policy Statement. These
policies can be likened to the proverbial wooden lie that 'trespassers will be prosecuted', as
few prosecutions will follow.


The problems with policing.
       Health and safety legislation does have some problems with policing operations.
First, there is not much experience on which to base guidance to forces on how to make risk
       assessments for all aspects of police work.
Second, there is the issue of removing an employee from a place of danger.
Third, there are the incidents of life-threatening situations in which police officers find
       themselves - how are they protected?
Fourth; the action which police officers should take when faced with danger - should they
       retreat for their own safety, or should they intervene in the incident in line with their
       public duty?
Fifth, there is a concern about potential conflict between the operational independence of
       chief constables and the powers of Health and Safety Executive's (HSE) Inspectors.
       Should an officer listen to the Chief Constable or the HSE Inspector?
Sixth, there is the problem of compliance with the Food Safety Act 1990 in respect of the
       preparation and handling of food for detained persons
                      Peisonal liability o f policc officers following major or critical incidents




Residual problems, which are; the right to complain to an industrial tribunal and the provision
       o f maternity rights, remain.


The way forward
       Bearing all the above facts in mind, and that legislation is apparently imminent, the
police service should implement new policies in relation to health and safety which must be
formulated with the authority and commitment from chief officers behind them.
       We can all cite cases where police officers have endangered their own lives with
foolhardy, but heroic, efforts at lifesaving.          All police officers, but particularly middle
managers, should be trained in health and safety matters. They should also be aware that they
may be personally liable for offences committed against police officers, employees and other
persons within their responsibility, but legal advice is that it is 'unlikely' that police officers
will be prosecuted for health and safety offences. Public events such as assemblies, 'pop
concerts' and soccer matches may be particularly problematic.
       Decided cases are contradictory on responsibility in the past, but future legislation will
not excuse managers who have neglected to take care o f their staff or planned for their safety.
HSE Inspectors have, quite rightly, got swingeing statutory powers o f entry and inspection,
far in excess o f police powers. Alleged offenders will not, therefore, have a right of silence
and cannot expect any quarter given for sloppy management practices, neglect or
thoughtlessness for the well-being of staff under their command.                   Fortunately, it is now
expected that psychological support for police officers should be available following firearms
incidents; however, not all Forces provide such support after other major or critical incidents
for their employees, (see Chapter Five)
       Detailed policies and strategy should be decided and supported at chief officer level.
There is assistance, advice, and training available. Managers should consider their response
to health and safety issues using the process outlined in the following section.
                     Personal liability o f police officers following major or critical incidents




A Manager's simple guide to Health and Safety at W ork procedures.
(Based on 'Successful Health & Safety Management1 published by the Health and Safety
Executive,)
Consider the following elements: -
       1-      Key elements o f successful health and safety management
       2   -   Framework for setting performance standards
       3-      Risk assessment
       4-      Key tasks and outputs of management
Then discuss them in more detail: -
1-     Key elements of successful health and safety management
       (a)     POLICY     -             Policy development
       (b)     ORGANISING -            Organisational development
       (c)     PLANNING/IMPLEMENTING - develop techniques of planning, measuring
               and reviewing.
       (d)     MEASURING PERFORMANCE - develop techniques as above.
       (e)     REVIEWING PERFORMANCE - feedback loop at all stages to improve
               performance and finally; -
       (f)     AUDITING
2-     Framework for setting performance standards.
       (a)     FIRST STAGE CONTROLS;-
                      Control of inputs to minimise hazards ENTERING the organisation,
                      *       Physical resources (design, selection of workplace, plant and
                                machinery.)
                      *       Human resources           (recruitment/selection of employees and
                                contracting organisations.)
                      *       Information (relating to health/safety, standards, technical and
                                management information etc.)
                        Personal liability o f police officers following major or critical incidents




           (b)    SECOND STAGE CONTROLS
                         Control of work activities INSIDE the organisation and to create a
                         supportive organisational culture through;
                         *        Organisation
                         *        Control
                         *        Cooperation
                         *        Communication
                         *        Competence
           (c)    THIRD STAGE CONTROLS;-
                         Control o f outputs to minimise the risks OUTSIDE the organisation

1                        arising from work activities and services in the following areas; -
                         *        Products and services

1                        *        By-products
                         *        Information.
0   3 -     Risk assessment
           Assessing the relative importance of health and safety risks by use of simple risk
    estimation.
           (a)    RATING OF HAZARDS; ■
                         MAJOR - 3 (death or major injury)
                         SERIOUS - 2 (injuries off work more than three days)
1                        SLIGHT - 1 (injuries off work for less than three days)
           (b)    RATING LIKELIHOOD OF HARM;
                         HIGH - 3 (certain or near certain that harm will occur.)
                         MEDIUM - 2 (harm will occur frequently)
                         LOW - 1 (harm will seldom occur.)
           (c)    RISK ASSESSMENT;-
                  RLSK -          HAZARD             x        UKEUHOOD
                                  SEVERITY                    OF HARM



9                                                    29
                      Feisonal liability o f policc officers following major or critical incidents




4 -       Key tasks and outputs of management
                Implementation of operational plans, performance standards, systems and
                procedures and the provision of necessary physical and human resources and
                information;
                Provision of timely feedback on performance including successes and failures
                and any deficiencies in plans, standards, procedures and systems.
                Ensuring participation at all levels in health and safety activities,
                safe and healthy production and delivery o f products and services,
                products and services which in themselves do not create risks to others.


Issues to finally convince you
Consider every day policing, and ask yourself questions such as those following;-
*       Issue of protective clothing and equipment should be considered for every officer to
        ensure his/her safety,
*       The purchase o f protective equipment should be considered very carefully. Has it
        been recommended by Police Scientific Development Branch? Can the officers rely
        on its safety or will it endanger them because they are overconfident with its use?
*       Plant and machinery should be safe. Are the vehicles overloaded with equipment
        thereby making them unstable?
*       Are all the police buildings safe? Is the flooring sound or loose? Are the canteen and
        toilets hygienic?
*       Have you put the health and safety of officers at risk by asking them to do a job
        unreasonably dangerous? Could it be done another way more safely?
*       Has a member of the public injured themselves at your police station?
The questions could go on endlessly. Have you the answers? Health and safety - YOU should
care.   You could be responsible.
                       Fcnonal liability o f police officers following major or critical incidents




                                       CHAPTER THREE


                                Personal Liability

Personal liability
        This chapter deals with policing operations where liability is most likely to result
following major or critical incidents. Public safety in general is the responsibility o f the
police when another responsible authority is not managing the event.                       When no other
organisation is capable o f taking responsibility, the police cannot deny liability for ensuring
that public safety is safeguarded to the optimum level. There is conflicting legal advice over
the exact responsibilities and liabilities o f police officers.
        Police are responsible for dealing with firearms incidents. These are usually regarded
as a special policing operation involving police officers at the highest level. However, policy
and strategy rely on trust and confidence in decision-making and discretion between the chief
officer and the authorised firearms officer. Research has shown that this trust does not always
exist in both parties. Furthermore, the person in charge of the incident as it unfolds is the
fireaims incident commander, usually of superintendent or chief inspector rank. The middle
man/woman will be the person who is asked the most searching o f questions in any
subsequent court proceedings.
        Also at middle-management level is the responsibility for contingency planning, a
topic which again needs careful consideration. To add to die conundrum are the problems
in relation to legal representation and other individual problems.
                      Personal liability o f police officers following major or critical incidents




                                           Public Safely


        Public safety is an enigma within statutory provisions. Some areas o f public safety
are tightly regulated to the point of suffocation. Other areas of public safety are lax to the
point of recklessness. This situation makes it difficult to identify who is responsible and,
therefore, liable to protect public safety in each individual case.
        It is certain that one organisation is the 'safety net' of society and can never abdicate
its responsibility to guard the safety of the public whatever the type or description of the
event; that organisation is the police service.
        Certain difficulties afflict the police when trying to fulfil this role First, unlawful
events are held over which police have no control, and can only seek to prevent where
possible. Second, there are no powers to prevent lawful events taking place where the police
believe that the event could be dangerous to members of the public.
        It is the second area that should cause police managers the greatest concern, because
despite police objections to events on the grounds of safety, they can still go ahead. Police
may continue to have responsibilities in relation to public safety arising from their common
law duty to save life and protect property.        It is important that police managers understand
the risks, liabilities and responsibilities involved and take advantage of strategies to mitigate
those risks.
        There is conflicting legal advice on this subject. The above opinion exists in several
police forces, but contrary opinion exists in others. That is, there is no specific obligation
upon the police to take responsibility for public safety. Public safety has to be achieved by
consent with the public.
       It is certain that if an emergency arises there is a general police duty to protect life
that may extend to public safety Police officers at the scene of an incident will do their best
to preserve public safety
        I will leave the reader to decide which view is the most prudent and practical one,
                       Personal liability o f police officcis following major or critical incidents




based on the circumstances of specific events that follow.
Superintendents - basic command u n it
         It is to the superintendents that most o f the comments in this section are addressed.
They are the 'decision making' level o f management that decides the strategy for policing
public events o f a local nature. It is usually at this level where most conflict occurs; as this
will be caused by insistence on inclusion o f safety features while liaising with organisers of
public events.
         Whatever the rank o f the officer making the decisions, the superintendent will
inevitably be directly involved in the strategy of policing operations, either in the planning
or execution of the plan. In a basic command unit, the 'buck stops' at the superintendent,
therefore, he/she needs to be aware o f responsibilities and liabilities in addition to what
happens if things go wrong. Some issues in relation to this problem should be understood
by all police officers, but especially those of superintending ranks.


Soccer
         Soccer has become a highly-regulated public event over the past few years. It has
taken many disasters and deaths to achieve the coordinated response to safety that we see
today. Although the emphasis o f the licensing authority is to place the responsibility for
public safely on the Football League clubs, there are still many concerns for police.
         First; are the football club management capable of managing public safely? Many
                 are, but in the lower leagues experience reveals doubts.
         Second, the police are still responsible for public disorder, therefore police attendance
                 will still be required at football matches, as appropriate to the threat.
         Third, police are still becoming too involved in safety issues at football matches and
                 are making decisions not theirs to make.
All the above issues continue to dilute the direct responsibility o f football clubs.
         It is essential that officers are properly trained to take on the task of managing die
policing of a football match. They need to realise the normal policing issues of deployment,
                      Personal liability o f police officers following major or critical incidents




briefing and the relevant law. Police also need to know about spectator safety, dynamics and
policing tactics of large, sometimes intractable or drunk, crowds. Tactics cannot be learned
quickly, as attendance at many football matches is necessary, along with judicious use of
intelligence and technology, (Closed circuit Television) before the            soccer   match commander
can successfully 'read' the intentions of the crowd. As crowd safety is being handed over to
the football club safety officer, these skills will need to be passed on to avert future tragedies.


Music festivals
       Public music and dancing is a highly-regulated area of public events. Indeed, there
is adequate legislation to control most events, if used in a coordinated method aggregated with
other organisations    However, there have been instances where the police have disagreed
with licensing authorities over the safety arrangements for public events. Despite minuted
protests over safety issues, the events have still gone ahead, so far, without serious
consequences. Police are still liable to ensure public safety even though the doubts about
safety have been ignored by the organisers of the event.
       Fortunately, there is now a very useful advisory document on this subject. This is
published by the Health and Safety Executive and sets 'benchmarks' for public safety and
health, and safety at work issues when organising musical events. This document may, in the
future, become the 'green guide' for musical events which organisers disregard at their peril.
( 'Guide to Health, Safety and Welfare at Pop Concerts and similar events' - the so-called
"Purple Guide".)


Street events
       Although for many street events there appears to be an organiser or organising
committee, these are usually 'ad hoc' arrangements without professional experience, expertise
or accident and indemnity insurance. In view of this, the police cannot sit back, watch a
disaster happen, and then accuse the organiser of negligence. This stance would not be
regarded as lawful, nor would it be acceptable to the media or politically. On the other hand,
                        Pcisonal liability o f police ofGceft following major or critical incidents




police must be careful not to take extralegal powers to simplify easier organisation o f public
events.      Powers of search and powers to close roads and divert traffic are particularly
prevalent in this issue. A new law will give highways authorities the power to close roads
for sporting or cultural events, but there are no provisions regarding public safety. (Road
Traffic Regulation (Special Events) Bill 1994.)
           The police must therefore attempt to inject some expertise, advice, management and
control into the organisation of events. This may lead to criticism of being 'killjoys'. A
policing policy must be decided on this issue; long term safety should not be sacrificed for
short term popularity.


Security incidents
           The police are responsible for public safety during 'security incidents' such as bomb
threats.     Strategy is well-developed in locations that have been hardest hit.
           It is important to remember that liability may result from bad advice or good advice.
I f good advice is to evacuate a building and a bomb goes off, but occupiers decided to
remain, there may be criticism. Alternatively if bad advice is given to evacuate and there is
no bomb, there will be criticism because o f loss of business. Also, precautions should be
taken to indemnify police before people are allowed into a potentially dangerous or uncleared
area. Therefore, it is essential that a policy is formulated which is followed so that all parties
are aware of, and have agreed to, the relevant issues.


The future
           Having established the problems, the future is not encouraging. Society is becoming
more litigious and is expecting ever higher standards of management and expertise from their
police without loss of civil liberty or public safety.
           The police must look around for support in their functions. A multi-disciplinary
approach to planning and execution o f policing operations for public events is essential.
Liaising with other organisations such as the Health and Safety Executive and District
                       Personal liability o f police officcix following major or critical incidents




Councils will pool expertise and offer sound advice to organisers of events. Working together
will broaden the responsibility for safely and lessen the effect o f criticism. We can leam from
each other and grow professionally. Each event should be individually assessed for the most
effective multi-disciplinaiy liaison arrangements.
        It has also been suggested that a national body should be available to give advice and
assistance to public events; this is evolving in the form of the Health and Safety Executive
This is a positive development that should be welcomed by the police service. Much good
advice is available for specific events, such as fireworks displays, which should be brought
to the attention o f organisers.
       The police service should be progressive in being prepared to accept technical advice
from the experts, and give up areas where they purport to be, but in reality are not, effective.
However, where the responsibility for public safety is handed over to stewards, police should
ensure that adequate training and briefing has taken place              Work is going on currently on
devising training courses for stewards that will eventually lead to a National Vocational
Qualification,
       All police officers should be aware of, and fully appreciate, the responsibilities and
liabilities they take on when dealing with public events. There should be proper planning
and, if possible, some type of quasi-legal document or 'statement of intent’ to outline the
responsibilities of each party organising public events               The media will not be slow to
criticise, quite rightly, if this issue is not addressed, (see 'contingency planning later in this
chapter)




                                        Firearms Incidents


Firearms Incidents.
       Firearms incidents are playing an ever-increasing part in the everyday operational
policing of this country. At present, they still occupy a special operational policing status.
                      Personal liability o f police officers following major or critical incidents




However, as every day goes by, the use of lethal force is considered                      less       serious as
’familiarity breeds contempt’. Also, as firearms incidents proliferate and police officers are
attacked with lethal weapons on a daily basis, the day is coming closer when all police
officers will be armed with a firearm.
       Firearms are becoming more readily available to criminals as they are being imported
from the eastern European and Balkan countries. As internal wars in these countries subside,
a criminal market will be found for surplus weapons in this and other countries.
       This section will concentrate on the issues o f responsibility and liability o f the
authorised firearms officer and the firearms incident commander as known in 1994; this
situation, in my opinion, will not persist until the turn o f the century when all patrolling
police officers will be armed.


Discharge o f weapons
       Generally, no consequences will befall the firearms incident commander until a police
issue firearm is discharged. However, firearms incident commanders or chief officers of
police who adopt the tactic o f refusing to authorise firearms when they are clearly and
urgently required, will quickly lose the credibility and trust o f their officers. Indeed, it could
be unlawful to ask a police officer to perform a dangerous task without the correct equipment.
Once firearms have been issued, and shots are fired, quite rightly, serious legal consequences
flow from this.
       There will be another factor to consider before issuing firearms - that of less than
lethal force’. Chief officers and firearms incident commanders must first consider if there is
a way of resolving the incident other than using firearms. Now, there are few other options,
but there axe many on the horizon and already in use in the United States o f America. Pepper
sprays, toxic gas, electronic prods and other tools have all been tried abroad, but we await the
Home Office authorisation for their use in this country. It is only a matter of time before its
introduction as the United Kingdom is in breach of the recommendations of the United
Nations Congress on the prevention of crimes and the treatment of offenders which states that
                      Personal liability o f police officeis following major or critical incidents




less than lethal force options should be available to police.
       The problem is that this factor places one more chain in the decision making process.
It has to be considered and discarded before moving on to the decision to issue firearms to
police officers. This additional step may take time or cause uncertainty in an already urgent
life-threatening situation.
       The issue o f weapons has a slightly different process in individual police forces, and
each must find an appropriate method, but, that firearms are now available twenty-four hours
per day is an operational necessity. Many police forces now have 'Armed Response Vehicles'
on duty that carry firearms in secure armouries within the car. According to Section 3 o f the
Criminal Law Act 1967, police officers may use as much force as is necessary to effect an
arrest or prevent a serious crime, therefore, the armed response vehicle officers may 'self-arm'
quite lawfully. This situation is becoming more frequent.


Legal Consequences
        When a police officer discharges a firearm and a 'suspect' is hit and wounded or killed,
the consequences may take many years to be concluded.                        There may also be deep
psychological effects on the officer from which he/she will never recover. However, the
immediate consequence is to begin enquiries into the incident to establish whether the injury
or death was lawful or unlawful. The officer must be prepared to face several enquiries into
the incident, depending on the seriousness of the case. Alongside the officer will stand the
firearms incident commander.
        In England and Wales, the list of tribunals faced by the police officers could number
six. These are;- Inquest, public enquiry, criminal prosecution, health and safety investigation,
police disciplinary enquiry, and finally, the civil claim for negligence. During each of these
processes, there is the possibility of problems. Police officers require and deserve a great deal
of support during this period. Research has shown that police forces frequently do not give
enough thought to this process. Police officers need to be constantly updated and given
practical advice, support and assistance to survive what is a testing ordeal. Contingency plans


                                                    38
                      Personal liability o f police officeis following major or critical incidents




may be necessary to ensure public order and security in the court buildings where the hearing
takes place.
       There should also be no uncertainty about firearms authorizations, suspensions and
'postings' after incidents. The Firearms Manual of Guidance covers all the areas o f post
incident procedures adequately, and it is essential that firearms incident commanders are
absolutely conversant and confident in dealing with incidents.


Victims' Options
       The 'suspect', having survived a firearms incident, has more options that the police
officer. He/she can complain or sue. If the suspect seeks legal advice he/she will probably
be advised to adopt the latter course o f action. This has many attractions, not least financial,
as the standard of evidence is 'on the balance of probabilities' and not the higher criminal law
standard of 'beyond reasonable doubt1. Also, many police forces, or their insurers, have a
policy o f settling claims out of court, therefore, the victim may obtain a speedy cash
settlement if he/she is not too greedy.
       Besides this aspect, the police complaints procedure does not have a good reputation
outside official sources. Despite the rigour which police officers know is invested in the
police complaints system, it is not perceived as credible by the media or opponents.


Vicarious liability
        The police officers involved in a firearms incident should be supported by their Chief
Constable, who will be vicariously liable for civil liability (if established). Also, unless they
have acted outside the execution o f their duty, they will be legally represented at the expense
of the police authority. There are, however, a few anomalies of which officers involved in
firearm s incidents should be aware.         These are listed in greater detail at the end of this
chapter, but relate to separate legal representation, retired police officers, recovery o f costs
from the police officer, and punitive damages.
        In any event, it makes good sense for police officers to confirm that they are properly
                        Persona] liability o f police officeis following major or critical incidents




insured. Federated ranks have little to fear, but those above will need to look carefully at
their policies, as their staff associations do not have sufficient financial support to back legal
advice that might become very expensive.


Evidence at tribunals
       The officer(s) who fired the shot(s) is going to be questioned along with the chief
officer who authorised the issue of firearms, but the most intense questioning is reserved for
the firearms incident commander. The firearms incident commander decided the policing
strategy that directly caused the death or injury. He/she considered all the options and arrived
at the conclusion that the only way to resolve the incident was to use firearms. The reasoning
is going to be questioned and evidence will be required to justify the actions taken.


Responsibility and liability
       Let us examine this statement in more detail before going on to give some helpful
advice. The officer(s) who fired the shot(s) are protected, provided they followed procedures,
(and the plan provided by the firearms incident commander,) by Section 3 of the Criminal
Law Act. Their perception of the incident may be questioned, but not their motives                         The
chief officer who authorised issue of the weapons can point to standing orders and force
procedures to justify his actions, along with advice from the firearms incident commander.
       It is the firearms incident commander who will be questioned on his/her thought
processes that led to the final operational plan that caused the death or injury of the victim.
The firearms incident commander was in charge of the planning, organisation and control of
the incident, and is therefore the person responsible for the outcome of events                        The main
document in relation to firearms incidents is silent on the job description of firearms incident
commander, although it describes the job and responsibilities of the authorised firearms officer
and the authorising chief officer.
       The firearms incident commander is also responsible for the welfare o f the police
officers engaged in the operation. He/she should be aware of information in the manual of
                       Personal liability o f policc officers following major or critical incidents




guidance on this subject and each force policy. Some forces have 'buddy* systems that give
excellent support to officers in their time of need.


Self-protection plan
       This is a suggested plan, in note form, to protect police officers, particularly firearms
incident commanders, from avoidable hazards in the witness box. It does not purport to be
exhaustive, but may contain some useful points.


1;     Hanning
               know your 'Bible' (Manual o f Guidance)
               are there existing contingency plans?
               are there existing maps, plans, photographs or videos?
               review the tactical options - listen to advice! (Do not forget 'less than lethal
                       force')
               select the best option, (along with backup options) make a clear, LOGICAL
                       decision, based on fact
               make a written plan
               taped briefings and instructions
               rules of engagement to be certain

2;      Immediate action regarding documents and tapes.
             suspend destruction
             notify duly o f preservation in writing
             retrieve internal copies
             read the documents quickly and spot the gaps
             file with source coding
             continue with the search for missing or relevant documents
             don't go into print immediately


3;     Statements
             no speculation
              time diminishes memory
              all documents are important
              all documents are ’discoverable’ - although 'public interest immunity' might
                      arise
              all notes to be retained
                       Persona] liability o f police officers following major or critical incidents




HOW TO PROTECT YOTJRSELF

          i)     Insist on MINUTES being taken of all meetings; ensure they are accurate and
                  agreed, including discussions.

          ii)    INSTRUCTIONS - written and verbal. Must be clear and preferably recorded.

          iii)   Incident LOG is essential and must be retained.

          iv)    Legal Protection INSURANCE - is the cover adequate?

          That concludes the self-protection measures which can be put into place before a
critical or major incident occurs, we will now look at what may be necessary if the worst
happens.
                      Legal representation and individual problems
History
          Before 1964, police officers stood personally liable against civil law actions against
them.      Following a long line of decided cases, chief constables and therefore police
authorities, were not liable for actions brought against their police force of negligence,
trespass (including assault and unlawful imprisonment) or nuisance, among other things,
because the individual police officer was the defendant.
          In 1962, the Royal Commission on the Police (Willink Commission) reported that the
legal status and situation regarding the legal representation of constables were unsatisfactory
and should be altered      It concluded that the legal status of constables should be similar to
that of other Crown servants and this was enacted in the Police Act 1964, Section 48.


Effect of Section 48
          The effect of Section 48 of the Police Act, was to place all constables under the legal
protection of their chief officer of police in civil proceedings. It is important to note that
Section 48 specifies liability 'in respect of torts' only. A tort is a 'civil wrong' which covers
the general areas of the law relating to; trespass to the person; negligence; defamation;
trespass to land; nuisance, interference with goods; and other miscellaneous items However,
                        Personal liability o f police officers following major or cdtical incidents




subsequent guidance from the Home Office brings in other categories (see the heading 'Cases
other than Tort', below) of legal proceedings which, at the discretion of the police authority,
can offer financial assistance to police officers for legal representation.


Master and Servant
       Section 48 of the Police Act 1964 therefore places the chief officer o f police on a
status likened to that o f 'master and servant1. This status is referred to in law as Vicarious
liability1 and is discussed in greater detail in chapter two. Effectively, the master (chief
officer) is liable for the torts committed by his servants (constables) in the course of their
employment.
       In any case against a constable, the chief officer will be treated as joint tortfeasor;
(which is similar to a joint charge,) both the constable and chief officer will be 'defendants'
to the action. Any damages or costs awarded against the chief officer, and any costs of legal
representation will be met out of the police fund.


Cases other Aan Tort
       Home Office guidance says that, besides the financial assistance to police officers in
legal proceedings relating to tort, assistance may also be given where officers have acted in
good faith in pursuance o f their duties, or in the interests of the force as a whole. The
essence of the guidance is that where the above circumstances exist, the officer should have
the support of the police authority to ensure that he/she has the services o f a lawyer and is
not out of pocket. Financial support in all the cases is a discretionary matter for the police
authority.
       In normal criminal proceedings against an officer, generally, he/she will bear the costs
o f defence. There may be rare cases where the police authority feels it is proper to provide
financial assistance.
       Where private prosecutions of police officers are concerned, if the officer has acted
in good faith and exercised reasonable judgement in his/her duties, the police authority should
                        Personal liability o f policc officers following major or critical incidents




provide or fund legal advice and representation.
       Where there is a prosecution under the Data Protection Act 1984, the chief officer is
again vicariously liable for offences committed by his/her 'servants'. In roost cases, the police
authority would provide financial assistance for legal representation.
       If a police officer is called to give evidence at an inquest, public enquiry, or other
tribunal, it may be appropriate that the chief officer is legally represented on behalf of the
force. Furthermore, at the discretion of the police authority, there may be occasions where
the individual officer may be separately legally represented in cases where conflict o f interest
may occur. In such cases, the police authority should give financial assistance to the officer.
Police officers should be aware, however, that this is an area which has caused considerable
concern to several officers when in a highly traumatic situation. A more detailed discussion
of this problem is covered later in this chapter, but it is recommended that police officers of
all ranks take out appropriate personal legal protection insurance.
       In addition to the defence of a claim or charge against police officers, there may be
occasions when financial assistance is sought from a police authority to enable an officer to
bring a civil action for defamation. Among other criteria, financial assistance will only be
available to the officer if the action is considered in the interests of the force or of the police
service as a whole. In rare cases, the Police Federation may fund a defamation case on
behalf of an officer.


Review Tribunal
       The above information sets out the limit o f financial assistance from police authorities
for legal representation which individual police officers could expect.                    As much o f the
guidance from the Home Office is discretionary, over the years, there have been a few
disputes over whether the officer is entitled to claim financial assistance                 The police staff
associations expressed concern about the operation of the system of granting financial
assistance for legal representation.         This led, in 1993, to the suggestion that a review
tribunal should be set up to review decisions of police authorities who withhold financial
                      P n stm l liability o f police officers following major or critical Incidents




assistance and to offer advice in such circumstances.
       It was stated then, however, that two facts should be borne in mind. First, that
incidents of practical difficulty are rare; second, that the ultimate discretion whether to grant
financial assistance remains with the police authority.
       The review scheme was then suggested; comprising the composition o f the review
body, the procedure for setting it up, the procedure at the review hearing and the remit o f the
review body. To date, (April 1994) the review body has not been activated. Indeed, there
appears to be some confusion over whether agreement on the suggested scheme has been
achieved.


Staff Associations
       Following the concern expressed by the police staff associations, it may be assumed
that they will assist officers, as it is similar to being in a 'union'. There is financial support
available to members o f the Police Federation, (most police officers up to the rank o f chief
inspector) but little available to officers over those ranks. Because of the low number of
officers of superintendent rank and above, there is limited finance available.
       Financial assistance is limited in all cases by tight and complex regulations as to the
permitted use o f staff association funds.         It will be difficult to justify bringing a case of
defamation on behalf of an individual officer sufficient to establish the criteria o f paying for
legal representation from staff association funds, although this does occasionally happen. The
individual police officer will find that there is little chance of pursuing a defamation action
on his/her own because o f the financial considerations.
        This is a further reason for not relying on legal protection from elsewhere other than
personal protection. Officers should ensure that they axe aware, and keep under constant
scrutiny, the level and type of personal protection insurance they have. It is difficult to
negotiate a satisfactory level o f insurance cover as insurance companies are reluctant to take
such an 'unknown quantity' on risk. The level o f cover also causes problems as two staff
associations have discovered.          There is also a dispute over who should pay for legal
                      Personal liability of police officers following major or critical incidents




protection insurance for chief officer ranks, as differing arrangements exist around the country.


Retired police officers
       None of the official arrangements to provide financial assistance for legal
representation of police officers applies to retired officers.             Bearing in mind that civil
litigation can take up to six years to be finalised, police officers cannot be sure that they will
be enjoying a stress-free and happy retirement after thirty years police service. We have
recently witnessed several instances where retired police officers have been summoned to
court to give evidence or have been charged with offences, alleged to have been committed
during their service, o f 'perverting the course of justice'. Police authorities are not bound,
under existing legislation or guidance, to give financial assistance to retired police officers;
they may do so at their discretion. This is an area of great concern.


Residual concerns
       There are some residual concerns relating to miscellaneous matters not covered above;-
Constables on Committees.
       Constables who sit on managing bodies of 'victim support' or 'neighbourhood watch'
organisations could be liable for losses or legal actions against such bodies and would be
personally financially liable to a share of any award made against it. Liability could stem
from the financial aspect (correct and audited use o f the funds of the organisation) or
wrongful advice given by him/herself or by the managing committee.


Emphasis on personal responsibility
       Since the enactment of the Police Act 1964, there has been more emphasis on the
individual responsibility of police officers. This may result in more cases against individuals
or ’scapegoating’. Fortunately, during research, there have been few cases found where chief
officers or police authorities have tried to get round the doctrine o f 'vicarious liability'.
Personal responsibility features in other areas of the law which are becoming prominent in
                          Fexsonal liability o f police officers following major or critical incidents




policing operations; health and safety at work legislation, and sexual and racial discrimination
cases.


Contingency funding for lawyers,
         A new scheme o f funding lawyers in England and Wales, due to commence in January
1994, is contingency funding. (It has been delayed at the time of writing) For the first time,
the scheme will allow lawyers to take cases on a ’no win - no fee' basis. This is an attempt
to enable less financially secure persons to obtain legal remedies through the courts. There
may be an effect of an increase in malicious or ill-founded cases against police officers
coming to court.        Balanced against this, the court system is working towards 'full cost
recovery' from civil court cases. Thus, court users will bear all the costs o f civil court cases
thereby relieving the Government of this liability.


Legal Aid
         Besides the above, die plaintiff in a case against the police is frequently 'legal aided'
with the power of unlimited fimds behind him/her. Compare this to the financial frailty o f
an individual serving police officer, or worse still, a retired officer.


Conclusion
         All police officers should consider their personal position carefully in relation to legal
protection. Research suggests that police officers are covered by their chief officers' vicanous
liability in the general run o f police work. However, it is the unusual event that brings
problems and the complete lack of cover after retirement which gives cause for concern.
Other factors such as health and safety at work legislation, individual problems, police
discipline procedures, public safety, and contingency                p la n n in g   should be considered also.
Overall, the conclusion must be reached that all police officers, o f whatever rank, should take
out personal   p ro te c tio n   insurance against legal action and public liability.
                           Personal liability o f police officers following mayor or critical incidents




                                            CHAPTER FOUR


    Effects of major and critical incidents on
                                   careei/social/family

Introduction
       When a police officer is involved in a critical or major incident, it affects his/her
career, social life and his/her family. This statement may seem obvious, but research has
revealed the marked effects on police officers from these factors.                          From confidential
interviews with many police officers who have been involved in critical and major incidents,
there is great concern that management respond to problems correctly. Much of the time
forethought and sensitivity are all that is required to counter these concerns.                           Good
management and organisation can prevent many deep-seated problems occurring.
       Police disciplinary regulations may be considered in major incidents, and they will
certainly be instigated in critical incidents involving firearms incidents. Referral to the Police
Complaints Authority is obligatory in all cases where personal injury is caused to a member
of the public by a police officer. Police disciplinary investigations will usually have a marked
affect on a police officer's career, his/her social life and family, as our discussion will reveal.


Effects on career
       When police officers are involved in critical or major incidents, there is usually a
profound affect on their career.             This ranges from a simple 'taking stock’ of life to a
fundamental    c h a ra c te r   change.   The severe psychological damage that can result from
exposure to traumatic events is covered in chapter five, but here we will concentrate on forms

                                                        48
                         PeiBonal liability o f police officers following major or ciilical incidents




of discrimination by the organisation against police officers who have been involved in major
or critical incidents.
        There is an 'up side' to police officers who are involved in major or critical incidents,
as it has been said that such officers frequently get promoted. This research has shown that
there are, conversely, many officers whose careers have suffered in that situation.




                                                Grievances

Postings
        There have been many examples within this research project where police officers
have complained that they have been posted from duties that they enjoy to other duties out
o f the public limelight following involvement in major or critical incidents. The police
officers told their stories confidentially, and have asked me to record the general, and not
specific, facts o f their cases. This gave me cause for concern, and led me to look further into
the facts about 'whistleblowing'.


Firearms authorizations.
        Police officers engaged in firearms incidents have also expressed concern over the
unnecessary or lengthy withholding of firearms ‘authority'. A national 'best practice1 guide
for chief officers should be brought in, which could be included in existing guidance. Less
aggravation, distress and anger would be caused if there was a nationally recognised
procedure to follow in post-shooting situations. Owing to the increase of firearms incidents
daily, this problem will not go away.
        Moreover, police forces are wasting valuable resources in training and personnel by
posting authorised firearms officers, tactical firearms advisers, and firearms trainers away from
their specialised areas and removing their authority to carry firearms. This is, apparently, to
prevent embarrassment (or further embarrassment) to the police force from the media where
                           Pcnonal liability o f police officers following major or critical incidents




the officer has shot one person and may be called on to repeat that action in the future.
       This is a short-sighted action that results in poor employee motivation and may result
in a lack of volunteers to do an onerous job. The victim police officer will, of course,
remember the discrimination to the end of their service.


Discrimination
       Racial and sexual discrimination also deserve a mention, because they are live issues.
Research has not revealed any such discrimination following a major or critical incident,
except the type of reverse discrimination above. Included with the obligatory race and sex
discrimination   tr a in in g ,   police officers should not be discriminated against when they have
completed onerous physical and mental tasks in the line o f duty.


Whistleblowers
       Few of the officers who gave confidential interviews had commenced grievance
procedures, although many of them believed they had legitimate grievances                         Their careers
had been affected simply because of the fact that they had been involved in a major or critical
incident. Some officers had minor effects on their career, and others major effects, but each
was angry and frustrated by consequences beyond their control.
       Most officers were quick to point out that their grievance had resulted despite the fact
that their actions had been ratified or praised by a court or public enquiry. Indeed, many
officers could also point to the fact that their actions had been commended as bravery
       When researching into this subject, it very quickly becomes clear why police officers
do not use grievance procedures. This process merely causes further discrimination and may
lead to ostracism, a similar phenomenon that occurs after police officers are suspended from
duty. 'Closing ranks' in the police service is still witnessed, whereas officers who tell the
truth, it appears, can expect disbelief, derision and abuse from senior officers.
       It would be a mistake to believe that discrimination from 'whistleblowing' only occurs
in the police service; there are well-documented instances elsewhere. To quote only two,
                     Betsoud liability o f police officers following major or critical incidents




there are the cases o f Morton Thiokol and Eddie Ottley. There was an expert on seals who
contributed to the work o f his company, Morton Thiokol, on the NASA 'Challenger1project.
He believed there was a flaw in a seal on the space shuttle and tried unsuccessfully to prevent
the take off. The Challenger exploded after takeoff. The expert was disciplined for his Stand
by his company and demoted. He was later praised by the national inquiry into the disaster.
       Eddie Ottley was a deckhand employed by P&O who reported that a ferry had sailed
with the bow doors open nine months after the Zeebrugge disaster. Ottley was interviewed
by two P&O captains and told his complaint was overzealous.                    The complaint went no
further, and Ottley claims he was later dismissed from the company.
       Police ’whistleblowers' should also beware;- In the few instances where [police]
officers had spoken up against malpractice, ranks were closed and steps taken to deal with
the messenger rather than the message', (see below - Public Concern at Work)


Public Concern at Work
       The organisation Public Concern at Work has produced a document 'Speaking up by
sector: The Police1. This publication uses some cases to illustrate the above contentions. The
main three recommendations from the document are;-
       •       police forces set up systems so that officers are encouraged and enabled to
               raise concerns about malpractice;
       •       loyalty to the service should be seen to come before loyalty to colleagues; and
               the annual appraisal system specifically deals with speaking up about
               malpractice and views it in a positive light.


The future.
       Most police forces do now have 'grievance procedures' written into their standing
orders. This is a growth area, which must be monitored to prevent overzealous attitudes
towards being 'politically correct'. Younger police officers accept current conventions and
working practices as part o f everyday life; older officers may find 'new* attitudes towards
                      Personal liability o f police officers following major or critical incidents




equal opportunities more difficult to understand.
       It is essential that police managers realise their responsibilities in this area, if we are
to leam from mistakes and prevent disasters. There are two areas of responsibility, one from
management and the other from all employees. First, there must be safe, open lines of
communication to the management so that subordinates can report their concerns about safe
working practices. Second, subordinates must take responsibility to pass on concerns about
safely and ensure action is taken, especially in serious cases.
       In the interests of everyone's well-being there should be written standards of acceptable
and non-acceptable behaviour. This is a good foundation for equality for all and elimination
of discrimination. It will take time for credibility and trust to be established before grievance
procedures are widely used.          Honour, courage, patience and willpower from police
management will be required to establish credibility and trust.




                                 Police discipline procedure


Effects on career and social effects.
       When police officers are involved in major or critical incidents, there may be several
unpleasant developments inflicted upon them by 'the system'. Because o f the professional
standing of police officers in society, high standards of personal integrity, organisational
ability, courage, and public accountability are expected of each individual officer. When
major and critical incidents occur, rigorous questioning of these personal qualities can be
expected. Police disciplinary proceedings will be the last process in a long line of legal or
quasi-legal processes.
       Where the personal standards of individual police officers are in question, offences
under the Police Disciplinary Regulations may be alleged. This situation will have profound
affects on the police officer's career, family and social life. The psychological effects on an
accused police officer are discussed in chapter five, but the Police Discipline Regulations, and
                      Personal liability o f police office is following major or critical incidents




the factors relating to die police officer’s career, social and family issues will now be
discussed.


Changes in police discipUoaiy proceedings.
        As the law in relation to Police Disciplinary Regulations is imminently about to
change, this is probably the wrong moment to assess their impact on police officers following
major or critical incidents. The Home Secretary, through the Home Office, has prepared the
relevant legislation to fundamentally change the Police Discipline Regulations, but, it appears
that passage through Parliament will not be an easy ride.
        Just about everything in die old regulations relating to the areas appropriate to this
research will be changed. The 'right of silence' for accused officers and the right to legal
representation for serious alleged offences will both be abolished, along with die reduction
in the standard o f evidence required to prove an alleged offence. These measures tilt the
balance considerably to the disadvantage o f police officers in disciplinary hearings. Not only
do police officers believe this to be taking the 'interests of justice’ too far, but also eminent
persons in the House o f Lords.
        Because Government is still debating the provisions o f the Bill, it is impossible to
comment on its outcome. However, it would appear feasible, as there is little opposition, that
there will be a provision for police misconduct.              There may be a power for immediate
dismissal in the provisions. There will certainly be a provision for dismissing police officers
as 'unsuitable'.
        Many o f the daunting powers suggested by Sir Patrick Sheehy in his enquiiy have
been passed over.      These would have frightened any police officer in a position of
responsibility, as his/her services could have been dispensed with 'in the interests o f the police
service'. Following a major incident, heads could have rolled.
        The provisions suggested by the Sheehy report relating to contracts and fixed term
appointments appear to have been lost also, except for chief officers.
                        Personal liability o f police officers following major or critical incidents




          The Police Federation asserts that the proposed disciplinary procedures; -
          •      take away officers' civil rights (effect of silence)
                 rights of appeal curtailed
          •      new appeals tribunal heavily weighted in favour of management'
          •      officers discouraged from appealing by cost
          There may also be inclusion of the possibility of'double jeopardy', where disciplinary
hearings may be heard and dealt with before criminal proceedings or vice versa for charges
based on the same facts. What then remains?


Probable disciplinary procedure of the future.
          A more constructive approach towards police discipline is required, and appears to be
gaining ground. This view proposes that police discipline will take the form o f a three part
'code of conduct’.
       Part one of the code will deal with constructive issues relating to a police officer's
career where his/her work performance is below standard. After the defective performance
has been pointed out, a plan of action should be formed to rectify the situation, thereby
achieving satisfactory work standards. This section should not be regarded as 'discipline' but
positive career development for the officer.             However, there is likely to be a power o f
dismissal for 'unsatisfactory performance' if all else fails. The second section of the code
would relate to 'misconduct' and would encompass minor disciplinary offences. The third
section of the code would relate to gross misconduct which may result in dismissal.


Social and welfare issues
          Having discussed the reasons why this section of the research is impossible to
complete with accuracy, it is possible to consider some social and welfare issues that will
remain.
          Several police forces view alleged police disciplinary offences from a welfare
perspective in the first instance. This view accepts that police officers may be under stress
                      Personal liability o f police officere following major or critical incidents




from pressure o f work or domestic problems and, in this extreme situation, commit
disciplinary offences. The Complaints and Discipline Department therefore look at this aspect
and may refer the case immediately to the welfare department for further action.
       When police officers are accused o f serious breaches of the discipline code, they are
suspended from duty. This situation will not alter after the legislative changes have been
completed. Police officers who are suspended from duty following their involvement in major
or critical incidents suffer problems of ostracism, anxiety, lack o f support, and lack of
information.


Suspension from duty
       Suspending an officer from duty automatically brings problems for the suspended
individual. He/she no longer has direct contact with colleagues, and sometimes develops
depression when brooding on die situation, with superfluous time to do so. Besides this, the
police culture promotes rumour and suspicion. Unsubstantiated rumours o f guilt may spread
and suspicion that 'there is no smoke without fire'.              There may also be press or media
speculation, which die suspended police officer is routinely forbidden to refiite or comment
Where the officer is eventually cleared o f blame, he/she can have the satisfaction o f being
proved right; however, this may be after die damage has been done.
       Many officers suspended from duty feel that they are forgotten and ostracised by their
colleagues, supervisors and the police service. This situation should be mitigated by visits
from colleagues o f suspended officers, along with welfare arrangements in force.
Investigating officers dealing with alleged discipline offences should keep the officer
continually aware o f the progress o f the case. Lack of information about the current status
o f enquiries is a constant complaint from police officers following major and critical incidents.
       One positive step taken by Humberside Police Federation is the provision o f a 24-hour
telephone helpline for police officers suspended from duty. The object o f this facility is to
take away the loneliness and despair suffered by officers in that position.
                       Personal liability o f police officers following major or critical incidents




Rigorous enquiry
         There is a recent trend for complainants against police officers to prefer the writ rather
than the complaints procedure. The public are, apparently, not aware that 'investigating
officers' complete the most rigorous enquiries when dealing with police discipline matters.
In addition to this, in serious cases, the Police Complaints Authority (PCA) ensure a
scrupulously impartial examination of the facts when supervising enquiries.
         There is a prescribed list o f incidents where there is automatic referral to the PCA.
This is so although deaths in police custody are rarely the subject of formal complaint. On
the subject of enquiries, it is also the view of the PCA that there is lack of management
accountability in the police service, and that there should be more accountability at 'director'
level.
         On considering the new legislation, politicians should not forget that some
complainants will go to any lengths to pursue a malicious complaint. Fortunately, this fact
has not been forgotten in the past by the courts, where it was stated that 'we should come
down firmly against such tactics'. ( Case of Neilson v Laughame [1981] )


Family and social issues
         When a police officer has been involved in a major or critical incident, whether they
like it or not, his/her family will also become involved. When interviewed, officers express
amazement that this should happen, but case studies, without exception, reveal this to be the

case Where firearms incidents are concerned, the identity of the officers who fired weapons
has been revealed by the media in almost every case. Attempts to protect the anonymity of
officers have been futile. In view of this, proactive steps should be taken by police forces to
mitigate the negative effects on police officers' families.
         The spouse, children and close family should be briefed on likely press reaction to
incidents There will also be reaction to events by neighbours, schoolmates, colleagues and
friends Confidential interviews with police officers have revealed serious financial losses to
families following threats or intimidation after a critical incident, and in several cases, extra
                     Personal liability o f police officers following major or critical incidents




security measures have been necessary at the police officers' homes. Where officers have
been forced to move house, this has had a detrimental effect on spouses' business or jobs, and
can result in financial loss running into thousands of pounds.
       At a time when a police officer is vulnerable to criticism and especially sensitive, there
should be a vital network o f support from his/her peers, supervisors and police force. During
this research project, the very opposite of this preferred situation has been found- Colleagues
and senior officers have acted or spoken inappropriately, and in many cases, have made the
situation worse. In a job which is difficult enough, why do police officers punish their
colleagues in this way?
       This aspect o f major and critical incidents is not usually foreseen and should not be
trivialised. The research has shown that it is die area that makes the deepest impression and
long-lasting hurt to the affected police officer.
                       Personal liability o f policc officcre following major or critical incidents




                                         CHAPTER FIVE


                          Police Officers' Health


Genera) health issues
       During the last decade, much excellent work has been completed on the subject of the
general health of police officers. Occupational Health Units have been set up in almost every
police force, to monitor health and give advice on healthy practices and living.                      The
awareness of police management at all levels has been raised towards the welfare of all
employees      It is usually easy to see when an employee has been physically injured in a
critical or major incident       This can be speedily diagnosed and dealt with; the use and
appointment of police surgeons is well-established.
       What is more difficult to spot and even more difficult to diagnose is psychological
injury to personnel. Following major and critical incidents it is essential therefore to the long-
lasting well-being of staff, that suitable psychological support is readily available.                One
method o f providing this is a technique called Critical Incident De-briefing. Because physical
injuries appear to be well catered for, this section will only cover the provision for
psychological support.


                                 Critical Incident De-Briefing


History
          It seems that the first recorded use of a type of Critical Incident De-briefing was when
Alexander the Great ( 356 BC - 323 BC ) used the technique The young Macedonian king
                     Personal liability o f police officers following major or critical Incidents




spoke to his troops individually, after they had been injured, in battles which took place 2,300
years ago.
       It is pitiful therefore, that centuries later, we are only just beginning to see the
necessity for support and care for persons suffering from post trauma psychological injury.
We now know that such care is essential to the long tenn welfare o f the individual who has
been involved in a traumatic event. Indeed, it is only over the past few years that the needs
o f the 'forgotten victims' o f disasters - the emergency service workers - are being properly
considered.
       Work on Tost Traumatic Stress Disorder* started in law enforcement organisations in
the United States of America in the 1930's, but it was not until the late 1960's that the first
full-time psychologist was appointed to a police department. Once established, the practice
of hiring psychologists has flourished in the USA, and some police forces in die United
Kingdom have followed suit         The work o f the pioneers has demonstrated the value of
retaining a person 'in-house' to attend to the welfare of a highly-stressed workforce.
       Despite the slow and 'patchy' response to provision o f psychological support in this
country, the principle is well-established in relation to the increasing number of policing
incidents where firearms are discharged.          One technique used in psychological care and
support following traumatic incidents is Critical Incident Debriefing. Most UK police forces
where Critical Incident De-briefing (CID) is provided, base their model on the work done by
Dyregrov and Mitchell in Norway and America respectively.


Critical Incident De-Briefing (O D )
       Critical Incident De-Briefing (CID) or Tsychological De-Briefing' or 'Critical Incident
Stress De-Briefing' are all terms to describe the same technique. The debriefing is a group
meeting to review the impressions and reactions that survivors, bereaved or helpers experience
during or following critical incidents, accidents and disasters. The meeting aims at reducing
unnecessary psychological aftereffects.
       In contrast to 'counselling', (which is non-directive) CID takes the form o f a very
                       Personal liability o f policc offiw is following major or critical incidents




structured meeting with a skilled leader, progressing through distinct phases.                        Simply
described, the phases firstly take the participants through an informal discussion about feelings
and sensations experienced during the traumatic incident. Then, reactions to those experiences
are talked through and normalised. This is followed by suggestions for coping with the
experience and how to utilise friends and family for support. Finally, the participants are
reminded where future help and individual assistance can be obtained.
         The CED should preferably take place twenty-four to thirty-six hours after the traumatic
event. It is neither an operational debrief, nor for evidence gathering purposes, nor even a
blame-seeking session. The sole reason for holding it is to reduce unnecessary psychological
aftereffects and ensure the long term physical and mental well-being o f the participants.


Advantages of O D
         The aim of holding a CID is to minimise unnecessaiy psychological responses by
allowing ventilation of impressions, reactions and feelings. It also helps the participants to
make sense of their experiences through better understanding and the sharing of experiences
with others. The debriefing utilises the group to reduce tension and reduce feelings of being
abnormal by sharing individual experiences. Coping strategies are mobilised for participants
by suggesting the use o f personal resources, group resources and external resources.
Participants are also prepared for further reactions by receiving information and a process of
normalisation assists in rationalising all their experiences.


Problems with CID
         A few problems remain with CID, which are far outweighed by the advantages. First,
there is the problem of confidentiality. The CID must be totally confidential as an integral
part of its 'rules'. Due to the recent guidelines on 'disclosure of evidence', the confidentiality
aspect has caused problems in at least one police force. Other police forces have not found
a problem, and the Association of Chief Police Officers is currently working on a definitive
answer     One leading exponent in this field suggests that CID should take place only with
                     Personal liability o f police officers following major or critical incidents




medically trained leaders thereby rendering the session confidential.
       Second, there is the 'macho' image of police officers who do not like to admit they
need help. A method of ensuring that all officers who were involved in an incident receive
the initial CID is to write into contingency plans that attendance will be mandatory.
Mandatory attendance takes away discretion and ensures adequate minimum support and
information for affected officers. Sometimes, the most obdurate officers gain roost from the
CID Those officers, despite initial protestations or silence, frequently contribute the most in
the discussions to the benefit o f other participants. Hie practice o f mandatory CID sessions
soon becomes the norm and is accepted by all officers as a necessary part of an incident,
moreover, it is already standard procedure in firearms incidents.


Recent Disasters
       CID techniques should be used in all critical incidents or major disasters. This
describes most incidents where sudden death is involved, or where violent crime is present.
During tile mid to late 1980's this country suffered many major disasters that caused a
tremendous loss of life, resulting in pain and anguish from bereavement, and a national sense
o f loss and helplessness, (see appendix A) The torrent of grief unleashed an unprecedented
need for pro-vision o f psychological services to support the survivors and bereaved relatives.
       Much excellent and dedicated work was carried out by social services departments
backed up by mental health care professionals and emergency services. In casesof major
disasters, research has shown that provision of care and support for victims will be required
for several years after the incident. There is also a wealth o f experience and advice contained
in research documents and individual accounts of the disasters.
       It is essential that we learn from previous incidents and take good practice forward to
plan for contingencies in the future. We must learn to protect victims from injury and harm,
both physical and psychological, and try to prevent major incidents reoccurring.




                                                   61
                       Pteisonnl liability o f police officci* following major or critical incidents




Are Police the forgotten victims'?
       During the disasters o f the 1980's, it appeared to many distinguished health
professionals that the rescue workers, including the police, were the ’forgotten victims' of the
incidents. There was help and support arranged for the survivors and relatives of the people
actually involved in the disaster, but no care, support or guidance was available for emergency
workers.
       Before this, it had been taken for granted that emergency workers could look after
themselves. A 'macho' image of self-dependency persists. Also, some people believe that
there is a certain amount of 'conditioning' of emergency service workers to withstand
traumatic incidents due to their frequent exposure to them.
       On the other hand, there is an increasing wealth of evidence that this is not so. Police
officers, like other human beings, suffer stress and psychological effects from exposure to
traumatic incidents.    There are specific examples in relation to firearms incidents, body
handling, and victim support. It appears that the media, if not police management, is well
aware of the traumatic effects on police officers involved in major and critical incidents.


Recognition of P.T.S.D.
       Post Traumatic Stress Disorder or 'PTSD' is recognised as a serious psychological
disorder and is listed by the American Psychiatric Association (DSM-IH-R-1987) and the
World Health Organisation (F 43.1). Specific symptoms of PTSD are therefore available to
supervisors, relatives and colleagues who can identify sufferers if they given correct
information and/or training, (see appendix B)
       PTSD may be suffered by a person who has experienced an event that is outside the
normal range of usual human experience and that would be markedly distressing to almost
anyone. Such events would include serious threat to life or physical integrity, or harm to the
individual's children, spouse, or other close relatives and friends. Also included is the sudden
destruction of home or community O f particular relevance to emergency service personnel


                                                    62
                      Personal liability o f police officers following major or critical incidents




is the inclusion in the list o f seeing another person who has recently been, or is being,
seriously injured or killed as a result o f an accident or physical violence.


Recent research
       There is a great deal of recent research into PTSD in general, and specific to policing,
in this country and around the world. Recommendations have been made that occupational
health units should be established in police forces, consequently most forces now have such
a facility. In addition, research has shown that psychological support should be provided to
all emergency services workers to ensure that appropriate welfare is available. A recent legal
case ruled that psychological injuries sustained in major incidents can result in civil liability
o f the employer towards the employee.          ( Damages o f £145,000 awarded - HALE case )


Support should be timely
       Much o f the research also suggests that psychological support is more effective and
will prevent long-term psychological problems if administered sooner rather than later. The
CID should take place within twenty-four to thirty-six hours of the incident, and follow-up
support should also commence immediately. Long term support may be necessary for several
years in severe cases. Late onset o f PTSD should not be forgotten either, as this is a common
occurrence.


National response
       Following the disaster-prone era of the 1980's, it has been suggested that there ought
to be a national response of psychological support for victims after major incidents. There
was an unsuccessful Private Members Bill in the early 1990's that sought to provide such
facilities, and the matter was discussed in the House o f Commons in 1993, but with limited
success.      There are several units, specialising in psychological support, which can be
activated in response to major disasters. However, provision is centred in the south and north
o f the country, which may result in delay to victims in other locations.


                                                    63
                      Personal liability o f police officers following major or critical incidents




       The benefits of joint emergency service provision of CID should not be overlooked.
This system works well in several locations in this country and the United States of America.


Contingency plans
       Numerous books and research papers are available on the subject of contingency
planning.     Also, following the many disasters, there is access to much expertise and
experience. Many organisers of psychological support at disasters have published emergency
action sheets that are available to planners.
       The fact remains however, that some police forces in England and Wales do not have
a contingency plan to provide psychological support for their own staff in the event of a
major incident or critical incident. This exhibits a lack of care and welfare for staff which
borders on negligence. If psychological injury results, this may leave employers civilly liable
or possibly criminally liable under health and safety legislation. Multi-disciplinary plans
should be formulated in liaison with Social Services, County Emergency Planning Officers
and the Health Service.
       Several of the more enlightened police forces have brought in systems for CID and
have also trained combinations o f civilian support staff and police officers to lead the CID
sessions. Great success has been claimed for these units, which has led to happier, well-
motivated staff with fewer marital problems and less sick leave.


Conclusions
       First, we must learn from previous disasters and formulate contingency plans to
prevent them or mitigate their effects. It is difficult, if not impossible, to predict everything
that will happen in the future. However, it is not satisfactory, nor sensible management,
simply to sit back with a fatalistic attitude and do nothing
       There is a middle course of 'risk management', which is to assess the risks and make
appropriate preparations. Contingency plans should be made for all foreseeable risks, and
these will include provision for psychological support for all police officers. It is foreseeable


                                                   64
                      Personal liability o f police officers following major or critical incidents




and predictable, with this country’s level o f violent crime and major incidents, that police
officers everywhere will be subject to traumatic incidents.
       Second, it is prudent to train officers to recognise 'stress' and PTSD in themselves and
their colleagues. It is also very sensible management to have welfare, psychological and
clinical support available to officers. Failure to provide these services may result in reduced
employee morale, less job satisfaction and increased staff sickness.                 It is agreed by staff
associations that there is an increasing amount of stress in policing, therefore police officers'
health must be protected.
       Third, in times o f major disasters, employers should slso take on the task of liaising
with and passing information to spouses and relatives of officers involved in the incident.
Relatives are a valuable source o f support for officers if they are aware of likely problems,
but they may also suffer trauma. The children of victims should not be forgotten in the care
plan, as they may suffer long term problems resulting from post trauma stress.
       Fourth, where it is possible to plan and prepare for a major incident, officers should
be specifically selected for tasks within the management, organisation and operation o f it.
Often, correct selection procedures have proved invaluable in reducing incidence of PTSD and
psychological harm to officers. This applies not only to officers involved in distasteful tasks,
but also to support and command staff. During the planning stages, advantage may also be
taken to prepare officers, by means o f training, to face the traumatic event ahead of them.




                                                    65
                     Persona] liability of police o ffic e s following major or critical incidents




                                         CHAPTER SIX

             Recommendations and solutions

1      Law of corporate liability to be codified and brought into line with
       European principles.
              Investigations into several disasters over the last decade have indicated that
       fault for the incident rested with defective or negligent arrangements for public safety.
       In some cases, particularly transport companies, low level operatives or supervisors
       have been charged with offences in relation to defects or omissions. Safety policies
       and procedures are matters for consideration by company management at the highest
       level. Responsibility for company safety policies lies at Board level but, it appears,
       that companies are not judged according to their safety record or policies As the law
       stands today, company directors are not legally liable for lapses or omissions in public
       safely within their company, except infringements of health and safety at work law.
              It appears that management of companies cannot be prosecuted or brought to
       book for 'sloppy' management practices that lead to poor safety procedures and lack
       of preventive measures. In extreme cases, this has led to serious injury and deaths.
       Employees at the operative level have been criticised, but the overall policies o f a
       com pany   or organisation should instill the quality of safety into all aspects o f the
       company business. This is not being done at present and top management is not held
       accountable for its negligence in this area              A fundamental overhaul of English
       corporate liability law is required to bring it in line with that in Europe.
Solution;-
              In 1993, an attempt was made to redress tills situation when a leading firm of
       London Solicitor,      (Davies Arnold and Cooper) prepared the background to this
       problem in a document and formulated the 'Corporate Accountability Bill'. Pressure


                                                   66
                       Personal liability o f police officers following major or critical incidents




       OA parliamentary time deferred the formal adoption of the Bill. All the preparatory
       work has been completed; it should now be implemented. IT there is insufficient
       political will to cany out two factora may iufeivene to expedite die matter; another
       disaster, or imposition from Europe.


2      Many tribunals dealing with major incidents combined into one hearing.
              Following a major or critical incident, up to five legal or quasi-Iegal courts will
       be sitting to hear ostensibly the same evidence, and come to separate conclusions,
       (plus possible disciplinary procedures against police officers) It would be logical to
       combine all        these procedures into one hearing and decide all the issues
       simultaneously.      This would greatly reduce legal costs, reduce the psychological
       burden on witnesses, injured parties and victims, and finalise the outcome of the
       enquiries without the present lengthy delays.
Solution:-
              The system of the Tatal Accident Enquiry' in Scotland achieves Ibis veiy
       purpose, and woifes well. It should be incorporated into English law.


3      Public safety - clear liabilities/responsibilities of organisations.
              Some areas o f the law in England and Wales relating to public safety are well
       regulated. Public entertainments generally are safe, and recently safely aspects o f
       sporting events have received legislative attention. There are, however, two areas of
       die law relating to public safety at events which remain to give cause for concern.
       The first is that events in public streets (carnivals etc.) are unregulated, and
       furthermore, safety arrangements are not satisfactory. Recent legislation will allow
       the closure o f roads. The second is that, although unsatisfactory safety arrangements
       exist at public events, the police become responsible for public safety despite their
       (sometimes unsuccessful) endeavours to instill safety precautions into the organisation
       of the event'


                                                     67
                     Personal liability o f police officeis following major or critical incidents




              Where there are genuine concerns for public safety and the event still goes
       ahead, there is no legal machinery to stop it. The police are inevitably cast as the
       'killjoys' for protecting public safety. In addition, when the problem is left to the
       police, it cannot be addressed by existing legislation.                Extra-legal solutions are
       necessary to deal with the problem.             These solutions can include road closures,
       prevention o f lawful access, unlawful stop/searches, and others.
              Because the law in relation to public events is unclear, and leaves the problem
       (by default) to Police, this subject should be the subject of legal debate and statutory
       intervention. There are two branches to the solution of the problem; first to bring all
       public street events into the remit o f the existing public safety legislation framework,
       and second to form an avenue of appeal against the holding of specific events where
       concerns for public safety are expressed- In this way, concerns for public safety will
       be exposed and the level of risk that is acceptable to the public will be established.
Solution:-
       (i)    Public street events to be regulated.
       (ii)   Machinery to be set up giving an avenue of appeal against unsafe events.


4      Risk assessment for contingency planning - more scientific methods of
       assessment
              At present, the law is unclear as to the responsibility and liability of police
       officers to make contingency plans. If the outcome to an event is foreseeable, there
       may be legal liability. It is prudent management policy to make contingency plans,
       although faulty or reckless plans will be criticised or worse still, establish liability if
       a disaster occurs Police forces and County Emergency Planning teams are working
       independently to forni their own bank o f contingency plans. A national policy of good
       practice should be established, along with advice and assistance o f a practical nature.
              Also, there are no criteria currently existing or recognised on which to base a
       risk assessment of each premises, or event upon which to prepare (or decide not to


                                                  68
                       Personal liability o f police officers following major or critical incidents




       prepare as appropriate) a contingency plan.                  What is required is a nationally
       recognised risk assessment formula upon which to base decisions about contingency
       planning. The formula could be written so that it is simple to operate and nationally
       recognised.    Once in existence, a demonstration o f the use of the formula would
       establish good practice had been used by a police force in the preparation of
       contingency plans and emergency procedures.
Solution:-
                The correct institution to establish and promulgate good practice in                  area
       is the Home Office Easingwold Emergency Planning College. In liaison with the
       college, police and emergency planning officers should formulate and circulate a more
       scientific method of assessing risks in relation to specific organisations and premises.
       Best practice should be identified and taught at all appropriate colleges and training
       centres.


5      Retired police officeis should be covered for legal representation.
                There is a loophole in the provision o f legal representation to police officers
       in that it ceases upon retirement. This is an unjust burden on men and women who
       have given good service to the police force and community over a period o f many
       years.     If the retired officer can prove he/she was acting in good faith, legal
       representation ought to be provided, as a matter of course, by the police authority.
Solutions
                Police authorities should show Iheir agreement with the above assertion, aid
       finance legal representation for retired police officers where litigation arises from
       incidents in which they were involved during their service and it can be demonstrated
       that they acted in good faith.




                                                    69
                          Personal liability o f police ofTiccrs following major or critical incidents




6         Criminal Injuries Compensation Boaid - an equitable award system.
                     It is proposed that the system of reckoning awards should be changed to a
           fixed 'tariff scheme. This is unfair to victims who have lost their livelihood.
S o lu tio n :-
                     Abandon proposed changes to fte Criminal Injuries Compensation Board
           procedures for awards.


7         To increase the credibility of Grievance Procedures in police forces.
                     So that discrimination and wrong practice is uncovered in police forces,
           'whistleblowers' must be encouraged to come forward. It will be necessary to promote
           a trusting and caring climate before this can be fully achieved. It is essential that
           police managers realise their responsibilities in this area, if we are to Ieara from
           mistakes and prevent disasters.          There are two areas o f responsibility, one from
           management and the other from all employees. First, there must be safe, open lines
           of communication to the management so that subordinates can report their concerns
           about safe working practices. Second, subordinates must take responsibility to pass
           on concerns about safety and ensure action is taken, especially in serious cases.
                     In the interests of everyone's well-being there should be written standards of
           acceptable and non-acceptable behaviour. This is a good foundation for equality for
            all and elimination of discrimination. It will take time for credibility and trust to be
            established before grievance procedures are widely used. Honour, courage, patience
            and willpower will be required from police management to establish credibility and
            trust,
                     Police officers engaged in firearms incidents have also expressed concern over
            the unnecessary or lengthy withholding of firearms 'authority'.                   It is time that a
            national 'best practice' guide for chief officers was brought in, which could be included
            in existing guidance. Less aggravation, distress and anger would be caused if there
                      Pcnonal liability o f police officeis following major or critical incidents




       was a nationally recognised procedure to follow in the post-shooting situation. Owing
       to the increase o f firearms incidents daily, this problem will not go away.
                Further than this, however, police forces are wasting valuable resources in
       training and personnel by posting authorised firearms officers, tactical firearms
       advisers, and firearms trainers away from their specialised areas and removing their
       authority to carry firearms. This is, apparently, to prevent embarrassment to the police
       force from the media where the officer has shot one person and may be called on to
       repeat that action in the future.
Solutionfs^:-
       (i)      Eveiy police force should have a written grievance procedure which is
                manifestly supported by the chief officers.
       (ii)     There should be a nationally recognised post-incident procedure for firearms
                incidents in relation to police officeis' authority to cany firearms.
       (iii)    Management policy should be stated in relation to postings of individual police
                officeis following major or critical (including firearms) incidents.


8      Police disciplinary proceedings should be fair and just
                In the proposed changes to the Police Disciplinary Regulations, the position of
       individual police officers will be considerably worsened. A system promoting the
       rules o f natural justice and fairness is required. Also, police management must not
       forget their responsibility towards support for suspended officers, and police officers
       who have been involved in major and critical (including firearm) incidents.
Solution^:-
       (!)      The Government should legislate justly and fairiy on behalf of police officers
                when formulating police discipline procedures.
       (ii)     Police management policies should include that support should be given to
                police officeis suspended from duty.




                                                   71
                      Personal liability o f pftlicc officers following major or critical incidents




9      Critical Incident De-briefing procedures should be adopted by all police
       forces.
                During the disasters of the 1980’s, it appeared to many distinguished health
       professionals that the rescue workers, including the police, were the 'forgotten victims'
       o f the incidents. There was help and support arranged for the survivors and relatives
       of the people actually involved in the disaster, but no care, support or guidance was
       available for emergency workers. Police officers, like other human beings, suffer
       stress and psychological effects from exposure to traumatic incidents.                         There are
       specific examples in relation to firearms incidents, body handling, and victim support.
                First, we must leam from previous disasters and formulate contingency plans
       to prevent them or mitigate their effects. It is foreseeable and predictable, with this
       country's level of violent crime and major incidents, that police officers everywhere
       will be subject to traumatic incidents.
                Second, it is prudent to train officers to recognise 'stress' and PTSD in
       themselves and their colleagues. It is also very sensible management to have welfare,
       psychological and clinical support available to officers. Failure to provide these
       services may result in reduced employee morale, less job satisfaction and increased
       staff sickness.
                 Third, in times of major disasters, employers should also take on the task of
       liaising with and passing information to spouses and relatives of officers involved in
       the incident Relatives are a valuable source of support for officers if they are aware
       of likely problems, but they may also suffer trauma.
                 Fourth, where it is possible to plan and prepare for a major incident, officers
       should be specifically selected for tasks within the management, organisation and
       operation of it
Solutjonfs);-
       (i)       Following major and critical incidents, in the interests of the individual police
                 employee and the organisation, the process of Critical Incident De-briefing
                     Personal liability o f police officeis following major or critical incidents




               should be adopted by all police forces.
       (ii)    Police forces should have a continency plan to provide for psychological care
               and support after major or critical incidents including provision for police
               officers' families.
       (iii)   Where a traumatic event is preplanned, the police officers deployed to the
               operation should be selected, trained and prepared appropriately.


10     Police officers of all ranks should ensure they are adequately insured for
       legal protection.
               All police officers should consider their individual position carefully in relation
       to legal protection. Research suggests that police officers are reasonably well covered
       by their chief officers' vicarious liability in the general run o f police work. However,
       it is the unusual event that brings problems and the complete lack of cover after
       retirement which gives cause for concern. Other factors such as health and safety at
       work legislation, individual problems, police discipline procedures, public safety, and
       contingency planning should be considered also.               Overall, the conclusion must be
       reached that all police officers, o f whatever rank, should take out personal protection
       insurance against legal action and public liability.
Solution;-
               Every police officer should consider his/her individual situation and would
       probably conclude that legal protection insurance is necessary.


11     The effectiveness of staff associations
               In interviews with police officers who have been victims o f major or critical
       incidents, it is apparent that police staff associations should look at die provision for
       their members. This theme reoccurs frequently through the body of the research
       report. Also, training in aspects o f support may be necessary for staff association
       personnel at force level for police officers who have been involved in major or critical
                          Peisonal liability o f policc officcB following major or critical incidents




           incidents or officers suspended from duty.
Solution;-                 Message to Police Staff Associations from the author;-
           "Please read this report and form your own conclusions,”


12         Role/responsibilities of tte police - is a Royal Commission required?
                  During the course of completing the research project, many areas of policing
          involving major and critical incidents show that there is a lack of legislation or
           procedure to assist police in the execution of their duty.                    Neither police, the
           legislature, the government nor the public know the extent o f police powers,
           responsibilities and liabilities in this crucial area of public safety.              The following
           headings included in the body of this report include areas of uncertainty and
           confusion; -
                  corporate liability - investigation of alleged offences
           *      health and safety at work - police responsibility
           •      public safety - street events
                  firearms incidents - responsibilities/liabilities
           «      contingency planning - responsibility/liability
                  These are all areas of major public concern and importance. It is time to
           specify and define police roles and responsibility and eliminate the confusion that
           exists in these important matters.
S o lu tio n ;-
                   There should be a Royal Commission appointed to look at the roles and
           responsibilities of the police service.


13         Police training to be enhanced
                   For the many reasons and information contained in the body of this research
           report, it is essential that police officers receive information relevant to their roles and
           responsibilities. The legal liability of the police force as a whole will frequently
                       Personal liability o f policc officers following major or critical incidents




       depend on the training and expertise o f a single police officer in a position of
       command at middle management level. It is for this reason, and that every police
       force must do its best to ensure the highest quality of safely to their public, that police
       officers must be trained to their optimum effectiveness. In view of this, the following
       modest list o f essential topics for training is included in the recommendations.
              legal aspects of major and critical incidents (roles, responsibility, liability)
              health and safety at work - legislation and procedures
              legal     liability/responsibility      relating    to    firearms     incidents,       including
               authorisation procedures.
              Effects on police officers involved in major and critical incidents
Solntioni-
              The above topics to be included in national, regional and police force training
       ciirriculums,




                                                    75
                                                                                                 i
                   Penonal liability o f police officers following major or critical incidents




                                      Appendix A



                                                                                                 I
RECENT DISASTERS IN THE UNITED KINGDOM

11/5/1985    Bradford City Football Club - stadium fire - 56 persons died.

22/8/1985    Manchester Airport - aborted takeoff and engine fire - 51 persons died.

6/3/1987     The Herald of Free Enterprise - Channel ferry sank - 193 persons died.
                                                                                                 I.
19/8/1987    Hungerford shooting - one man shot local persons - 17 persons died.

8/11/1987    Enniskillen explosion - terrorist bombing - 11 persons died.

19/11/1987   Kings Cross Station fire - 30 persons died.

6/7/1988     Piper Alpha Oil Rig explosion - 166 persons died.

1/12/1988    Clapham Junction rail crash - three commuter trains collided - 36 persons died.

21/12/1988   Lockerbie plane explosion - terrorist bombing - 281 persons died.

8/1/1989     Kegworth plane crash - engine failure - 47 persons died.
                                                                                                 L
17/4/1989    Hillsborough Football Stadium disaster - crushing on terraces - 99 died.            L
24/8/1989    Marchioness River Boat sinking - crushed by another craft - 51 persons died.
                                                                                                 I.




                                                 76
                                                                                                 L
                                                                                                 I.
                     Pcnonal liability o f police officeis following major or critical incidents




                                        Appendix B

SYMPTOMS OF POST TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER


Persistent symptoms o f increased arousal (not present before the trauma), as indicated by at
least two of the following, and duration o f the disturbance has lasted at least one month; -
        1      Difficulty o f falling or staying asleep. (Eg 'flashbacks' anddreams)

       2      Irritability or outbursts of anger

       3      Difficulty in concentrating (eg unable to make decisions)

       4      Hypervigilance and excitement.

       5      Exaggerated startle response and sense of vulnerability.

       6      Physiologic reactivity upon exposure to events that symbolise an aspect o f the
              traumatic event, (eg a woman who was raped in an elevator breaks out in a
              sweat when entering any elevator.)




Spouses, family members and colleagues should look for the above symptoms along with
'flashbacks' (intrusive memories or dreams) 'numbness' and emotional blunting, detachment
from other people, and anxiety and depression. Excessive use o f drugs or alcohol may be a
complicating factor. Also, uncharacteristic impulsive actions such as excessive spending,
moving home or changing job. Sufferers may talk incessantly about the traumatic incident
and keep a diary or news cuttings.



       The course o f the symptoms is fluctuating, but recovery can be expected in the
majority o f cases. In a small proportion o f patients the condition may show a chronic course
over many years and a transition to an enduring personality change.




                                                  77
                    Personal liability o f police officeis following major or critical incidents




                                       Appendix C




                  CASES & REFERENCES



              Cases and references follow on the succeeding pages.




CASES

The line of TNervous Shock' cases;-

Wilkinson            v         Downton             [1897]          2 QB 57
Hambrook             v         Stokes Brothers     [1925]          1KB 141 (COA)
Hay                  v         Young               [1942]          2 All ER 396, [1943] AC 92, 103
King                 v         Phillips            [1953]          1 All ER 617, 1 QB 429
Boardman             v         Sanderson           [1964]          1 WLR 1317
Hinz                 v         Beny                [1970]          1 All ER 1074, 2 QB 40.
McLoughlin           v         O'Brien and others [1981]           1 809 CA
Attia                v         British Gas FLC     [1987]          3 All ER 455
Alcock               v         C C. of Sth Yorkshire                  [1991] 4 All ER
Hale                 v         London Underground Ltd,             [1992] Q30 (4/11/1992)




           Cases referred to in the body of the research report are listed overleaf
                    Personal liability o f police officers following major or critical incidents




Decided cases referred to during the research

Alcock & others      V        C. C. South Yorkshire Police [1991] 4 All ER
A T & T Istel        V        Tully     [1992] 2 All ER 28
Alexandrou           V        Oxford [1993] 4 All ER 328
Ancell & another     V        McDermott and others        The Times 4/2/1993
Anns and others      V        London Borough o f Merton [1977] 2 All ER 492
Attia                V        British Gas PLC       [1987] 3 All ER 455
Boardman             V        Sanderson [1964] 1 W.L.R. 1317 (COA)
Chadwick             V        British Transport Commission [1967] 2 All E.R. 945
City o f Canton      V        Ham s 489 US 378(1989)
D.P.P.               V        Kent & Sussex Contractors Ltd [1944] 1 All ER 119
Davis                V        Mason County 927 F2d 1473 (9th Cir.1991)
Dorset Yacht Co      V        Home Office       [1969] 2 All ER 564
Farrell              V        Secretary o f State for Defence [1979] HOL 19/12/1979
Fisher               V        Oldham Corporation [1930] 2KB 364 94 JP 132
Ghani                V        Jones     [1969] 3 All ER 1700
Hale                 V        London Underground Ltd. [1992] QBD 4/11/1992
Halford              V        Sharpies & others [1992] WLR 736 24/7/1992
Hambrook             V        Stokes Brothers      [1925] 1 K.B. 141 (COA)
Harvey               V        R G O'Dell Ltd        [1958] 1 All ER 657 QBD
Hay (or Bourhill)    V        Young       [1942] 2 All E.R. 396 HOL
Hill                 V        C. C. of West Yorkshire [1987] 1A11 ER 1173 CoA
Hrnz                 V        Beny      [1970] 1 All ER 1074
Holtom               V        Bamet London Borough Council [1993] TLR 478 30/9/1993.
Housecraft           V        Burnett [1986]
Hughes               V        National Union of Mineworkers [1991] 4 All ER 278
Johnson              V        Phillips [1975] 3 AUER 682
Jones                V        Swansea City Council       [1990] 1 WLR 1453 30/11/1990.
Jones                V        Manchester Corporation [1952] 2 All ER 125
King                 V        Phillips [1953] 1 All E.R. 617 COA
Knightley            V        Johns and others [1982] 1 All ER 851 CoA
Lask                 V        Gloucester Health Authority [1993] CoA 6/12/1993.
Lister               V        Romford Ice & Cold Storage Co Ltd [1957] 1 All ER 125
Makanjuola           V        Metropolitan Police Commissioner (1989) [1992] 3 617 CA
Marshall             V        Osmond & another [1982] 2 All ER 610
McFarlane            V        E.E. Caledonia Ltd [1993] TLR 476 CoA 30/9/1993
McLoughlin           V        O’Brien and others [1981] 1 809 CA
Mersey Docks etc.    V        Coggins & Griffiths Ltd & McFarlane [1946] 2 All ER 345
Moss                 V        McLachlan [1984] JP 167 QBD 22/11/1984.
                                                                                                              G
                        Pcireonal liability o f police officeis following major or critical incidents


                                                                                                              li
Neilson
Oldham
                          V
                          V
                                  Laughame [1981] 1 All ER 829
                                  C. C. of Merseyside Police Reuter Textline 7/11/1993                        G
                                  Ferguson & another [1993] 4 All ER 344 CoA
                                                                                                              u
Osman & anoth             V
Petrofina (UK) Ltd        V       Magnaload Ltd and others [1983] 2 LLR 91
Prem                      V       C.C. Notts Constabulary Reuters Textline Nov. 1993
R                         V       l.C .R Haulage Company [1944] 1 691 CCA
R
R
                          V
                          V
                                  Cory Brothers [1927] 1 KB 810 28/2/1927.
                                  C.C, Devon & Cornwall Police e.p. CEGB [1981] 3 826 CA
                                                                                                              L
R                         V       Goodfellow      [1986] 83 CR App. R.23
R                         V       PCA ex parte BROOME 7/11/88 unreported
R                         V       C.C. Notts. Police e.p. SUTHERLAND TLReport 30/9/93
R                                 C.C. West Midlands Police e.p. WILEY TLReport 30/9/93
                                                                                                              L
                          V
Racz                      V       Home Office      [1994] 1 All ER 97.
Riches                    V       News Group Newspapers Ltd.       [1985] 2 845 CA
Rigby                     V       Chief Constable Northamptonshire [1985] 2 All ER 985.
Tescos
Waugh
                          V
                          V
                                  Nattrass [1971] HOL 31/2/1971 AC 153
                                  British Railways Board [1979] 2 All ER 1169
                                                                                                              G
Wilkinson                         Downton [1897] 2QB 57
Wilson
                          V
                          V       C. C. of Lothian and Borders[1986] SLT 92 OH 25/11/1986.                    G
References

Author

ACAS
                          Tide

                  Discipline at Work
                                                     Date

                                                      1987
                                                                        Publisher

                                                               Advisory Conciliation & Arbitration Scrvice
                                                                                                              G
                  Manual of Guidance on the
ACPO

Adams,
                  Policc use o f Firearms
                  A Policewomen on the emotional
                                                      1992             ACPO JSC on Police use of Firearms     G
                  front line                         12/8/93           The Independent
Adshead, G
Adshead, G
                  Interview with Dr. G Adshead
                  Management of psycho-social
                                                           10/8/93     Institute o f Psychology, London

                                                                       Institute of Psychology
                                                                                                              G
                  morbidity                           1/5/93
Alderson, K       King's Cross fiu u d u awarded
                  £147,000 fo r tianma injuries       4/11/92          The Times                              I.
Alexander, D.A.     Reactions of police officeis to body
                  handling after a major disaster 1/10/91              British Journal of Psychology,
Alexander, D.A
Alexander, D.A
                  Meeting with Dr. D. Alexander 22/11/93
                  Psychological intervention for victims and
                                                                       University of Aberdeen
                                                                                                              G
                  helpen after disasters             Aug 90            British Journal of General Practicc.
Alexander, D.A,   Stress among Police Body Handlers;
                  A long term follow-up              Feb 1993          British Journal of Psychology
Andersen, H.S.    Post-traumatic stiess reactions amongst rescue W OlkeiS
                  after a major nail accident        1991              Anxiety Research
Anon              Coroners Inquests                  18/11/92          Bramshill Police Staff College


                                                       80
                           Personal liability o f policc officeis following major or critical incidents




Author             Title                                Date              Publisher

Anon               Brochure on Psychological services 1993 The Centre for Crisis Psychology
Anon               Post Traumatic Stress Disoider      1993        CompuServe, Safetynet forum
Anon               Whatcom County Critical Incident
                   Stress Debriefing Programs       1993           CompuServe, Safetynet Forum
Anon               Firearms Incidents               14/1/94        Essex Police
Anon               Statements o f Intent            21/2/94     Easingwold Emergency Planning College

Baruth, C.L.       Pre-Critical Incident Involvement
                   fay Psychologist                    1986             FBI Academy
Bassett, D.A       CRISIS MANAGEMENT -
                   Minimizing Civil Liability         18/8/93           FBI Academy, Quantico,
Bcckett, S         Living Nightmares                  2/10/93           The Times Magazine
Beckley, A         Notes taken a t FBI Academy on
                   stress/liability                    1990             FBI Academy
Becldey, A         Pop concerts course at
                   Easingwold College                 21/2/94       Easingwold Emergency Planning College
Bentil, J.K.       Coipoiate Body as Capable o f being
                   changed with Manslaughter          15/7/1989         Justice of the Peace
Bergman, D         Disasteis - where the law fails.        ?            The Herald Families Association
Beirington, L      Gentle touch helps tortured
                   families o f m uider victims       7/2/1994          The Times
Bettinger, K..J.   After the gun goes off             1990              State Police Officers Journal
Bibbins, VJE.      The Quality o f family and marital
                   life of police peisomiel           1986              FBI Academy
Bindman, G         Worth eveiy million                15/2/94           The Times
Blake, B           The Pavarotti experience           21/2/94           City of Westminster
Bohl, N            The Effectiveness o r brief psychological interventions in police
                   officeis after critical incidents       ?            ?
Bonifacio, P       The Psychological effects of
                   police w oik                            ?            Plenum Press
Boone, £           Identifying High Liability Risks Oct 1993            Sheriff
Bowles, L          Journey through Fear                    ?            Nursing Times
BPS                Psychological Aspects of Disaster ScptI990           The British. Psychology Society
Breeze, A          Another side to stress             3/12/93           Police Review
Brennan, C         Police Negligence defined          7/8/92            New Law Journal
Brown, J.          Sources of non-traumatic stress in
                   the police                         1989              Hampshire Constabulary
BSC                Health & Safety at Work - general 1993               British Safety Council
Burrows, C         Less than lethal devices for
                   police use                         27/9/93           Police Scientific Development Branch

C.C.               Preparing fo r a Public Enquiry Septl9S9               Cleveland Constabulary
Callahan, M.       Municipal Liability for Inadequate
                   Training & Supervision           Mai 198 9             FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin
Cameron, Ld        The Public Enquiry               11/11/88              Davies Arnold and Cooper, London
Capcwell, E        Critical incident management     19/4/93               Croner
                        Pcnona] liability o f police officets following major or critical incidents


                                                                                                              £
                                                    Date              Publisher
Audio r         Title
                                                                                                              I
Carter, D.L.    The efTcct o f higher education on police liability: implications
                for police peisonnel policy       Spring 1989       American Journal of Police
Casey, C
Cawsey, L.A.
                Disaster Briefing
                Deaths in Police Custody
                                                   25/6/93
                                                   26/3/93
                                                                      Police Review
                                                                       Police Complaints Authority
                                                                                                              L
CAF             Hie Human Elements o f Disaster
                Management                         1992                Home Office
Chittenden, M   Police accuse BMW on bikes         1/6/93              Sunday Times or Independent
Chorley, A.     Post Traumatic Stress Disoiders and
                the Police                         1991               Royal College o f Nursing
Clayton, R      Civil Actions Against the Police 1992                  Sweet & Maxwell
Clements, T     Safe StewwSng                      21/2/94         Easingwold    Emergency Planning College
CLP             Bombs - defusing the threat        April 1993          City o f London Police
Cohen, D        Afteishock - The psychological and political
                consequences o f disaster          1991               Paladin Grafton Books
                                                                                                              L
Comer, J        Carnivals - Avon & Somerset        19/10/93            Avon & Somerset Constabulary
Connett, D      Mayhem and flic messengers         6/10/93            The Independent
Corless, F      Fan's suicide over TV Hillsboro
                flashback                          8/6/1990            Daily Mirror
Cox, T          Stress, coping and problem solving 1987                Work & Stress
CPS             Support Services to Surviving Families of
                Line-of-Duty Death                 October 1988        Concerns of Police Survivors Inc.
Crainer, S      Zeebnigge; Learning from disaster 1990                 Herald Families Association
Crook, J        When disaster strikes              1987                Social Service Insight

Davies, Arnold, Cooper Director? & officeis Liability      1993       Chubb Insurance
De Quidt, J.    Meeting with Football Licensing
                Authority                           5/10/93           Football Licensing Authority
Desmond, D     Meeting with Donat Desmond        16/11/93             Disaster Action
Desmond, D     Coiporate Responsibility Project 16/11/93              Disaster Action
Disaster Working Party   Disasteis: Planning for                                                              I.
                caring response                    1991          H.M.S.O,
Douglas, J.D.   Official deviance.                 1977          J.B, Lipincott Co. U.S.A.
Doyle, R.       Public Enquiries                   1/7/91        HM Inspector of Fire Services
Drew, C.J.      Brighton Bomb Grand Hotel          12/11/93      Sussex Police
Duckworth, D    Psychological problems arising
                from disaster work                 1986          Stress Medicine.
Duckworth, D.   Disaster Wo ik and Psychological
                Trauma                             1988          Disaster Management
Duckworth, D    The Nature and effects of incidents which induce

Duckworth, D.
                trauma in policc officeis
                The human side of disaster
                                                  1990
                                                  1990
                                                                 PRSU
                                                                 Policing
                                                                                                              L
Duckworth, D.   Occupational Health and Welfare 1992             IPEC 92
Dynes, M        Howe savages Scott's Iraq Inquisition' 13/1/1994   The Times
Dynes, M        ScottV; conduct of aims-to-Iiaq
                probe challenged                  13/1/94        The Times
DyregroV, A     Caring for Helpers in Disaster Situations:
                Psychological Debriefing.         1989           Disaster Management                          L
                                                      82


                                                                                                              E
                                                                                                              I
                        Personal liability o f pollcc officeis following major or critical incidents




Author          Title                               Date               Publisher

EEPC            Easingwold papers no 4 -
                Crowd related disasters            Feb 1992            Easingwold Emergency P.C.
EEPC            Easingwold papers No 5 -
                Luge scale evacuations             Feb 1993            Easingwold Emergency P.C.
Elliott, C      Police move crash barriers to protect
                new year crowd                     28/12/93            The Times
Elliott, C      Doctors treat thousands of police for
                stress disorders                   26/10/92            The Times
Elliott, M      Police marksmen get crime in
                their sights                       27/2/94             Sunday Telegraph
EOC             Code o f Practice. Sex Discrimination 1993             Equal Opportunities Commission
EP              What we all need to know about
                Health and Safety                  ?                   Eaton Publications
EP              Post Incident Fircamts Procedures
                in Essex Police                    14/1/94             Essex Police
EP              Stress management in R.U.C         14/1/94             Essex Police
EP              Suspension of Firearms Permits 14/1/94                 Essex Police

Farell, S       Visit to Abbey Legal Protection
                 Insurance Ltd                      24/2/94            Abbey Legal Protection Insurance Ltd.
Farell, S       West Midlands Police Legal
                protection insurance                24/2/94            Abbey Legal Protection Insurance Ltd.
Farrell, M      Stressing the dangers               2/6/93             Police Review
FEMA            Liability and Risk Management in
                 Emergency Planning                 1993               CompuServe
Field, S        Corporate Liability and Manslaughter
                should we be going Dutch?           1991               The Criminal Law Review
Fowler, WH.     Post Critical incident Counselling;
                 an example o f emotional first aid 1986               FBI Academy
Friend, CJE.    Civil liability - The w ar goes on 1/9/93              Sheriff
FWS             Festival Security Charter           Feb. 1994          Festival Welfare Services

Gallagher, G.Patrick     You too could be sued     Spring 1990      Policing Magazine
Gersons, B.P.R.     Patterns o f PTSD among Police officets following
                 Shooting Incidents: A Two-Dimensional Model
                 and Treatment Implications.       1989              Journal of Traumatic Stress
Gibb, F          QCs condemn new civil court fees as barrier
                 to justice.                       15/2/1994         The Times
Gibb, F          Lawyeis in double fee dilemma 15/3/94               The Times
Gibson, G        Learning from Disasters           Summer 1992          Bereavement Care
Gibson, M        Older from Chaos                  ?                 Venture Press
Gilchrist, R     Coping with increasing risk       1/12/93           DPLU Newsletter
Gleeson, B       Individual Liability in civil law 1/2/94            Cleveland Constabulary
Goldsmith, A     Liability and Emergency Planning 1/4/92       Easingwold Emergency Planning College
Goodsir, J       A new beat fo r HR in the Police 1993               Personnel Management
Gorman, £        45 London police face corruption
                 allegations                       4/2/94            The Times
                                                                                                           E
                        Personal liability o f policc officers following major or critical incidents
                                                                                                           L

Author           Tide                               Date               Publisher

Grabsky, P       The Great Commanders            1993                  Boxtree
Grimshaw, P      Occupational Health and Welfare      1992             IPEC 92

H & W CC        Coping with a persona] crisis             1993 Hereford & Worcester C. C.
                                                                                                           E
Hall, J.C.      Firearms training and liability (part 1) Dec. 1992       Corapuserve/FBI Bul'tn
Hall, J.C.      Firearms Training and Liability (pait2) Jan 1993 CompuServe and FBI Bulletin
Hall, J.C.      Deadly Force in Defense o f Life August 1993           CompuServe and FBI Bulletin
Hall, J.C,      Firearms Training and Liability Dec. 1991              FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin
Hansard         Impact of Disasters - A Bill            1992           BMSO
Hansard         Post trauma counselling.                24/5/93        HMSO
Hansard         The Police Bill                         26/11/1963     HMSO
Hansard         The Police Bill                         11/5/1964      HMSO
Hansard         Criminal Injuries: Compensation
                System.                                 2/3/94         HMSO
Hanson, D       An  assessment   o f Safety  at Football
                Grounds                                 1991           DPLU
Harrison, J.    Police Misconduct: legal remedies 1991                 Legal Action Group
Hayes, P        Occupational Health andWelfare I992                    IPEC 1992
Hepple & Matthews TORT cases &Materials                 ?              Butterworths
Herbert, S     Malice avoids privilege in police
                complaint                               1/5/93         Daily paper
Herrick, J.H.  Critical Incident Tiamna                 March 1993     Emergency Magazine.
Higginbotham, J Defending Law Enforcement officett against personal liability
                in constitutional tort litigation        April/May 1985 FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin,
                                                                                                           L
Hiilas, S       Stress in Hie Police   Service         1986            Nottingham University
Hilliard, B     Ghosts of Hillsborough                 16/6/93         Police Review
Hilliard, B     The other side of disaster             23/6/93         Police Review                       L
Hilliard, B     Speech freedom                         9/4/93          Police Review
Hilliard, B.    Right but wrong                        30/10/92        Police Review
HMSO            Employment
                Act 1978
                               Prelection   (Consolidation)
                                                       1978            HMSO
                                                                                                           L
HMSO            Health & Safety at Work etc. Act 1974                  HMSO
HMSO            The Crown Proceedings Act              1947             HMSO
HMSO Cmnd 1728 Royal Commission on die Police 1962                      HMSO
Hodgkinson, P Coping with Catastrophe                  1991             Routledge, London
Hodgkinson, P   Hie  Hidden   Victims   o f Disaster -
                Helper Stress                          ?                The Centre for Crisis Psychology
Hodson, J.      Merseyside Policc - Critical Incident
                de-briefuig                            ?                Merseyside Police
Home Office     Home Office Circular 77/1987 4/12/87                    The Home Office.
Home Office     Home    Office  Circular  26/1967      6/2/67           The Home Office
Home Ofiicc      Guidance on Police Misconduct
                Procedures                              Dec 1993        The Home Office.
Home Office     Health & Safety @ Work Act 1974,
                HOC 7/1982; 122/1978.                    18/1/1982      Home Office

                                                                                                           I.

                                                      84




                                                                                                           V
                        Personal liability o f police officers following major or critical incidents




Author          Title                                Date              Publisher


Home Office     Control o f Noisy Patties            Sept. 1992  Home Office / Department of the
                                                                 Environment
Home Office     HOC 35/1993 Guide to Health, Safety and welfare at
                Pop conceits and similar events. 4/11/93         Home Office
Hooper, D      Public Scandal, Odium and Contempt         ?      Coronet Books, Hodder & Stoughton
Howe, S        Pan- onr £250-a-year ACPO subs, chiefs
                plead.                              21/1/94      Police Review
HSE            Successful Health & Safety management 1991        H.M.S.O.
HSE            Managing crowds safety               1993         Health and Safety Commission
HSE            Five steps to succcssfiil health and
                safety management                   1993         Health and Safety Commission
HSE            Guide to Health, Safety and Welfare at
                Pop Conccits and similar events Nov. 1993        Health and Safety Commission
HSE            Essentials o f Health and Safety at Woifc ?       Health and Safety Executive
HSE            What yon should know about the
                Officcs Shops etc Act               ?            Health and Safety Executive.
MSE            Mental Health at W oik               ?            Health & Safety Executive.
HSE            Management o f Health & Safety a t W oik 1992     Health and Safety Executive
Hudson, M      Disasteis: Hie emotional afteimath for suivivois,
                 witnesses, relatives and rescuers. 18/12/93     The London Borough of Lewisham
Hudson, M      Disasters: Dealing with the practical
                and emotional aftermath             March 1992   Lewisham Social Services
Humberside Police     Helpline for suspended officeis 15/10/93   Police Review

James, A       The Psychological Impact of Disaster and the
                Nature o f Critical Incident Stress for
                Emeigency Peisonpel                 1992         Disaster Prevention and Management
Jenkins, L      Contingency Planning - presentation 5/8/93       City of London Police.
Jenkins, L      Bomb Notice: Threat Assessment          5/8/93   City of London Police.
Jenkins, L      Advice to Occupieis - bomb threats 5/8/93        City of London Police
Johnson R.W.    A report into recent shooting incidents
                involving police officeis           1/12/93      ACPO JSC on Police use of Fireamis
Johnstone, N    Meeting - Chief Inspector Johnstone 14/10/93     Emergency Procedures Unit, NSY
Johnstone, N    M ajor Disaster Adviso*y Team        Winter 1993 Civil Protection
Joyce, D        Why do Policc Ofliccis Laugh at Death? Sept. 1989 'The Psychologist' magazine.

KCC             The Zeebiugge Feriy Disaster      1990           Kent County Constabulary
Keller, A       Meeting with Dr. A lf Keller      1/10/93        University of Bradford
Kirby, T        Police Force set to agree record damages 13/10/93 The Independent
Kletz, T        Are Managers above the law?        November 1991 The Chemical Engineer
Kletz, T        Lessons from Disasteis: How organisations have no
                raemoiy and accidents recur       1993           Institute of Chemical Engineers

Langer, J.H,    Conuption o f Public Officials: An inevitable consequence
                of International Drag Traffic.     1986             Police Studies
Laurence, C     Dogs o f crime defy police guns 22/2/94             The Daily Telegraph
                                                                                                           I



                          Personal liability o f police officeis following major or critical incidents

                                                                                                           L
Author            Title                               Date               Publisher


Leib, J           Disasters and die Law               May 1990       Easingwold Emergency P.C.
Lewisham S.S.     Disasters Dealing with flic practical and
                  emotional aftennath                1993              Lewisham Social Services
                                                                                                           L
Librarian         Post Traumatic Distress            1/4/93            Bramshill Police Staff College
Lloyd, G
Loo, R
                  Metropolitan Police - Safety Policy
                  Post-shooting Stress Reactions Among
                                                            23/11/93 Metropolitan Police
                                                                                                           L
                  Ptolice officetr>                  Spring 1986       Journal of Human Stress
Love, S,          Counting the cost          9/4/93            Police Review

Maakestad, W J.   Corporate Homicide           16/3/90                   New Law Journal
Macmtyre, B     Agents tampered with Waco papers to
                  conceal blunder                     1/10/93        The Times                             I
MacIntyre, B      David Koresh told his Waco disciples, ^ou must be
                  willing to kill for Cod'.         13/1/94          The Times
MacIntyre, B.     Waco prosecution ends in humiliating
                  failure                           28/2/94           The Times
Manolias, M       Study of post shooting experiences in
                  Firearms officers.                1986              Home Office
Mantel] M.R.      San Ysidro: when the badge turns biue 1986          FBI Academy                          I.
Martin, C.A.      Post-traumatic Stress Disorder in police and Working
                  with Victims: a Pilot Study        1986     Journal of Police Science & Administration
Martin, P.W,      One must not be ashamed            1990             University o f Surrey
Mashbum, M.D.     Critical incident Counselling      1993             CompuServe, Safetynet forum,
Mason, G          Whistleblowers a it victims        3/12/93          Police Review
McCall, A

McCargo, B
                  Police may face instant dismissal for
                  misconduct                         31/3/93
                  Civil Actions Against the Police 1991
                                                                      The Daily Telegraph
                                                                      PRSU
                                                                                                           t
McCarrolI, J.E.   Handling bodies after violent death:
                  strategics for coping.             April 1993    American Journal of Ortho-psychology.
McCarroIl, J.E.   Psychological responses of rescue woiken:
                  fire fighters and trauma           July 1993     American Journal o f Orthopsychiatry
McKenzie, I       Trigger Unhappy                    10/1 /92         Police Review
McKenzie, I.K.    Letter from Ian K McKenzie         8/2/1994         University o f Portsmouth
McLeod, J A       Study of Stress and Support in the Staffordshire
                  fire and Rescue Service            1992             Keele University
McMams, M.J       Post shooting trauma: Principles
                  from combat                        1986             FBI Academy
Mitchell, J,T.    Evaluation of Psychological Debriefings 1/7/93      Journal o f Traumatic Stress
Mitchell, T.M.    Comprehensive Traumatic Stress Management
                  in the Emcigcncy Department        ?                Emergency Nurses Association
                                                                                                           L
Moore, A           Crowd management: Learning
                  from Histo 15'                     April 1992       The Police Journal
                                                                                                           I
                                                                                                           E
                                                        86




                                                                                                           I
                       Personal liability o f police officers following majoror critical incidents




Author         Title                               Date              Publisher


Morton, J      Sailing into troubled waters     25/5/1990            Police Review
Morton, J      An Unfair Cop                    10/10/93             The Times
Moses, O       Emergency Planning Issues        21/2/94              Hertfordshire County Council
MP             The Legal Powers available to police conducting
               operations against persons who may be, or
               who are known to be, aimed.      Sept 1993            Metropolitan Police
MP             Pavarotti Conceit                30/7/91              Metropolitan Police
MP             N oting Hill Carnival            1993                 Metropolitan Police
MP             Health and Safety at W oik Act 1974      5/2/92       Metropolitan Police
MP             Divisional Health and Safety
               Policy Statement                  1/7/91              Metropolitan Police
MP             Health and Safety Policy
               Statement - AREA                  1/7/91              Metropolitan Policc
Muir, W.K.     Police: Stieeteomer politicians   1977                University of Chicago Press
Murphy, S      Why we need aims in 94            Feb 1994            Police Magazine

Napier, M      The Medical and legal trauma
               of disasters                          14/2/91         The Medical-Legal Society
Napier, M      Hie Attitude of Ac Courts to post
               traumatic stress disorder;            May 1989        The Personal Injuries Law Letter
Napier, M      Nervous Shock                         July 1989       The Journal
Napier, M      Interview at Irwin ftfitchell         16/3/94         Irwin Mitchell
Napier, M      Costs after die event                 8/1/93          New Law Journal
Napier, M      Disasteis - some of die lessons (die view
               o f a plaintiffs lawyei)              1/10/89         Irwin Mitchell
Napier, M      B it m d myth damage cases            18/6/91         The Times
Napier, M      Zeehiugge: the way forward.           17/11/90        The Law Societys Gazette
NASDLET        Failuie to train: Costs o f Liability
               Litigation                           Spring 1989      The Informer
Newbura, T     Some Lessons from Hillsborough July 1993              Civil Protection Magazine
Nielsen, E.    Understanding and assessing Traumatic
               Stress Reactions                      1986            FBI Academy

Omer, R        Staff at Risk Course                 28/10/93         Lincolnshire Joint Emergency Services
                                                                     Initiative.
Omer, R        A Survey of Critical incident Stress
               management Services               1993                North Lincolnshire Health Authority.

Parkinson F    Coping strategies during and after
               traumatic incidents                 8/8/93            Priory Associates
Parkinson, F   Caring for helpers in disaster situations. 8/8/93     Priory Associates.
Parkinson, F   Typical effects o f post trauma stress
               on relationships                    8/8/93             Priory Associates.
Parkinson, F   Critical Incident (Psychological)
               De-briefing                         24/8/93            Priory Associates
Parkinson, F   Psychological debrief structure      1993              Priory Associates
                        Personal liability o f police officeis following major or critical incidents




Author          Title                               Date               Publisher


Parkinson, F    Post-Trauma Stress                 1993              Sbeldon Press, London
Parkinson, F.   Post Trauma Stress                 8/8/93            Prion’ Associates
Parkinson, F.   Children and faauma                8/8/93            Priory Associates
Paschall, R,    Critical Incident Management       ?                 The Office of Criminal Justice
Patou, D        Disasteis and helpers: psychological dynamics
                and implications fo r counselling, 1989              Counselling Psychology Quarterly
Paton, D.       Disaster Rescue Worfcldentifying the training
                needs of search and rescue 'workers      1990     The occupational Psychology Conference.
PC @ W          Speaking up by sector - The Police        Nov, 1993 Public Concern at Work
PC A            Hillsborough Stadium Tragedy        13/1/92          Policc Complaints Authority.
Pemberton, K    Policing Football matches in
                die 1990s                          Autumn 1993       The Manager, West Midlands Police.
Pengelly, M     Psychological Debriefc» Course 1/11/93               South Wales Police
Pepper, S       The Discipline mess                7/1/94            Police Review
PF              Branch Board Secretaries Procedure
                Handbook                           ?              Police Federation of England and Wales
PF              Health and Safety Legislation: application
                to the police service.             April 1993        Police Federation
Pipe, G         Who should pay for incompetence 12/11/93             Police Review
Pipe, G         Stemming Damages                   28/5/93           Police Review
PN              PANNONE NAPIER SOLICITORS March 1994 Pannone Napier
Porteous,   C   Justification for using foice      1993              Metropolitan Police Solicitors Dept,
Porteous,   C   Power o f police to disperse a crowd 1993            Metropolitan Police, Solicitors Dept.
Porteous,   C   Legal aid on high                  1989              Policing Magazine
Porteous,   C   Suing Police - a growth industty March 1993          Metropolitan Journal.
Porteous,   C   Stages in Public Order Events      1993              Metropolitan Police, Solicitors Dept.
Porteous,   C   Hughes v N.U.M.                    1993              Metropolitan Police, Solicitors Dept.
PR              £10,000 for mother o f murdered daughter      19/11 /93       Police Review
PR              Court blocks new Hillsborough inquest 12/11/93                Police Review
PR              WPC wins discrimination case       10/12/93          Police Review
PR              Victims of stress on the increase 14/1/94            Police Review
PR              Warren bached by civilian bead
                of personnel                       14/1/94           Police Review
PR              Four face discipline over search 14/1/94             Police Review
PR              New Super armour1 vests to becomc
                standard issue                     14/1/94           Police Review
PR              Accused officers to get police authority
                funding                             4/2/1994         Police Review
PR              Warren rejects final' £85,000
                compensation.                      4/3/94            Police Review
PRSU            Organizational Health in die police
                service                            undated           PRSU

Reese, J.T.     Critical incidents, now there’s help    1987           FBI Academy
Reese, J.T,     A cops best hopes ate his family
                and his colleagues                 1984                F.B.L Behavorial Science dept
                        Feisonal liability o f police officers following major or critical incidents




Author          Title                               Date               Publisher


Reese, J.T.    Policing the violent society: The American
               experience.                         1987               F.6.I. Behavorial Science Dept.
Reese, J.T.    A History o f Police Psychological Services 1987       U.S. Dept, of Justice, F.B.I. Academy
Reuter         Heto will never recover from taanma
               suffered in tragedy                 5711/92             Reuter Textline
Reuter         Black policeman puts ’racist' force
               in dock                             7/11/93             Reuter Textline
Reuter         Changes come with a straggle - Ac o ideal
               o f PC Prem                         9/5/93              Reuter Textline
Rex Features   Crowd Safety                        March 1992          Which?
Riddell, P     Howe raises temperature before Prime
               minister faces enquiiy               13/1/1994          The Times
Roger, D       Changing your mind                  7/7/93              Nursing Times
Roger, D       Smart Deliveiy                       14/7/93            Nursing Times
Roger, D       Taking Control                      21/7/93             Nursing Times

Sage A-         Police pay-outs to hunt saboteurs
                Vexeeed £80,000*.                   16/2/93         The Independent
Scanlon, T.J.   Disaster Preparedness some Myths
                and Misconceptions                  1992       Easmgwold Emergency Planning College
Schofield, DX. Personal Liability; Tbe Qualified
                Immunity Defense                    March 1990      FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin
Schofield, D.L. Legal issues o f pursuit driving May 1988           FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin
Scoggins, M     Emergency Planning                  27/4/93         Bramshill Police Staff College
Scoggins, M     Legal Liability - presentation.     27/4/93         Bramshill Policc Staff College.
Scoggins, M     Plan for the future - preserve flic past Autumn 1993         Civil Protection
Scoggins, M     Corporate Accountability Bill       Jan 1993         Davies Arnold and Cooper
Shaw, T.        Lawycis seek w ider no win, no fee plan 19/7/93 Daily Telegraph
Sheehy,P        The Sheehy Report                    1993            H.M.S.0
Sheldrick, N    Disaster                            March 1994       Warwick University
Shinn, C        Visit to Occupational Health Unit 1/12/93            West Yorkshire Police
Sloan, Ken      Policc duty o f can; over hazards        23/4793    Police Review
Sloan, Ken      Alice11 v McDennott                  23/4/93         Police Review
Smith I.T. & Wood J.C. Industrial Law                7              Butterworths, London
Smith, P        Cloner's Health & Safety a t Work 1993               Croner Publications Ltd.
Soloman, RJvl Post-shooting Traumatic leactionsrA
                pilot study                          1986            FBI Academy
Somodevilla, S.A Post-shooting Trauma: Reactive and
                Proactive treatment                  1986            FBI Academy
Spector, EJ3.    Official v Individual Capacity Liability M arl993 The Police Chief Magazine U.S_A.
Staff           Warning over public Crewoiks displays Oct 1993 Event Organiser
Staff           Nonnal, common signs o f Battle
                 Fatigue                             1990            FBI Academy
Staff           Deliberate abuse o f public office
                o r authority                        ?               Halsburys Laws of England
                                                                                                          II
                        Personal liability o f policc officers following major or critical incidents
                                                                                                          £
                                                                                                          £
Author          Title                              Date               Publisher
                                                                                                          L
Staff           Police Bill gives Government too
                much power                        Jan 1994          Police Magazine
Staff           Scntcncc firet, verdict later     Feb 1994          Police Magazine,
Staff           Record number; sue force          26/2/93           Police Review
Staff           Hillsborough families to mount

Staff
                court challenge
                Wanen could face £20,000 bill over
                                                  9/4/93            Police Review
                                                                                                          L
                bid to sue Met                    23/4/93           Police Review
Staff           Average civil Action costs force £10,000 23/4/93 Police Review
Staff           Lords throw out discipline shake up      25/2/1994 Police Review
Staff           Post-trauma help goes on trial    13/S/93           Police Review
S taff          Stress on officers to get worse 26/11/1993          Police Review
Staff           45 London police face conuption
                allegations                       4/2/94            The Times
Staff           Insurance will pay loser's costs 29/10/93           The Times
Staff
Staff
Staff
                Tube fire widow gets £141,000 1/7/93                Daily Telegraph
                Police pay mother over missing woman 15/11/93 The Times
                Hungerfoid case PC found dead 4/3/94                The Independent
                                                                                                          II
Staff           Unions may sue over injuiy scheme        16/3/94    The Times
Staff           Home SccKbuy lu s pvwerto dismiss 18/3/94           The Times
Stuart, M       Seminar H & W CC - Critical Incident
                De-briefing                        29/9/93       The Centre for Crisis Psychology

Tait, A         Guidelines fo r selection, management and                                                 E
                training of victim recoveiy and
                identification teams                1992          PRG (PRSU) Home Office
Taylor, P       The Hillsborough stadium
                disaster - 15/4/89                  1990          HMSO
T endler, S     Police bine safety experts to cut die
                risks at carnival                   17/8/93       The Times
Tendler, S      Policewomen imprisoned by a macbo
                culture                             7/2/1994      The Times
Thompson, J     Body Recovery Teams at Disasteis:
                Trauma o r challenge?               1991          Anxiety Research
Thompson, J     Psychological impact of body recovery
                duties                              Nov 1993 Journal o f the Royal Society o f Medicine
Thompson, J
Thompson, J
                Psychiatric aspects of disaster     Jan 1991
                The Kings Cross Flic: Planning a ’Phase Two’
                                                                  The Royal Society of Medicine           L
                Psychosocial response               1989          Disaster management
Thompson, J,    Stress in Ambulanec W oriars        1991          Disaster Management.
Thompson, J     Stress Theoiy and Therapeutic Practice 1992       Stress medicine

various         Otganisational health           14/7/89                Police Review
various         Information about Calgaiy Police 1993                  Call Box Magazine
Vasquez, I.J.   Managements Commitment to die
                Undercover Operative            Feb 1989               FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin
                                                                                                          E
                                                     90
                                                                                                          L
                                                                                                          I.
9

                              Peisonal liability of police officcxs following major or critical incidents




    Author           T itle                               Date              Publisher
3
    Walker-Smith, A     The King's Cioss Disaster Report 1990           London Borough of Camden
    Watson M        Interview with Association of
                    County Councils                     16/11/93        Association of County Councils
    Wattcndorf, G E     Avoiding Liability for Failure to Protect Mar 1993       Police Chief Magazine, U.S.A.

9   Wells, C
    Wells, C
                    Manslaughter and Corporate Clinic 7/7/1989          New Law Journal
                    The Decline and Rise o f English Murder. Corporate Crime
                    and Individual Responsibility       1988            The Criminal Law Review

9   Wertheimer, A
    WestemJJ
    Wheatley, D.
                    Facing  op to the H onor
                    Mate people m e the police
                    A way to pay the piper
                                                        28/10/1987
                                                        1/5/93
                                                        17/8/93
                                                                        Nursing Times
                                                                        B irm ingh am Post
                                                                        The Tiroes
    Wilkinson, I    It could happen to you              4/1/91          Police Review
1   Wingate, B
    Wright, C
                    Contingency planning - legal issues. 29/7/93
                    EQllsboniugh police fight for legal fees. 1/3/93
                                                                        Hertfordshire Constabulary
                                                                        Daily newspaper

    Young, P         Disasteis Focusing on Management Responsibility The Herald Families Association
1
a


9
a
9
a


9                                                           91
