                             Form 89
             C U M B R I A   C O N S T A B U L A R Y


Telephone:     0539 722611                     S u p e r in t e n d e n t W illia m s
Fax:           0539 818799                     B ra n ch S e c r e t a r y
                                               P o lic e O ffic e
                                               Busher Walk
                                               KENDAL
Our Ref:     JCW/SLB                           Cumbria
                                               LA9 4RJ
Your Ref:

                                               22 June 1994

Superintendent G Mumford
The Police Superintendents' Association
67A Reading Road
Pangbourne
READING
Berkshire
RG8 7JD

Dear George
RE:   MAJOR DISASTER TRAINING
I write in reply to your letter of     18   May 1994, regarding
the above subj ect.
Following major disasters, such as Lockerbie, Zeebrugge and
the Thames Marchoness sinking, there is clear evidence that
such disasters can be of so large a magnitude, that Police
resources, and by implication, senior management, can be
stretched beyond desirable limits. You will recall, in the
Hillsborough Inquiry, that there was a concerted effort to
lay responsibility at senior Police Managers for their
decision making and planning measures.    It is a matter of
regret, that courses for senior Managers at the Police
Staff College have not, in my view, provided training to a
sufficient degree. What is needed is practical advice on
how to deal with, and manage, major incidents.
Two options are available, either seek suitable training
for nominated Officers from commercial enterprises, or
develope in-house programmes through Force, regional or
national courses.   In the case of the latter, the Police
Staff College would be the natural venue.       Rather than
include such training as part of 'Command" type courses,
better quality and focus might be achieved by designing
carousel courses, geared to specific types of problems, for
example, crashed aircraft, public order events, etc. This
approach would allow Forces to nominate Officers with
optional needs and responsibilities, for courses which are
appropriate to their role, rather than the more wasteful
approach provided in a 'catch all' command Course.
                                 -   2   -



_ Areas   which    I   suggest   require     such   training,   could
^■Include:-
  Crashed aircraft
  Multiple fatality/major road disasters
  Ferry/shipping disasters
  Commercial disasters eg petrochemical, nuclear leaks, etc
  Prison riots
  Industrial/civil unrest
  Disorders/demonstrations
 The above list is not mutually exclusive, but in some
 instances could include topics to be merged into one or
 more courses.
 Whilst there is value to turning to outside organisations,
 there is a danger that standards vary and senior Officers
 might not respond in a coordinated manner, in a multiple
 command situation. I therefore, favour the establishing of
 a structured in-house package, albeit there is nothing to
 stop the utilising of external tutors. This would ensure a
 degree of control and standard approach which is essential,
 bearing in mind that large disasters, such as Lockerbie,
 might involve senior Officers from more than one force.
 I trust that the above thoughts will be of assistance when
 you formulate your reply.
 Yours sincerely




  Superintendent
