                                                                                          INSPECTORS’
                                                                                   C EN TRAL COM M ITTEE
Police Federation                                                                  15-17 Langley Road
OF ENGLAND A N D W ALES                                                            Surbitdn, Surrey KT6 6LP
                                                                                   Tel 0181339 9750 • Fax 0181339 9751
                                               Established by Act Of P&riiamdflt


Your Ref;

Our Ref :
             GJH/PM                                                                     22nd November 1996




     D Parkinson Esq                                                                                          j,Vv
     Assistant Secretary
     The Police Superintendents Association
     67A Reading Road
     Pangboume
     Reading RG8 7JD



     Dear Des

     On behalf of the Inspectors Central Committee may I thank you and David for attending our
     Offices on 20th November and for the full update given on your current pay negotiations.

     We are grateful for the offer to take part in a Small Working Group to look at Management
     Resilience and look forward to hearing from Peter in due course. I have discussed this with Jeff
     Moseley our General Secretary so that he is aware that these discussions are taking place. I
     enclose for your information, as discussed, a copy of the synopsis regarding the recent
     Hillsborough Judgement. Since our meeting however, I have been notified that there is a distinct
     possibility of an Appeal being lodged and that a final decision my may well not be reached until
     early 1997,

     We look forward to seeing you in March 1997 as agreed.

      Y ours sincerely,




   r^ii)
      G* X-ilyde
      Secretary                 a s s is t a n t
                                SECR ETAWV
                                r e t a in
                                original
                                                        SCMNNBqF
RESCUERS AND EMPLOYEES - PRIMARY VICTIMS
           OF NERVOUS SHOCK


In the Court of Appeal on 31st October 1996 a 2-1 majority found in favour of four Police

Officers who suffered psychiatric injury as a result of their attendance at the Hillsborough

Football Tragedy on 15th April 1989.



The Appeal was from a decision of Waller J made on 10th April 1995 in. Sheffield High

Court dismissing the claims of six Police Officers. One Officer withdrew his Appeal for

reasons unconnected with Hillsborough but the Court kindly gave their view on his prospects

as a further seventeen cases were to be affected by the outcome of the decisions, including

some who performed similar duties to the Plaintiff who discontinued.



The Appeals were heard by Rose, Henry and Judge U J on 15th July 1996. The reserved

Judgment was handed down on 31st October.



The exposure to stress likely to cause PTSD was from the admitted failure of crowd control

at the FA Cup Semi-Final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest. Lord Justice Taylor

in his report stated that incidents at Hillsborough were "truly gruesome" and there was "an

horrific scene of carnage. Viewers were shocked into impotence by what they saw". A

temporary mortuary was opened in the gymnasium of the football stadium behind the stand.

 This is the place to which the bodies were transported and retained prior to transfer to the

 Sheffield Mortuary.



 On 5th January 1995 the Defendants admitted liability in relation to fourteen of the Plaintiffs.
No reason was provided. Those cases settled at the door of the Court for £1.2 million earlier

this year.



Waller J’s findings

These can be synopsized as follows:-

1.      There was an analogous relationship of Master and Servant between the Chief

        Constable and his Officers.

2.      That relationship gave rise to a duty of care.

3.      The duty of care did not arise when a Police Officer was a secondary victim unless

        he could succeed as a rescuer.

4.       Such a duty of care could not place a Police Officer in a better position than a

        bystander.



His general conclusion was that it was "unattractive" and not "just and reasonable" that

any of the Officers should recover when a bystander could not.



 In relation to rescuers, he found that there were three categories, namely:-

 1.      Lay rescuers,

 2.      Professional rescuers who were intimately concerned with the danger of the event,

 3.      Professional rescuers who were not intimately concerned with the danger of the event.




 He felt that 1 and 2 could succeed but 3 would not. In this regard he felt there ought to be

 something akin to a "Fireman’s Rule” for the professional rescuer.
The arguments at the Court of Appeal

The Plaintiffs pursued their claim on two bases, namely:-

1.     The Master and Servant relationship, which resulted in a breach of the duty of care

       by the Chief Constable to the Plaintiffs,

2.     The Plaintiffs were rescuers and therefore primary victims or at least in a special

       category.



We said a distinction between primary and secondary victim was of no particular importance

in relation to these cases. The distinction is for the purpose of defining whether a duty of

care arises and is not designed to distinguish the scope of the duty of care. Waller J in effect

found that there was a duty but then reduced the scope of the duty to Police Officers who he

classed as secondary victims. We argued that this was artificial and without supporting

authority*



i) Master and Servant

The phrase "Antecedent negligence" was also introduced. Whilst previous cases, including

Hughes -v- NUM held that the Chief Constable could not be responsible for injuries suffered

whilst carrying out operational decisions, we asked the Court to accept that where the Chief

Constable, through antecedent negligence, had created the danger to his Officers, then he

 could be held responsible and in particular relied on the decision in Knightly -v- Johns.



 ii) Rescuer

 In relation to rescuers, we argued that Waller J had in effect used the bystander as a

 determining factor in examining the scope of a Defendant’s duty to a rescuer. This is

 inappropriate for if it was accepted then the Defendants would simply look for a bystander
on every occasion when there was a rescuer claim in order to defeat the claim by showing

that a bystander could not succeed.



We also argued that nervous shock does not have to be instantaneous but could result from

a gradual build up of shock over the period of the event and in this regard Mr Chadwick’s

efforts had involved a period of 12 hours. (Chadwick -v- British Railways Board).



In relation to the professional rescuer, we argued that there should not be a different

approach. The House of Lords in Ogwo -v- Taylor had accepted that a firefighter could

pursue a claim for physical injuries arising out of putting out a house fire caused by a

householder’s negligence.   Therefore we were not creating a new category of claimant,

which Waller J seemed to believe (see Caparo -v- Dickman) and therefore it was unrealistic

to differentiate between the lay and professional rescuer.



The Court of Appeal's findings

Rose U provided an extremely succinct Judgment with a remarkably logical approach to

what Lord Justice Bingham, the ex Master of the Rolls, described as "One of the most

vexed and ta n ta lisin g areas of the modern law of tort". He found as follows>

 1.     Rescuers

        They are a special category who are primary victims and would fall within the

        definition of "participants" as provided by Lord Oliver in Alcock -v- Chief Constable

        of South Yorkshire. He felt that Page -v- Smith did not have rescuers in mind when

        Lord Lloyd categorised primary and secondary victims. The point of Page -v- Smith

        in relation to these cases was the Lord’s (see Lord Browne-Wilkinson) clear

        indication that there is "No justification for regarding physical and psychiatric
injury as different kinds of injury". The clear conclusion of Rose LJ was that as

the House of Lords accepted that a firefighter should succeed with physical injury and

as physical and mental injury are not different "kinds" of injury, then these Police

Officers should not be at a disadvantage.



As to whether a particular Plaintiff is a rescuer, Lord Rose helpfully provided some

guidance for the future when he stated that we ought to look at:-

1.     The character and extent of the initial incident caused by a tort feasor.

2.     Whether that incident had finished or was continuing.

3.     Whether there is any danger continuing or otherwise to the victim or to the

       Plaintiff.

4.     The character of the Plaintiffs conduct in itself and in relation to the victim.

5.     How approximate in time and place the Plaintiff’s conduct is to the incident.



Moving to the individual cases he found that three of the five Plaintiffs were rescuers

because they were sufficiently closely involved in the crushing incident or its

immediate aftermath. This included one Officer who arrived at the ground “some

time after the incident", The Officer at the ground who failed as a rescuer helped to

move bodies and obtained first aid but did not work close to the Leppings Lane end

of the ground.



Henry U found that the event was clearly a PTSD stressor and that shock does not

have to be immediate.      He too held that a rescuer is a primary victim and that

  Public policy favours a wide rather than a narrow definition" of the word

 rescuer. He found there was no reason for "Any relaxation of the rejection of the
Fireman’s Rule" which was expressed in Ogwo and he expected a duty to he owed

to members of the emergency services by any Defendant who caused a disaster such

as Hillsborough. He accepted the twelve points so clearly addressed by Rose U in

his Judgment.



The dissenting Judge U felt that Mr Chadwick was in some personal danger, despite

accepting that the decision of the Court, which has never been challenged, was that

his condition resulted from "the horror of the whole experience". He suggested that

the fourteen settled Police cases were on the basis that they risked physical injury

from entering the pens. This was not the basis of the settlement.



The Judge however was distracted by the Plaintiffs from the Alcock action. He spent

some time in the Judgment considering the actions which a number of relatives took

on the day to identify whether they could be classed as rescuers or "searchers”

(Chester -v- Waverley Corporation 1939). He seemed to believe that the decisions

particularly of Lords Akner and Oliver in the Alcock case suggested that rescuers

were secondary victims who would still have to satisfy the limiting control criteria

 outlined once more by Lord Lloyd in Page -v- Smith.



 In Page -v- Smith Judge U felt that the House of Lords said nothing that suggested

 that rescuers should automatically be classed as primary victims. Indeed they did not,

 but the Court were not concerned with rescuers, or for that matter employees as Mr

 Page was neither.    From implying that there was something sinister from this

 omission in Page, Judge LJ also unplied that Lord Oliver in Alcock failed to deal

 with the Master and Servant relationship point when he had the opportunity in
considering the cases of Dooley, Galt and Wigg. These cases were “conduit pipe

cases" where the employee felt that he had created the fault when in fact it was due

to the negligence of the employer. That line of cases has been considered once more

by the Scottish equivalent of the Court of Appeal in the case of Dillon -v- British

Railways Board.     It is clear that the Courts deal with those cases as a separate

category.



Master and Servant Relationship

The Defendants relied particularly on a recent decision of the Scottish equivalent of

the Court of Appeal in Robertson and Rough -v- Fourth Road Bridge Company.

Judge U agreed with the decision of the Court but denied the Plaintiffs the right to

compensation. He states "An employee who establishes th at his employers breach

of duty fyis caused his psychiatric illness is not autom atically to be classed as a

p rim ary   victim of his employer’s negligence".   He reverted to the decision of

MacFarlane -v- EE Caledonia Limited and stated that employees had still to satisfy

the control test of Page -v- Smith, namely that they had a proximate relationship to

the victim and were proximate in time and place. This would suggest that employees

are bystanders and were not participants, otherwise they would satisfy Lord Oliver’s

test in Alcock.



What Judge LJ would not accept is that the relationship of Master and Servant had

any influence on a Plaintiffs right to damages for psychiatric injury caused by an

employer’s fault.



 Fortunately, this was very much at odds with the decisions of Rose and Henry U J.
Rose U dealt with the Robertson decision by doubting that the same decision would

be reached today. He stated "Once it is accepted that there is no justification for

regarding physical and psychiatric injuries as different kinds of injury, when an

employer negligently causes physical injury to one employee, it seems to me to

be impossible to contend that he is not equally liable to a fellow employee of

normal fortitude working on the same task who sustains psychiatric injury          ".

His Lordship also dealt with the question as to why should an employee succeed when

a bystander does not from witnessing the same event in providing the answer that "In

the Master and Servant context the duty of care exists by reason of that

relationship". All one need look at therefore is the nature of the job and the degree

of fortitude to be expected of the employee. He highlighted the fact that no case has

proceeded to the higher English Courts since Ogwo where the Plaintiff was either a

servant of the Defendant or a rescuer.



Heray LJ used the American term "direct victim" in relation to the Master and

Servant relationship and felt that the Officers who were involved in crowd control at

Hillsborough were participants (see Lord Oliver in Alcock) because they were on duty

and directly involved in the consequences of their employer’s negligence and they had

no choice but to be there. He was not quite as critical of the decision in Robertson

as Rose U and felt that Lord Hope in Robertson had left the door slightly open for

active participants. Henry LJ felt that all active participants should be classed as

primary victims because the employer was in breach of a pre-existing duty of care to

the employee and it was wrong to apply the control criteria of Lord Lloyd in Page -
       v- Smith tq such Plaintiffs.



       He highlighted that the essential ingredient in the cause of action of these Plaintiffs

       was that they were exposed to the horrors of Hillsborough because of the negligence

       of their employer and there should be no public policy justification for exempting the

       Chief Constable for the consequences of his "antecedent operational negligence".



Conclusion

The Defendants were unanimously refused leave to appeal to the House of Lords. They can

of course petition the House of Lords directly.



If the decision stands the case is important for the following reasons

1.     It reinforces the decision in Page -v- Smith that psychiatric and physical injuries

       should be looked at in the same way and are not different kinds of injury.

2.     Employers owe their employees a duty of care to prevent them being exposed to a

       danger which is likely to create a mental injury.

3.     The decision in Robertson and Rough -v- Fourth Road Bridge has been put in context

       and the anxiety the decision created in restricting claims by employees against their

       employers has been removed.

4.     The phrase "antecedent negligence" has entered English law and has assisted those

       dealing with the emergency services in differentiating between a negligent act and an

       operational decision.

5.     Professional rescuers have the same entitlement to claim as lay rescuers.

6.     The definition of a rescuer has been clarified by reference to the five factors

        identified by Rose U on page 15 of the Judgment.
7.    Rescuers are classed as primary victims and are not subject to the control tests of

       Lord Hoyd in Page -v- Smith.



Public Policy

Finally, the public policy arguments that Defendants time and again put forward in

psychiatric injury cases were hopefully diffused by the comments of Henry LJ when he

identified that:-

1.     A Plaintiff must establish that psychiatric injury was foreseeable and that he was not

        a mere bystander.

2.     That disasters capable of being PTSD stressors are rare.

3.     That it would be curious to deny the majority of genuine claims for fear that a

        fraudulent claim might slip through the net.



The future

It is clear that the onus is on the Law Commission to produce a paper which may result in

statutory backing to further clarify this vexed area of the law and to hopefully provide clarity

in relation to cases of relatives and secondary victims.



 In relation to these particular cases, it is to be hoped that the matter will end here. One

 questions whether the House of Lords will feel it appropriate to consider these matters

 further following their decisions in Ogwo -v- Taylor and Page -v- Smith. Surely the law

 relating to members of the emergency services suffering psychiatric injury is now established.
Chester -v- Waverley Corporation 1939 62 CLR 1

Chadwick -v- British Railways Board 1967 I WLR 912

Knightley -v- Johns 1982 1 WLR 349

Ogwo -v- Taylor 1988 AC 431

Alcock -v- Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police 1992 1 AC 310

Caparo -v- Dickman 1992 AC 605

MacFarlane -v- EE Caledonia 1994 2 All England Reports 1

Robertson and Rough -v- Fourth Road Bridge, decision of the Inner House of the Court of

Session 2nd March 1995

Page -v- Smith 1996 1 AC 155
