         H o m e O ffic e
         Police Personnel and Training Unit
         50 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW1H 9AT
         Switchboard: 0171 273 4000 Fax: 0171 273 2501 Direct Line: 0171 273 3684____________

                                                                  Our reference:

                                                                  Your reference:
To: M em bers of th e Police Advisory
    Board                                                         Date:                23 January 1998




Dear Member

P O L IC E ADVISORY BOARD

Please see attached the minutes of the Police Advisory Board meeting which was held on 11
December 1997.

Yours sincerely




Sarah Blackley
Police Personnel SC Training Unit




                                                                     -^ S U P E R lN ^ g




                                                                 SCANNED
                                                                 SECRETARY
                                                                 ASS'STant     ■
                                                                 SSCPfETAflY
                                                                 R£7AJN            NCTVoi;c
                                                                 QRtGtNAL
                                                                                   SCANNED

 Document^
M inutes of the m eeting of th e Police Advisory Board held on Thursday 11
December 1997 in room 716. H om e Office. Q ueen Anne's Gate

Present:

Chairm an:          Home Secretary
                    Alun Michael

M embers:           D r Ruth Henig
                    Sir John Grugeon DL               Association of
                    W yn Evans                        Police
                    Mrs Angela Harris JP              Authorities
                    Melvyn Smith JP
                    D r M Dickie

                     M r A Thompson                    Metropolitan Police

                     Mr R Wells                        ACPO

                     M r R Wood                        CPOSA

                     Mr D Parkinson                    Police
                     M r A Wareing                     Superintendents
                                                       Association


                                                       Police
                                                       Federation




                     HMCIC
                     Mr Boys Smith
                     Miss D Loudon                     Home Office
                     M r L Hay
                     M r I Smith

 Secretariat:

                     Miss I Cole                       Home Office
                     Mrs S Blackley

 In attendance:
                      Mr M Caxin                        LGMB

                      Mrs M Burroughs                   Independent Secretariat,
                                                        PNB
                                                           Police Federation

                      Mrs C Crawford               -       Association of Police
                                                           Authorities

O pening rem arks

The Chairman welcomed th e representatives from the Association of Police
Authorities an d !          of the Police Federation who were all attending the
Police Advisory Board for the first time. He also noted that M r Thompson of the
M etropolitan Police Service was attending in place of Mrs Woods. Mr Wells of
A CPO and M r Wareing of the Superintendents Association were both attending
their final meeting and the Chairman thanked them for the contribution they had
made over the years.

Item 1: M inutes of the last meeting - PAB(97\1

2. The Chairman referred to the letter dated 24 April received from the Police
Federation in which they had made a number of comments and requests for
amendments as follows:

• The major concern was that by including CPOSA as an organisation to be
  represented on the Board in addition to ACPO the constitutional membership
  had been increased. However ACPO had now reduced their representatives by
  one to accommodate CPOSA, and so this issue had been resolved.

• In relation to paragraph 6              felt that he had advised the Board that
  there were major concerns that remained outstanding rather than the reported
  “minor areas of disagreement".                 had also indicated that the guidance
  was lacking in several important areas, moreover with regard to complaints, the
  involvement of the CPS, disclosure and public im munity and the overlap
  between criminal and civil proceedings. He had also referred to a fundamental
  disagreement over the standard of proof.

• In relation to paragraph 16 under the heading “Part-time Working and Job
  Sharing”              felt the second sentence did not convey what Deborah
  Loudon had stated, in that her emphasis was that the decision did not give an
  automatic right for probationers to dictate the hours they wished to w ork part-
  time.

   Under paragraph 18                 lad expressed the Police Federation’s regret at
   the Minister’s decision to allow probationers to w ork part-time and he sought
   and was assured that appropriate guidance would be provided in order to secure
   a unified system of adoption by chief officers who intended facilitating
   implementation.

3. There were no other amendments to the minutes which were then agreed.
Item 2: M atters arising

4. There were no other matters arising other than those listed under agenda item
3.

Item 3: Progress reports
3(a) M anagem ent of health and safety in th e police service -PAB(97)2

5. M r Hay introduced PAB(97)2. outlining the work that had been carried out in
order to bring police officers under the Health and Safety at W ork Act 1974
(HSWA) and to develop guidance on the application of the legislation to
operational policing duties. Mrs Harris referred to item 5 of paragraph 6 which
stated that police authorities would be required to reimburse any costs incurred by
chief officers in civil proceedings, and have discretion to pay any fine in criminal
proceedings.
She felt that it was necessary for some guidance to be issued on this to assist local
decision making. M r Wells supported this view .

6.                felt it was important to ensure that there was no further slippage in
the delivery of the training programme. M r W ood asked that members’ gratitude
to M r Hay for all the w ork he had carried out in this area be noted.

3(b) Police recruitm ent selection procedures - PAB(9/)3

7. Tan Smith introduced PAB(97)3. This outlined the work which the Steering
Group on Police Initial Recruitment Selection Procedures had taken forward since
the Board had last met. The Steering Group had recommended:

 • the introduction of the revised PERT and a new pass mark of 250 from 1 April
   1998

 • that the Board note the progress made on the introduction of a new application
   form for the police service

 • that the Board note the progress made on the adoption of the new RUC physical
   fitnpss test to replace the existing approved test with one which was objective,
   job related and fair in relation to male, female and ethnic minority applicants.
   Further w ork to evaluate and modify the RU C ’s test for transfer to the
   m ainland was being carried out by the ACPO led Joint Working Group on
   Occupational Health and Welfare.

 8. The Steering Group had also considered the Metropolitan Police Service’s
 fitness test and Tan Smith made it clear that although the Group had not chosen to
 recommend it this was not because it was considered to be inappropriate but
 because on balance they had slightly favoured the RUC test.
9.                stated that the Police Federation was prepared to sign up to the
“type” of test similar to the RU C ’s rather than the actual test itself.

10. The Board agreed with the Steering Group’s recommendations.

3(c) Police p ensions review

11. The Chairman stated that it was intended to publish the consultation paper on
the police pensions review in the New Year, The main purpose of the review was
to identify ways in which the very high cost of the police pension scheme might be
reduced by means of a more affordable scheme for new entrants, but it also
considered current management of medical retirement terms and procedures. The
possible changes set out in the consultation paper were options for discussion rather
than firm proposals.

12. Sir John Grugeon stressed that the current pension arrangements were a drain
on the system and changes to the existing arrangements were necessary.

13.               asked the Chairman to confirm that the changes discussed in the
consultation paper were options rather than recommendations . The Chairman
reiterated that the consultation paper included options for discussion rather than
firm proposals.                also queried the length of the consultation period
which he said had been initially set at 6 months. The Chairman said it would be
necessary to agree with colleagues the length of time necessary for consultation, but
he felt it was important not to hurry the procedure.

14. Miss Loudon confirmed to                 |:hat the amendments to the existing
arrangements for police pensions would be carried out through the usual channels
of consultation within the Police Negotiating Board.

3(d) Police personnel procedures

15. The Chairman referred to the Home Affairs Select Committee who were still
considering this issue and stated that he was awaiting the outcome with interest.

3fel Special C onstabulary - PAB(97>I4

16. Mr H ay introduced PAB(97)4, and outlined the progress which had been made
within forces and by the Home Office to implement the 91 recommendations of
the Special Constabulary Working Group. It was proposed to amend and extend
the regulations which dealt w ith the conditions of service of special constables.
There had been a couple of complex issues in this area. The first was the payment
of compensation to specials. This issue had now been resolved and a package of
proposals had been produced. The second was the issue of legal representation
available to specials where, for example, they had been involved in criminal or civil
proceedings or disciplinary action. Mr Hay said that it was intended to convene a
meeting in late January 1998 to discuss a range of options with the staff associations
and the Association of Police Authorities.
     _            nade it dear that the PoHce Federation were not in favour of
special constables having access to schemes of assistance which were for the benefit
of their regular members. There were legal and political issues to be considered.
M r WgUs felt that there was a delicate balance between these legal and political
issues and welcomed the opportunity to seek the views of chief constables.
Furthermore he felt it was important to be supportive of specials and to leave them
with no recourse to protection was quite unacceptable. HMCTC felt that a great
deal of progress had been made in relation to the Special Constabulary over the last
few years and that it was important for these areas to be considered very carefully.

18. _           stated that the Police Federation did on an ad hoc basis provide a
service to specials but he felt that if this process were to be formalised it would risk
the ad hoc support being withdrawn entirely.

19. The Chairman stated that he considered the current arrangements for specials
to be unsatisfactory in this area and felt that it was not legally defensible for t-h^m
to remain unprotected. He was grateful for the progress which had been made.

The Home Secretary then left the meeting and M r Michael took the Chair.

20*               referred to a recent HMIC thematic report in which the bulk of
recommendations on specials made reference to cost and their funding. He also
expressed concern at the wastage factor and that there is no way of identifying the
cost of their training. M r Hay stated that the wastage rate for specials was
comparatively very low. M r Wells stated that it was im portant not to consider cost
in isolation but in parallel w ith the value of the service that was being given. The
Chairman agreed that the build-up and retention of experience was essential, and
that cost was important.

Item 4; Q ualifications for appointm ent as a police constable; nationality -
PABf97^5                                                                  '

21, Ian Smith introduced PAB(97)5. He stated that this was the first real
opportunity for police service interests to consider this question. H e stated that as
a result of the changes taking place within the European Union, and an increasing
number of enquiries from citizens of the EU to join the police service, it was
proposed to issue the discussion paper to police service interests to seek their views
on the subject.

22-            Commented that PAB(97)5 seemed to point to item (d) within
paragraph 16 as the favoured option. Ian_Smith replied that he thought it was
important to keep an open mind.               Agreed that the Police Federation
would take the proposals away for further consideration.
Ttom    A ssistant C hief C onstable? (D esig n ated selection procedures aqd
com mand resilience - PAB(9.Z)6

23. Ian Smith introduced PAB(97)6 and outlined the proposals set out in
paragraph 11 of the paper. The Chairman asked for members’ comments on the
proposals.

24. D r Hftnip strongly supported the proposals, and asked if police authorities
could operate in the spirit of them pending the introduction of the necessary
changes to the legislation. Mr Veils stated that ACPO were generally in favour of
the proposals, but felt that they could be too narrow in focus as there were a
number of areas to be considered. Mr Woods supported the position outhncd by
M r Wells and said that he would welcome the reconstitution of the Small W orking
 Group which had been set up to examine this area. Mrs H arris welcomed
 A CPO ’s stance, and asked whether the areas to which Mr Wells referred would
 include civilian ranks. M r Wells c o n f i r m e d that it would, fir John Grugeoft. was
 also in favour of the proposals which he felt would reduce the tension between
 forces and their police authorities, and agreed that it would be useful to introduce
 changes before the legislation was amended..

25                kras also in favour of the reintroduction of the rank of deputy
chief constable and referred to the importance of the rank m the discipline system.
H e commented that in the absence of the deputy chief constable, however, it would
be necessary to re-appoint a designate. In response M r Weill said that for a short
term absence forces would have their own arrangements which would take ettect
but if the absence were to be for any significant length of time then it would be
necessary for the police authority to appoint a successor.

 26. ffMCTC was also in favour of the proposal and felt that it was im portant to
 adopt a common sense approach and to be flexible. M r ParkmsOfl stated that the
 Superintendents Association was in favour of the proposal in principle.

  27                isked that the Police Federation be invited to take part inan y
 discussions. The Chairman confirmed that this would be the case. H e noted that
 the Board agreed to the re-introduction of the rank of Deputy Chief Constable m
 principle, but that the implications of this, and interim arrangements needed to be
 explored. Mr Woods asked for the timetable to brisk. Miss Loudon informed
 members that it would not be possible to act in the spirit of the changes until they
 had become law.

 Ttem 6: Kflview o f regulation 13(1) ;”th e tWO-VSar ru ^ ~

  28-      Chairm an referred to the difficulties that had arisen in the application of
  the “two-year rule”, particularly when there was loyalty within a force to a
  particular individual, and asked members for their views. Melvyn Smith stated that
  not all police authorities were in agreement on this matter. H e personally e t t at
  the best person for the job should be selected and as forces spent a considerable
amount of money training their assistant chief constables they might prefer to
appoint one of their own officers who had been in post for less than two years.
___________ stated that the Police Federation were also in favour of removing the
“two-year rule”and had responded to the Home Office in September 1997 stating
that whilst it was considered that these statutory provisions should not simply be
waived as a result of a single case and that it was essential for aspirant Chief
Constables to secure a breadth of experience at senior level, the Police Federation
felt that the provisions as currently operative within Regulation 13 of the Police
Regulations 1995 would benefit from a degree of amendment. It was considered
that any amendment should not only facilitate the breadth of experience necessary
to carry out the full range of duties and responsibilities that the post of Chief
Constable carried but that it should also allow the appointment of the most
professionally competent applicant.

29. M r Wells. M r Woods. Mr Parkinson, and Sir John Grugeon were all in favour
of retaining the “two-year. rule”. Mr Wells felt that althpugh there .might be some
disadvantages to the rule there were more advantages in its retention. It ensured
fairness, experience and officers were aware of the rule’s existence and managed
their careers accordingly. Mr Parkinson considered the rule to be appropriate for
officers at a senior level, as it ensured a healthy cross-fertilisation of experience. M r
Woods felt the removal of the rule would mitigate against equality of opportunity
and the benefit of new experience.

30. HMCIC stated that he was only aware of one case during the course of the past
year in which the existence of the “two-year rule” had created a problem.

31. The Chairman favoured the retention of the “two-year rule” as a clear rule and
not as an option which could be ignored, and which would render the rule
meaningless. Officers had always made career judgements on the basis of the rule.
H e noted that the majority of members were in favour of its retention and
requested that if there was any additional information which members would like
to be considered this should be sent to the Secretariat by 31 January 1998. He
would take into account any further information received and then discuss the issue
with the Home Secretary to arrive at a final decision.

 Item 7;Freemasons

 32. The Chairman stated that the Government was still considering its response to
 the Home Affairs Committee recommendations which it.hoped to provide soon.
 He added that he felt that registration across the criminal justice system was right
 and registration just for the police service was wrong.

 Item 8;JEinancial assistance to police officers in legal proceedings - PAB(97)7

 33. This item was initially raised at the Police Advisory Board meeting of
 December 1991, and followed the inquests on the Hillsborough disaster which
 several police officers were obliged to attend. The police staff associations had
 originally requested that the guidance currently contained within Hom e Office
Circular 77/1987 should be amended to enable police authorities to provide
financial assistance to retired as well as serving officers. From this it emerged that
the 1987 Guidance had been misleading in that there is no express statutory
provision enabling police authorities to give financial assistance to officers facing
criminal charges. The law enabled financial assistance to be given only to officers
involved in civil proceedings.

34. After consultation w ith ACPO, the APA and the other police staff associations
the Home Office had now drafted a revised circular which provided guidance in
relation to this area. The revised draft circular outlined the provisions which exist
for police authorities to provide financial assistance to officers involved in civil
proceedings. However police authorities would need to consult their legal advisers
as to whether they have any other power to provide such assistance for officers
facing criminal proceedings.

35. However the Superintendent’s Association and the Police Federation expressed
their concern that the guidance did not provide for financial assistance to be granted
except in civil cases and the provision of financial assistance in criminal cases was at
the discretion of the police authority,

36. Tan Smith stated that the present law clearly only enabled police authorities to
provide financial assistance in relation to civil actions. Furtherm ore he felt it
correct that assistance should be discretionary, not mandatory, and it should be the
police authority which exercised this discretion.

37. As the latest draft of the guidance had not been seen by all members, lil£
Chairman agreed that he would arrange for this to be circulated w ith a view to
receiving comments on it by the end of January. In addition he also agreed that
the Home Office would look again at the legal advice it had received in this area.
M r Wells elected to co-ordinate an interim meeting before the end of January w ith
other members to see if there were any areas of agreement.

 Item 9: Anv other business

 38. HMCTC informed members of the forthcoming Sickness Thematic which had
 been carried out by HMIC. It was due to be published and circulated on
 16 December.

 Item 10: D ate of next m eeting

 39. The Mi'nisrftr informed members that the date for the next meeting, in
 December 1998, would be arranged in due course.




 Home Office
 December 1997
Action List

Paragraph 31 - Any additional information in relation to the retention of the “two-
year” rule to be supplied to the Secretariat by 31 January 1998.

Paragraph 37 - Re-issue the draft Home Office Circular on financial assistance to
police officers in legal proceedings to members.

Paragraph 37 - Any additional information in relation to financial «fiistanrp to
police officers in legal proceedings to be supplied to the Secretariat by 31 January
1998.
