\




STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL

Note of a telephone conversation between Alun Michael and Des Parkinson on 26th June
1997.


    Mr Michael rang me at my request to discuss the following

    a) Possible new Public Inquiry into the Hillsborough Tragedy

           Mr Michael said there were concerns about new evidence that had come to light about the
           way the incident had been handled and they needed to be aired. However, Jack Straw was
           very concerned to avoid “starting a hare running1'’.

           As a result there had been some “creative thinking1’ in the Home Office to find a way of
           testing the new evidence without re-opening the whole affair. Mr Michael was of the
           view that the announcement on Monday would not cause this Association any problems.

    b) Crime and Disorder Bill

           I asked Mr Michael when the bill would be published and if there would be a period of
           consultation. He said it was in its drafting stage and would not be published in full until
           at least late Autumn.

           The list of contents was still being considered and he was mindful of the need for proper
           consultation. He thought it would be possible to put sections of the bill out for
           consultation as and when they were ready and would arrange for that to be done

    c) Parliamentary Advisor

            I told Mr Michael that the Association was looking for a new parliamentary advisor
            following the retirement of Sir Anthony Durant and that we thought it would be best to
            choose a Labour MP. I asked him for his views.

            He said it would be sensible to select a Labour MP but it would be best to wait for
            another week or so before drawing up a short list as the membership of select committees
            had not yet been finalised and that could create a conflict of interest. He said while new
            MPs would not normally be considered, some mature new members were ideally qualified
            for the job.

            Mr Michael agreed to put forward some names when Mr Mackenzie and I see him on 10th
            July.




                                                     1
Pma C(a )
#




    d) The Standard of Proof in Misconduct Cases

          I asked Mr Michael if there had been any developments.

          He said the issue was under consideration but no early decisions would be made. Mr
          Straw was conscious that there were strongly held views on both sides and was looking
          for a balanced solution whereby some of the objectives of both ACPO and the other two
          staff associations were met.

    e) ACPO Pay

          He confirmed that the ACPO pay agreement had been approved by Home Office Ministers
          and was awaiting Treasury approval.

    f) Changes to the Value of Criminal Damage Before it is Counted as a Crime

           I told Mr Michael that I had heard that the Home Office rules on when criminal damage
           should be counted as a crime might be about to change with the £20 limit being scrapped.
           That would mean very minor cases of criminal damage would be crimed, with an
           escalation of the crime figures giving a false impression of an increase in crime.

           He said he was not aware of such a move but would ask his officials to look into the issue.
           In the meantime he would be grateful if we could trace the source of the suggestion.




                                                    2
