                                                 HO PRESS OFFICE!    P. 1 /2


                                                                           c.


                         y H o m e O ffice
                              50 Queen Annes Gate, London SW1H 9AT
News Release         034/96   (Might line: 0171 273 4595)
   9 February 1996                                          0171 273 4610
        PHOTOPHONE PUTS FOOTBALL HOOLIGANS ON THE LOSING SIDE

   Euro '96 will see the debut of a new player against football
   hooliganism. Home Secretary Michael Howard announced today at
   Villa Park,
   Mr Howard unveiled the latest technology - Photophone - which
   will link all eight championship grounds in the fight againat
   football hooliganism.
   The photophone will enable the police to send photographs of
   football hooligans by computer link.
   The Football Unit at NCI5 and the central co-ordinating unit in
   London will also play a crucial role in identifying the hooligan
   element at the grounds so that police can act to stop any trouble
   before it starts.
   At the Photophone launch, Mr Howard said:
        "Euro '96 is going to be a tremendous sporting occasion for
        this country. It's going to be the greatest feast of
        football here since tha 1966 World Cup.
        "The clear message to football hooligans is don't come. You
        are not welcome. And most importantly you will be caught by
        the police.
        "The majority of fans travelling to the grounds are genuine
        fans of the game. Like them, 1 am looking forward to
        watching some great football.
        "West Midlands police and forces all over the country are
        going to work together to ensure that there is a great
        sporting atmosphere at all the matches.
        uWe cannot, and will not, ignore the small minority who try
        to mar the safety and enjoyment of others,"
   Mr Howard thanked the Football Trust who ‘are contributing
   £150,000 to provide ten Photophones to the eight forces
   patrolling the grounds, New Scotland Yard and the British
   Transport Police.
09   FEB '96 13= 4?     HO   PRESS OFFICE             HO PRESS OFFICE     P. 2 /2




       The Government has introduced and supported a range of measures
       to beat hooligans:
             *        provided the courts with the power to stop convicted
                       football hooligans attending grounds under the 1986
                       Public Order Ace and the 19S9 Football Spectators Act;
              *       controls on the sale and possession of alcohol under
                       the 1985 Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol) Act;

              *       introducing football related offences under the 1991
                       Football (Offences Act),
                                 throwing missiles inside grounds,
                                 taking part in indecent or racist chanting,
                                 and
                                 going on to the pitch; and
                      introducing a criminal offence for an unauthorised
                      person to sell a ticket for a designated football
                      match under the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act
                      1994.
       All the clubs involved have worked hard to ensure that their
       stadiums are designed to be as safe for fans as possible.


        Notes to Editors
        1 There are eight championship grounds - Villa Park (Aston
        Villa), Anfield (Liverpool) , City Ground (Nottingham) , Elland
        Road (Leeds), Hillsborough (Sheffield Wednesday), Old Trafford
        (Manchester) St James' Park (Newcastle) and Wembley.

        2. Euro '96 matches at Villa Park:

                       Monday IQ June            Netherlands v Scotland

                       Thursday 13 June          Switzerland v ttetherlands

                       Tuesday 18 June           Scotland v Switzerland

                       Sunday 23 June            Quarter Final Match
