i7.N0V.199e   1£:4r-         HO =RESS OFFICE                                       NO.399      P.l

              C « J     Is   f o ,.
              t^ >      t     f c - jj ft

 a
                                             H o m e O f I ic e
                                             50 Queen Anne’s Gate, London SW IH 9AT j
News Release                    468/98
                                             (NigKt line: 0171 273 4595) Fax: 0171 273 4<|i0
                                             E-Mail: crtmmdir.ho@gtnet.gOv.uk


        27 November 1998                                                       0171 27: 4610


                              MARKING HOOLIGANS OUT OF THE GAME
                     Proposals for Combating Football Hooliganism Published


        Wide-ranging proposals to combat football hooliganism and protect the c cent
        fan were announced today by Home Office minister Kate Hoey.

         The 29 measure consultation document - A Review of Football Related j
         Legislation - puts forward for discussion the most far-reaching antkhoolicjan
         package ever considered by government.

         The main measures for consultation include:


                       toughening existing powers to stop convicted criminals from
                       travelling abroad, including the surrender of passports;

                       introducing new powers to stop unconvicted but known hooligans
                       from travelling abroad;                                    l:
                                                                                         ij!
                       extending existing legislation on ticket touting to cover matchelp
                       taking place abroad;                                             j:|

                       toughening existing powers to stop convicted hooligans from i'j
                       travelling to domestic games;                               iI

                       making it an offence for an individual to make racist chants;

                       introducing new powers to restrict the sale of alcohol in and around
                       grounds.                                                        '


         Launching the consultation document Kate Hoey emphasised the need ip r all
         parts of the football community to share responsibility and work togethe o
         drive out the hooligan;




        H om e Office News Rdmses can be found on: www.coi.gOY.uk/coi/deptsi/GHO/Gljt O.html
                    H om e Office homepage can be found on: www. h o meftlTice.gov.uU
“Football is our national sport and millions of people go to football
matches each season to watch and enjoy the game. Trouble has ,
declined in recent years but we must not become complacent Tmj'e
are still a small minority who ruin things for the decent supporter, fhey
cause mayhem, grab the headlines and divert resources.

“The review is wide ranging and contains some 29 proposals. It is
aimed at making sure the decent, law-abiding supporter can enjov
football in a safe and secure environment.

“Some of the proposals would represent fundamental change. Fo
example, the issue of travel restrictions against unconvicted hoolit Ians
is a significant shift and the introduction cf alcohol bans, although
intended for use only in extreme circumstances, would also be a
serious move. However, following their success at France ’98, ha <;ing
a similar power at our disposal will help England's bid for 2006.     i
                                                                      i

“The review also seeks to plug gaps in the present legislation on:
                                                                        I
                                                                        |
       travel restrictions (including extending the definition of a football
       related offence for the purpose of imposing restriction ordejs
       and, to make sure the order is obeyed, a requirement for tljjjse
       subject to restriction orders to hand in their passports to a jtolice
       station);

       ticket touting (extending the legislation to cover the sale of j i
       tickets to matches taking place overseas); and
                                                                      I
       racist chanting (extending the current law applying to two ci
       more people to cover a single individual).


"We need a framework of legislation so those who commit offences are
brought to justice. However, it is not just a matter of introducing ni^/i/
laws. Government has a role but so do the football authorities, th«!l
clubs and the supporters themselves in creating a culture that doeiE not
tolerate the hooligan.                                                •

"Football has made considerable progress in improving grounds bikt
this needs to be combined with a recognition of the value of the
supporter and the creation of an environment where they feef part jtjf
the dub.                                                          11

"Emphasis should be given to the fact that supporters are more th^i
just punters who hand over their money each week. They are an
integral part of the sport and should be seen by clubs as their
representatives.
7.M("v .        12:*          HC =RESS OFFICE                                      M0.3?9,        P.3
                                                                                            ll
                                                                                            :i


                    'The football authorities and individual clubs have a responsibility the
                    wider community and must demonstrate that they do not condonelbad
                    behaviour on or off the field. Players are seen as rote models and.'lalso
                    have 3 responsibility to live up to the best traditions of the sport, ~
                    leading by example both cn and off the pitch.


                    ‘ Consultation on future legislation is our way of making sure the wjf ole
                    of the football community is involved in developing the legislation 4 e
                    need to combat the hooligan.                                        j

                     "We are determined to prevent our international reputation from bl&ng
                    tarnished by the mindless few and show that we have the legislathjte
                    framework, the facilities and the supporters tc host the 2006 Worlcl'
                    Cup. We also Know that we need effective measures in place for iiiuro
                    2000 .                                                                    !
                                                                                         h
                    “I hope this exercise will galvanise everyone in the game to consic fer
                    what they can do to help. The solution lies in working together an {
                    letting hooligans know that we are determined to mark them out o(i^he
                    game and look after the interests of the decent fan.”              i!



           NOTES FOR EDITORS:

           1. A summary of the proposals and a summary of current legislation are!
              attached.                                                          I

           2 . Kate Hoey was speaking at the launch of the document held at Arsenal
              FC.
                                                                                         [j
           3, Home Secretary Jack Straw announced the review in February at theiPU
              Seminar on the Policing of Football, held at Blackburn Rovers.   'T

           4. Copies of the review document are available from Operational Policing
              Policy Unit, Box 25, Room 541, Home Office, 50 Queen Anne's Gate
              London. SW 1H9AT.

           5, Comments on the review should be sent to the same address.                i




                                                                                         i I
                                                                                         lf
                                                                        II!
Main Proposals for Change                                               |{,


Restriction Orders

      •   Re-name as international banning orders

      •    Extend to 72 hours either side of a matchthe period in which a | j
          football-related offence can be committed for the purpose of seeing
          an order

      • No attendance or intention to attend match required

      • Reporting required to specific named police stations

      • Submission of passport in advance of the reporting requiremen

      • Period of order extended to 10 years

      •   Application for termination not before fouryears               ij
                                                                         \ ii
      •   New offences for breaches of order                             '
                                                                         \\

      •   New powers of arrest                                           !

      • Requirement for the court to consider issuing an order in ail casjes
        following conviction for a football related offence              Ij
                                                                              i
                                                                         II! j
Exclusion Orders

      ■   Re-name domestic banning orders

      • Extend to 2.4 hours either side of a match the period in which a
        football-related offence can be committed for the purpose of iss uing
        an order

      • MaKe a breach an arrestable offence

      • increase penalty for breaches

      » Central records to be maintained of domestic banning orders

      • Requirement for the court to consider issuing an order in all caslSs
        following conviction for a football related offence
7.H0V.19SS   12:47        HC' PRESS OFFICE .                                     N0.3S3



                                                                                      ll
                                                                                      i




       Alcohol Bans

                   Allow chief officers of police to apply for alcohol restrictions

                   Applications would be made to the licensing magistrates

                   Consent of Secretary of State then required

                   Restrictions can apply to the sale, consumption or carrying of
                   alcohol


       Hooligans without conviction

               • Courts to have the power to issue a restriction order without thd
                 need for a football-related conviction

               • Application to the court for an order to be based on intelligence
                 information available to the police

               ■   Information would be required to show there was sufficient re a ^ n to
                   believe violence would be prevented                             11


       Ticket Touting

               ■   Extend existing legislation to tickets sold in this country for
                   designated matches played outside England and Wales


       Racist Chanting

               •    Make it an offence for an individual to make racist chants at a
                   football ground
27.NOV. 1996   125 4?      HC PRESS OFFICE.                                      N0-3S9,        P.6
                                                                                       f!
                                                                                       ; \
                                                                                       1I
                                                                                       'i
                                                                                         !
                                                                                         i




         Existing Legislation to Combat Football Hooliganism at Matches in
         England and Wales


         The Sporting Events (Control of Aicohol etc) A d 1985

                   prohibits the possession of alcohol on the way to matches on footbjt II
                   special coaches and trains and makes it an offence to be drunk on|!jhem

               •   makes an offence of trying to enter a ground when drunk or in       |
                   possession of alcohol; of possessing or consuming alcohol within view
                   of the pitch during the period of the match: or being drunk during jtfie
                   period of the match                                                ||
                                                                                        i l


                   provides the police the power to search someone reasonably suspjjicb:ed
                   of committing an offence under the Act, and to arrest such a persori this
                   may include searching coaches or trains carrying passengers to or from
                   matches or on arrivai as welt as searching fans waiting to enter a
                   ground or inside a ground


         The Public Order Act 1986

               • created the new offence of disorderly conduct • behaviour which s'tpps
                 short of actual violence but which is likely to distress, harass or aiaijrn

               • the courts have the power to make exclusion orders against convicjfid
                 football hooligans, prohibiting their attendance at league matches irji
                 England and Wales


         The Football Spectators Act 1989

               • courts can impose restriction orders on those convicted of football-
                 related offences to prevent them from attending matches abroad.
                 Involving teams from Engiand or Wales

               * those subject to restriction orders are required to report to a police
                 station (of their choice) roughly when the match is taking place. It fcji an
                 offence to fail to do so                                               I
                                                                                        i
               ♦ the Act also enables magistrates in England and Wales to make orcl »rs
                 against those convicted of corresponding offences in Scotland, Sweden,
IOv.1998   12:4S          HC PRESS OFFICE                                        N0.399j        P.7



                                                                                 I!
                Italy, Republic of Ireland, France and Norway. Bilateral agreem en t are
                necessary to achieve this                                        "




     The Football (Offences) Act 1991

            •      three offences of disorderly behaviour

            (a)       throwing any object at or towards the pitch or spectator areai
                      without lawful authority or reasonable excuse                  i

            (b)       taking part in indecent or racist chanting

            (c)       going on to the pitch without lawful authority or lawful excuse
                                                                                        ■I

            *      These offences attract a fine, and the' exclusion and restriction or jers,
                  referred to above, may also apply


     The Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994

                introduced legislation (on grounds of public order and public safetV),
                which makes it a criminal offence for an unauthorised person to sfell'a
                ticket for a designated football match in a public place or a place f ii
                which the public has access or otherwise by way of a trade or        I!
                business                                                             ;I
                                                                                       ij
                this measure addresses two evils brought about by ticket touts. Fljrst
                as they did not discriminate as to whom they sold tickets, their        j
                activities acted to undermine segregation arrangements. Second i ,
                the very presence of ticket touts outside, or in the vicinity of a groan'd
                can act as a focus for disorder since it encourages those without
                tickets to travel to the ground hoping to obta'm them


    The Crime and Disorder Act 199S

            *     Section 84 amended the 1989 Act to

                      •   Increase the penalty for breach of a restriction order from!
                          one month to six months the level of fine from 3 to 5      I!

                     •    make the offence of failure to comply with a reporting
                          requirement an arrestable offence
H ome O ffice
      H om e O ffice




f e ^ c i w ©if
Football-Related
Legislation
November 1998




Home Office
Operational Policing Policy Unit
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London
SW1H 9AT
Introduction
Legislation introduced in the early 1990s has helped make football hooliganism inside domestic
grounds largely a thing of th e past. There rem ain isolated incidents b u t the m ain focus now lies
outside th e grounds often some distance from th e venue and often some hours before or after the
m atch. It can also involve those w ho do n o t attend matches but use th e sport as an occasion to
instigate or com m it criminal acts.


On the international scene, events in France during the World Cup Finals illustrated th e
lim itations of measures to deal w ith those w ho are known hooligans b u t w ithout football-related
restrictions as defined in the current legislation.


The purpose of this review is to establish measures which would provide recourse to th e law to
prevent a range of offenders from attending m atches in this country and travelling to and
attending key designated matches abroad.

The num ber of matches overseas at d u b level is increasing w ith th e expansion of the Cham pions'
League and the greater use of prelim inary rounds to other European club tournam ents. The
possible introduction of a European Super League appears a strong likelihood w ithin the next few
years. The shape it m ay take is open to speculation. However, it m ay provide to p clubs in this
country w ith regular hom e and away fixtures against continental sides. This m ay add to the
intensity of (further) rivalry and add to the potential for hooligan activity.

With UEFA-based club competitions, the approach of Euro 2000 and Japan/ Korea 2002, there will
be a great m any overseas matches to be played in the next four years by team s from all four hom e
countries. W ith the UK, the problem of football hooliganism is perceived to be largely lim ited to
England. However, there are certain aspects of football-related legislation th at m ay need to be
considered in a UK context.

Football hooliganism reflects on our international reputation and our ability to deal w ith our own
citizens. The prospect of m ajor international sporting events being held in this country should n o t
be dim inished by th e actions of th e small minority.

Football is our national sport and the standing of th e domestic game in international terms is at an
all-time high. There is a real prospect of th e World Cup com ing to England in 2006. Hosting th e
World Cup Finals reflects th e am bition of the sport and th e am bition of the nation. It is essential
that we can show we have th e measures and the ability to thw art th e actions of th e mindless few.




Com m ents on the contents of th e review docum ent should be sent to the following address no
later than 26 February 1999:

Home Office
Operational Policing Policy Unit
Box 25
Room 541
SO Queen Anne's Gate
London
5W1H 9AT
        r




-r-ti
     1 Summary of Recommendations
    Restriction Orders

    1       That th e restriction order would be replaced w ith an international banning order.

    2       That the order may be issued in relation to football-related offences w hich take place 72 hours
            either side of a designated m atch being played outside England and Wales; or 24 hours either side
            of a designated m atch being played in England and Wales.


 3          That th e courts could issue an order a t or around the venue or location irrespective of attendance
            or intention to attend th e m atch but where evidence exists to show th at th e person's attendance
            was principally in connection with the m atch.


4           That th e courts could also issue an order in respect of football-related offences com m itted at
            venues or locations other th an the ground where it can be shown th a t the person’s attendance or
            behaviour was principally in connection w ith the m atch.

5           That the courts would have the power to require reporting at th e tim e of key international
            matches to a nam ed specific police station.


6           That a constable should have the power of arrest w ithout w arrant if he has reasonable grounds
            for believing th at a person is likely to breach the reporting or passport requirements of the
            banning order.


7       That a condition of an international banning order would require th e person to subm it his
        passport to a nam ed police station five days before key designated matches as prescribed by th e
        enforcing authority.


8       That a new offence be created for failure to submit a passport as part of th e reporting requirem ent
        carrying a level 3 fine.                                                                            '


9       That the period of international banning orders is increased to six years on conviction and to ten
        years on conviction for an offence carrying a term of im prisonm ent.


10      That persons provided w ith exem ptions to reporting requirem ent would have to subm it passports
        to the police.


11      That the period of withdrawal of term ination process for restriction orders in operation is
        increased from one year to four years and six years respectively.

12      That enforcem ent powers should provide for:

        •     Reporting requirements copied to a designated police station
        ■     Action to be taken by th e named police station in the event of a breach
        ■     Passport Office to be advised of those subject to international banning orders
        •     Provision for the issue of an arrest w arrant for those overseas in breach of an order
        ■     Ports to be advised of those subject to international banning orders
Exclusion Orders
13    That the exclusion order is re-titled dom estic banning order.

14    T hat th e orders should be issued for a m inim um period of one year.

15    T hat breaching an order would be m ade an arrestable offence.

16    That a new offence of likely to com m it or about to com m it a breach of an exclusion order
      is provided-

17    T hat th e order m ay be issued in relation to football-related offences w hich take place 24 hours
      either side of a designated m atch being played in England and Wales.

18    That th e penalty on breaches is increased to six m onths and/or level 5 fine.

19    T hat the enforcing authority would m aintain records o f dom estic banning orders and
       subsequent breaches.



Racist chanting at football grounds
20     That it should become an offence for an individual to make racist or indecent chants at
       football grounds.



Ticket Touting
21     T hat ticket touting legislation should be extended to make it unlawful to sell tickets in England
       and Wales for designated m atches being played in other parts of th e U nited Kingdom and abroad.



Alcohol
 22    That legislative provision be introduced to enable chief officers of police to make application to
       th e local licensing authority for th e issue of an order, w ith the consent of th e Secretary of State, to
       restrict the sale of alcohol in specified areas, or th e whole area w ithin their licensing area, for a
       specified period of tim e and prevent the public consum ption and carrying of alcohol in those areas
        during that tim e.



 Dealing with Category Cs
 23     That conspiracy and incitem ent should be added to th e list of relevant football-related offences.

 24     That consideration should be given to the courts to have th e power to impose orders to prevent
        non-convicted persons attending designated m atches.
Automatic requirement by the courts to issue restriction orders

25   T hat th e issue of restriction orders (international banning orders) is required in all cases where a
     person is convicted of a football-related offence an d there is sufficient evidence th a t to do so
     would help prevent violence or disorder at designated football m atches played overseas.

26   T hat th e threshold for im posing restriction orders should be reduced from "satisfied" to one of
     reasonable grounds.


27   1h at th e requirem ents for reporting of football-reiated convictions by foreign jurisdictions should
     be simplified.



Automatic requirement by the courts to issue exclusion orders

28   T hat th e issue of an exclusion order (domestic banning order) is required in all cases where a
     person is convicted of a football-related offence and there is sufficient evidence th at to do so
     w ould help prevent violence or disorder at designated football m atches played in England and
     Wales.


29   T hat th e threshold for im posing exclusion orders should be reduced from "satisfied" to one of
     reasonable grounds.
2 Restriction Orders
       The present legislation on restriction orders contains a num ber of significant gaps o n liability to an
       order an d enforcem ent th a t are likely to be (further) highlighted b y th e increasing num bers issued
       and th e potential for future increases. The following measures seek to fill those gaps.




       fte^laeei restriction order virith international banning order.



2.2    This change aims to have m ore im pact th a n 'restriction order'. The in ten tio n of th e banning order
       is explicit from th e title and th e ability to require submission of passport (recom m endation 7) will
       add further weight to th e process. Although som ew hat cosmetic, it does provide greater Indication
        of th e purpose of the order.




                 order may be i s l l d in relation to football-related offences which take place 72 hours either
        side of a designated match being played outside England and Wales; or 24 hours either side of a
        designated match being played in England and Wales.



2.3     Section 15 of th e Football Spectators Act 1989 provides for a court in England and Wales to issue a
        restriction order to a person convicted in lingland and Wales of a relevant offence (football-related
        offence) specified in Schedule 1 of th e Art; or, under section 22, convicted of a relevant offence
        outside England and Wales for offences w hich correspond to football-related offences and specified
         in an order in Council.

 2.4     Section 1(8) of th e 1989 Act requires th a t offences to be considered football-related m ust be,
         effectively, w ithin a tw o-hour period before th e start of the m atch and w ithin one hour after the
         end of th e m atch. If the offence was com m itted away from th e ground, the convicting court m ust
         make a declaration of relevance confirm ing th a t the offence was football-related.

 2.5     The provision of two hours before an d one hour after a m atch for offences to be considered
         football-related does n o t reflect the nature of th e problem . In th e case of international or European
         club m atches, supporters m ay often be there a day or so or sometimes longer before the m atch.
         They may also rem ain in the area after th e m atch or in cases of international tournam ents, travel
         o nto th e next venue. Extending the overseas provision to 72 hours would provide for th e banning
         order process to be used against those convicted of football-related offences for, effectively, one
         week at a tim e. This would cover all non-m atch playing days during international tournam ents.
          For domestic matches, th e three-day period would appear sufficient.
                  >•   • ••   '

       That tfie;cburts could issue anijrder at or around the venue or location irrespective of attendance or
       intention to attend the match but where evidence exists to show that the person's attendance was
       principally in connection with the match.




       Thatiifejcourts may also issue iii order in respect of football-related offences committed at venues or
       locations other than the ground where it can be shown that the person's attendance or behaviour was
       principally in connection with the match.



2.6   A difficulty courts face is in determ ining w hether or not an offence com m itted away from th e
       ground is football-related. The court must make a declaration of relevance and the prosecution
       provide the defendant w ith five days notice before the start of the trial of th e intention to seek
       such a declaration. There is a right of appeal against making such a declaration. These safeguards
       should remain but we should agree criteria w ith th e police, CPS and LCD to assist in determ ining
       the basis for applying for and issuing a declaration of relevance,

2.7   That criteria should similarly be capable of being applied to offences com m itted overseas, although
       by their very nature offences advised under bilateral agreements m ust be football-related,

2.8   Developing the criteria m ust take account of hooligan-type behaviour w hich occurs around
      matches but m any miles from the ground. For example, there were a num ber of arrests in this
      country following m atches played in France '98. It is arguable whether these are all football-related
      or not but we m ust establish a basis for dealing with behaviour related to th e event and not
      exclusively the venue.




      Thattfiejeourts should have the power to require reporting at the time of key international matches
      to a named specific police station.



2.9   For a restriction order to be issued, the courts m ust be satisfied th at the issue of th e order would
      help prevent violence or disorder at or in connection w ith designated football matches played in
      any country outside England and Wales. The order requires that the offender m ust report initially
      and within five days of the order being issued - subject to a term of im prisonm ent - to a designated
      and specified police station. Thereafter, the offender may report to any police station in England
      and Wales in response to the reporting requirement,

2.10 The police station is of th e offender's choosing and he is not required to notify the enforcing
     authority as to w hich police station he intends to report on each occasion the reporting
     requirements have been imposed. This means th a t a breach is n o t recorded with the enforcing
     authority until some tim e (several days) after the reporting requirem ent has n o t been fulfilled. It
     also means that th e police are n o t able to act swiftly if a breach has occurred.
            ffiafaxSStable should have tfiepower of arrest without warrant if he has reasonable grounds for
            believing that a person is likely to breath the reporting or passport requirements of the banning order.



     2.11   Section 84 of th e Crime and Disorder Act 1998 provides th a t the offence for failure to com ply w ith
            th e duty to report becomes an arrestable offence; and th a t a person guilty of such an offence shall
            be liable to a term of im prisonm ent n o t exceeding six m o n th s (increased from one m onth) and/or
              a level 3 fine.

     2.12 The am endm ents in th e Crime and Disorder Act 1998 are useful b u t m ay benefit from further
          clarification. Making a breach an arrestable offence does provide a power of arrest under section 24(7)
          of PACE w hen a person is about to com m it a n offence or there are reasonable grounds to suspect
          th a t an offence is about to be com m itted. Case law w ould suggest th a t simply boarding a plane or
          train or ferry would n o t in itself constitute reasonable grounds. It would have to b e confirmed by
          an objective assessment th a t th e person intended to com m it th e offence in question. Therefore,
          th e potential lies for a person to give reasons th a t allow th e court to consider th a t a reasonable
          person would n o t have objectively reached th e view th a t a breach was im m inent or intended.

     2.13     To avoid any confusion, th e pow er of arrest should be available where a constable has reasonable
              grounds to believe th a t a breach of the order is likely to occur. This would help prevent those
              subject to a restriction order travel in advance of th e reporting or passport requirem ents. It would
              replicate similar conditions contained in Section 7 of th e Bail Act 1976 for those considered likely
              to breach th e conditions of their bail. It would also rem ove any uncertainty about th e exercise of
              this power on th e basis of tim e e.g. a person subject to a restriction order m ay travel to one
              country several days in advance of a m atch being played in another country w ith th e in ten tio n of
               later travelling to th at country in w hich th e m atch is being played.




                                                          :‘.vt   '

               TTiat'ascSndition of an international banning order requires the person to submit their passport to a
               namelpolice station five days before key designated matches as prescribed by the enforcing authority.




                                   offence of failurltoi submit passport as part of the reporting requirement, carrying a
                le v e l! .fine.



       2.14     W here a restriction order is in place, there is no certainty over w hether a person will travel to an
                overseas m atch u ntil such tim e as they do or do n o t report to th e police station w hen required.
                This uncertainty could be m inim ised by requiring subm ission of th e passport in advance of the
                reporting requirem ents. This would have a two-fold benefit: firstly, it w ould counter th e m ajor
                criticism th a t we do n o t do enough to stop (convicted and non-convjcted) hooligans travelling in
                th e first place; and, secondly, from a more practical perspective, failure to subm it a passport on the
                 allotted day will alert th e police to a potential breach sufficiently in advance of th e reporting



10
           requirem ents. This should allow th e opportunity for action to be taken against th e individual
           ijefore they travel. The court would make submission of th e passport a condition of th e order.

    2.15                   The police have no power to remove a passport from som eone unless passport facilities have been
           w ithdraw n from th em by the Secretary of State under th e Royal Prerogative or a court has required
            surrender of th e passport. There are certain international conventions w hich bear on the freedom
            to travel and th e UK does n o t regard its national passport as a m eans of controlling th e
-          m ovem ents of its citizens. In th e context of a banning order, th e court w ould require subm ission
            of th e passport as a m eans to ensure com pliance w ith th e reporting restrictions. Reporting
I          restrictions are there to prevent travel. Submission of th e passport is a m ethod to help reduce th e
            potential for breach of the court order.




    2.16   Article 1 of the First Protocol to th e ECHR entitles individuals to th e peaceful enjoym ent of their
           possessions. It m ight be argued th a t th e (temporary) removal of som eone's passport is contrary to
           this right. However, there is some doubt th at such a claim w ould be Successful. For a start, a
           passport m ay n o t be considered a possession (it says th a t it rem ains th e property of Her Majesty's
           G overnm ent). Also, th e Article provides fairly wide scope for th e State to lim it this right, and it
           m ay be th a t th e reasons for w anting to deprive football hooligans of th eir passport for a lim ited
           period would be regarded as Justifying such an infringem ent.

    2.17   Article 2 of Protocol 4 to th e ECHR provides for freedom of m ovem ent. Paragraph 2 states that
           "Everyone shall be free to leave any country, including his own." However, paragraph 3 enables
           restrictions to be placed on this right on various grounds (including "national security or public
           safety, for th e m aintenance of public order for th e prevention of crime...") provided such
           restrictions are in accordance w ith the law and necessary in a dem ocratic society. The proposal is
           likely to m eet these criteria.


                                                                                                                       11
     2.18       The UK has n o t ratified Protocol 4 so th e Article on freedom of m ovem ent is n o t presently an
                international obligation of the UK under th e ECHR (nor is it included in th e Human Rights Bill).
                However, the UK has ratified th e International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR),
                Article 12 of w hich is similar to Article 2 of Protocol 4 to th e ECHR. The UK does therefore have an
                international obligation to comply w ith Article 12 of th e ICCPR.




                Thirtha^eriod of intem ationl& nning orders is increased to six years on conviction and to ten
                years.oh conviction for an offence carrying a term of imprisonment.



         2.19   Section 16 of th e 1989 Act provides th a t th e court m ay issue a restriction order for a period of five
                years where a person has been sentenced to a period of im prisonm ent. W here no such term of
                im prisonm ent has been given on conviction, th e order is issued for a period of two years.

         2.20   International football in Europe effectively runs o n a two-year cycle w ith European
                Cham pionships and World Cup tournam ents tw o years either side of each other. Orders providing
                for 10 years on im prisonm ent and six years w ith non-custodial penalties would m ean that
                offenders would miss 2 World Cups + 1 European C ham pionship and 1 World Cup + 1 European
                C ham pionship (and qualifying rounds) respectively. These would be autom atic restrictions w hen
                th e order is issued by th e court- These would be added to by the targetted restrictions determ ined
                b y th e enforcing authority in respect of club m atches played in UEFA-based tournam ents and
                 friendly or other matches.

         2.21    These bans m ay seem harsh but would provide the strong message th a t those who choose to break
                 th e law at football m atches have to suffer the consequences of their actions. Preventing them from
                 attending would help secure the safety and enjoyment for those w ho attend matches to watch and
                 enjoy football.


                     • *Av/         —   ** * 1
                                             */


                                               (QJ<U
                ..          _____
     ,                 ..               -O'-
            "    Th'atpejSons provided with exemptions to reporting requirement would have to submit their
                 passports to the police.



         2.22 Section 20 of th e Football Spectators Act 1989 makes provision for the enforcing authority to grant
              exem ptions from th e duty to report w hen designated matches are being played, it is an offence for
              a person to knowingly make false or m isleading statem ents or produce false or misleading m aterial
              in support of th e application for exem ption. W here an exem ption is granted, th e person should
              rem ain subject to the requirem ent to subm it their passport five days in advance of th e date on
              which such reporting requirements would have come into effect. The only exem ption to this
              would be in cases where the person subject to th e order has satisfied th e police/enforcing authority
                     th at the passport is required for travel unconnected w ith a football m atch.




12
        rhat the-period of withdrawal'Of-termination process for restriction orders in operation is increased
        from one year to four years and six years respectively.



2.23   Section 17 of the Football Spectators Act 1989 provides that a person may make application to the
       court to terminate the order after it has had effect for at least one yean Should that application be
       refused the person is entitled to make a further application after six months. The 1989 Act is exempted
       from section 63 (2) of the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980 which provides th e court with a power to
       suspend or rescind any order other than for payment of money made on complaint to the court.

2.24 The ability to term inate the order is based on regard to th e person's character, the nature of the
     offence and conduct since the order was made. Apart from the latter, these would be th e criteria
     with which th e decision to impose a order would have been considered. A period of review after
     one year seems unduly lenient, particularly in those cases where the offender has served a term of
     im prisonm ent for conviction of th e footbalUrelated offence. That should be increased to six years
     and for non-custodial convictions, to four years.




       That enforcement powers should'provide for:



   0 Reporting requirements copied to a designated police station

   0 Action to be taken by the named police station in the event of a breach
     Direct action should be taken by the local force area enabling swifter action.

   • Passport Office to be advised of those subject to international banning orders
       Notifying the Passport Office in advance of those subject to banning orders will allow the issuing
       office to notify the police of any application for a passport. If reporting restrictions are in place and
       the passport subm itted as part of th a t process, th e police may th en either arrest the person at th e
       issuing office or at the address given by the applicant in any postal application. In addition, the
       person seeking a new passport will have com m itted the offence of knowingly having supplied false
       inform ation to obtain a passport under section 36 of the Criminal Justice Act 1925.

   * Provision for the issue of an arrest warrant for those overseas in breach of an outer
     This will allow positive action to be taken against those who have failed to comply w ith either the
     passport or reporting restriction and allow authorities overseas w ith th e ability to return persons
     either at the port of entry or elsewhere w ithin their jurisdiction. It would be a useful tool in
     showing th at we are doing som ething about convicted hooligans abroad rather th an rely on quasi­
     judicial or adm inistrative processes in those countries.

  ° Ports to be advised of those subject to international banning orders
       By being deemed an arrestable offence, section 24 provides the ordinary citizen with th e power of
       arrest. That would Obviously include immigration officers. Ports should be advised as a m atter of
       course of those subject to international banning orders. This would give a stronger message of
       intent to prevent those subject to international banning orders from travel.


                                                                                                                   13
3 Exclusion Orders

'■^.♦"'•V./,     'W.,M '                  s'

      '        That'tire-exdusion order is re-titled domestic banning order.



3.1            As well as m aintaining th e link w ith international b an n in g orders, th e revised title w ould provide
               a stronger and more direct message.



     ^asSS*f^*3r           —
   d;

                ThatiorSers should be issued foKa minimum period of one year.



  3.2          Part IV of th e Public Order Act 1986 gives th e court powers to make an exclusion order prohibiting
                a person from attending all designated m atches in England and Wales w here a person has been
                convicted of a football-related offence; and th e court is satisfied th a t such an order w ould help
                prevent violence or disorder at football m atches. Orders are issued for a m inim um of three m onths
                an d there is n o m axim um duration. W hilst advice to courts indicates th a t th e term in w hich the
                order is in force should take account of th e d o se season, a period of three m o nths m ay involve
                 only six hom e m atches for th e convicted person.
      That breaching an order wouLdftje made an arrestable offence.



3.3   There is an offence of breach of an exclusion order of one m onth's im prisonm ent or a level three
      fine or both. A constable has th e power of arrest for anyone he reasonably suspects is com m itting
      such an offence.


3.4   W ith th e increasing and extensive use of stewards, th e offence of being in breach of an exclusion
      order should be m ade an arrestable offence. This would allow a citizen's power o f arrest to be
      exercised in accordance w ith section 24 (4) of PACE.




                                     ,r& '"
      Thata'riew offence of likely to commit or about to commit a breach of an exclusion order is provided.



3.5   A constable has no powers of an est when there are reasonable grounds to suspect th a t a person is
      likely to com m it a breach of an exclusion order. This m eans th a t powers to stop a person attending
      m atches cannot be used un til such tim e as a person has been adm itted to th e ground. An option
      m ay be for th e conditions of th e exclusion order to ban the convicted person from being present
      either outside or inside th e ground on m atch days b u t th is m ay be difficult to draft and
      cum bersom e to enforce. Instead, th e m ore preferred o ption is th e ability to provide th e power of
      arrest o n seeking entry to th e ground in accordance w ith section 24(4) of PACE and, for a
      constable only, th e power to arrest w hen there are reasonable grounds to believe th a t a person is
      likely to breach an exclusion order. The latter would be useful in helping prevent convicted
      hooligans turning up outside venues on m atch days, thereby m inim ising th e potential for trouble.




      Thatthe;drder may be issued in-relation to football-related offences which take place 24 hours either
      side.of a designated match being played in England and Wales.



3.6   Under section 31 of th e Public O rder Act 1986, an exclusion order m ay only be issued in relation
      to football-related offences com m itted either on a journey to or from a designated m atch; or 2
      hours before or one hour after a m atch. As indicated above on international b anning orders, these
      timescales before and after m atches do not reflect th e nature of th e problem . This is particularly so
      in ternis of hom e supporters after m atches and extending th e tim e frame clarifies any potential
      confusion as to w hether som eone was "on a journey to or from " th e m atch.
'      Thatthecpenalty on breaches is ihcreased to six months and/or level 5 fine.



3.7    Section 32 (3) of th e Public Order Act 1986 provides for a term of im prisonm ent of u p to one
       m o n th and/or a level 3 fine. The penalty should be brought in to line w ith th a t for breach of
       restrictions orders, recently increased to six m onths and/or a level 5 fine by section 84 of th e
       Crime and Disorder Act 1998.




                                     -0 :? '
       ThatthCenforrfng authority would maintain records of domestic banning orders and subsequent
       breaches.



3.8    Under section 34 of th e Public Order Act 1986, details of th e exclusion order are conveyed to the
       person concerned, th e chief officer of police in th e force area concerned and th e Football
       Association. The N ational Crim inal Intelligence Service (NCIS), Football U nit receive copies either
       through th e force concerned (by th e Football Liaison Officer) or by th e courts, th e latter appearing
       to be at th e discretion of th e court.

3.9    To ensure consistency of inform ation and m aintain up-to-date records o n th e effectiveness of the
       orders, th e enforcing authority (NCIS) should be added to th e list of notifiable authorities and a
       requirem ent introduced for courts to notify convictions on breaches to th e enforcing authority.

3.10   W ith the recom m endation (17) th at th e offence of about to or having com m itted a breach of the
       dom estic banning order becomes an arrestable offence, we should determ ine an effective process
       for ground operators and football authorities to obtain and act upon inform ation on those subject
       to domestic banning orders.
4 Racist chanting at football grounds

 <cr' fhatS^pould become an offericeforan individual to make racist or indecent chants at football grounds.



4.1   Section 3 of the Football (Offences) Act 1991 makes it an offence for two or m ore people to take
      part in racist chanting at football. This was introduced following a recom m endation of the Taylor
      Report into th e Hillsborough Disaster. Lord Justice Taylor concluded th a t racialist abuse of th e kind
      chanted at football matches was probably n o t intended to stir up racial hatred; nor could it be
      readily proved th a t racial hatred was likely to be stirred up. Therefore, th e introduction of section 3
      offences removed the need to show th a t the chanting was w ithin the sight or hearing of a person
      likely to be caused harassment, alarm or distress.

4.2   This was proposed in the Labour Charter for Football published in 1995. In July 1997, the Home
      Secretary agreed in principle the threshold for this offence should be lowered to an individual
      chanting racial abuse. Owing to pressure on th e Crime and Disorder Bill and the legislative
      programme generally, the Home Secretary concluded th at this measure could n o t be included.
      There has been public confirm ation through the Government's response on th e Football Task Force
      Report on Eliminating Racism of the com m itm ent to change th e legislation w hen a suitable
      legislative opportunity arises.
5 Ticket Touting
               ■ voistf*..



       That t^kfit touting legislation5sfe>uld be extended to make it unlawful to sell tickets in England and
       Wale^for designated matches being played in other parts of the United Kingdom and abroad.



5.1    U nder section 166 of th e Crim inal Justice an d Public Order Act 1994 it is an offence for an
       unauthorised person to sell or offer or expose for sale a ticket for designated football m atch in any
       public place or place to w hich th e public has access.

5.2    A designated football m atch is, broadly, any association football m atch played In England and
       Wales involving m ajor international teams or m em bers of th e Prem iership or football league.

5.3    The legislation w hich makes ticket touting unlawful does n o t currently apply to m atches abroad.
       We could n o t make it unlaw ful to sell tickets in other countries for m atches w hich are to take place
       there w ith o u t getting in to difficulties of extraterritoriality. But it m ay be possible to am end the
       touting legislation to lim it selling in this country of tickets for m atches w hich are to take place
       elsewhere. T hat w ould n o t stop people travelling abroad on spec an d looking to buy tickets from
       foreign touts, b u t it would m ake it m ore difficult to acquire tickets in th is country.

5.4    Legislative change in th is area is likely to be complex. Experience from France *98 showed th a t
       there was some difficulty for th e footballing authorities in determ ining exactly w ho was an
       authorised agent for th e sale of tickets. The co-operation of th e footballing authorities would be
       required in (a) determ ining an established list of authorised agents fo t each m atch or tourn am ent
       and (b) ensuring th a t m atch tickets are always deem ed n o t transferable w ith out th e express
        perm ission of th e organiser.

5.5     Section 166 was introduced to prevent problems w ith crowd safety and security arising from
        breaches in ground segregation w hich m ay follow from th e sale of unauthorised tickets to rival
        supporter groups. Events in France during th e World Cup Finals show ed th a t there was an
        extensive black market and th a t th e relative absence of crowd segregation did n o t create safety or
        security problem s inside stadium s. W hilst recognising th a t positive developm ent, it is too early to
        m ove away from segregation of rival supporter groups per se. Extending the legislation as proposed
        is to m aintain th e ability for th e governing bodies to achieve effective segregation. A side benefit
        m ay be to prevent rogue ticketing agencies prom oting bogus tickets for overseas m atches but th a t
        is a m atter for consum er-related legislation.

 5.6    O n a related issue, th e paper "Labour's Sporting N ation" issued shortly before th e general election,
        contained a com m itm ent to make ticket touting at all m ajor sporting events illegal. This could be
        achieved by issuing an order under section 166 of th e Crim inal Justice and Public O rder Act 1994.
        However, through discussions w ith representative bodies of other sports, there has been no evidence
        to suggest th a t there are safety and security im plications arising in th eir sports as a result of touting.
 6 Alcohol

                                       ..asjgrH-
                  , - y ■ ; <• • •   . : - ; c y ■•

         That-tegjstative provision be iiffroduced enabling chief officere of police to make application to the
         local licensing authority for the issue of an order with the consent of the Secretary of State to
         restrict the sale of alcohol in specified areas or the whole area within their licensing area for a
         specified period of time; and prevent the public consumption and carrying of alcohol in those areas
         during that time.



6.1     The Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985


      • prohibits the possession of alcohol on the way to m atches on football special coaches and trains
        and makes it an offence to be drunk on them;


      • makes an offence of trying to enter a ground when drunk or In possession of alcohol; of possessing
        or consum ing alcohol w ithin view of the pitch during th e period of th e m atch; or being drunk
        during the period of th e m atch;


      • provides the police the power to search someone reasonably suspected of com m itting an offence
        under th e Act, and to arrest such a person: this m ay include searching coaches or trains carrying
        passengers to or from matches or on arrival as well as searching fans w aiting to enter a ground or
        inside a ground.


6.2     The legislation does not, however, provide an ability to prohibit th e sale of alcohol or prevent the
        public consum ption of alcohol in certain specified areas at certain specified times. Such restrictions
        on the sale and public consum ption of alcohol during the World Cup Finals at France '9S in
        selected venues were seen as a significant contributory factor to the behaviour of supporters.

6.3     Section 188 of the Licensing Act 1964 empowers the closure of all licensed premises in or near the
        place where a riot or tum ult has occurred or is expected to occur until such tim e as two justices of
        the peace in th at area may order. The Confiscation of Alcohol (Young Persons) Act 1997 empowers
        a constable to require a person under the age of 18 to surrender any liquor in his possession in a
        public place. Both pieces of legislation would be restrictive in their effective application to football
        matches. Section 188 of the 1964 Act places too high a level of incident and m ay be difficult for
        the police to justify an application for closure on th at criteria; and the 1997 Act is obviously
        lim iting in terms of age. Each contain useful frameworks for football-related alcohol provisions
        and m ight be used in com bination w ith the framework provisions of public order legislation on
        trespassory assemblies.


6.4     Section 13 of the Public Order Act 1986 makes provision for the chief officer of police to make
        application to the district council to prohibit public processions which may result in serious public
        disorder. Such an order prohibiting processions requires th e consent of th e Secretary of State.
        Section 14A of the 19S6 Act provides th at on application by th e chief officer of police, a district
        council may make an order prohibiting for a specified period the holding of all trespassory assemblies
        in th at district. The making of th e order requires th e consent of th e Secretary of State and that,
        am ong other things, th e assembly may result in serious disruption to th e life of the community.
6.5     In the case of alcohol and football m atches, It is proposed th a t a chief officer of police can make
       application to th e licensing justices for an order to ban th e sale of alcohol and the carrying and
       consum ption of alcohol in a public place for a specified location and period of time. The m aking
       of such an order should be subject to the consent of th e Secretary of State. This would be an
       im portant safeguard against excessive or inappropriate use of th e power. The basis of th e
       application would be th a t th e chief officer has reasonable grounds to believe th a t th e availability
       of alcohol would be a significant contributory factor to the com m ission of football-related
       offences. Strict criteria would have to be applied for th e consideration of such applications and it is
       anticipated th a t they would be used sparingly to deal w ith a specific problem rather th an as a
       m atter of course.




 6.6   Section 188 of the Licensing Act 1964 provides for th e offence of a licensee keeping open premises
       w hen ordered to be closed. Consideration would be required to deal w ith superm arkets and other
        establishm ents licensed to sell alcohol. The confiscation and offences provisions contained in the
        Confiscation of Alcohol (Young Persons) Act 1997 could be related to any person carrying or
        consum ing alcohol in a public place w ithin th e specified area. The order w ould have to m aintain a
        provision w hich made th e buying or selling or drinking alcohol in a licensed premise or carrying
        alcohol in a public place during 'curfew tim es' unlaw ful - th e curfew powers w ould impose the
        illegality by creating th e offence of unlaw ful possession in a public place during those specific
        hours in connection w ith th a t specific event. Some consideration m ay have to be given to the
        reasonableness of those carrying alcohol and w hether there was any connection to th e football match.
6.7    Section 60 of the Criminal Justice and Public Order 1994 (powers to stop and search in anticipation o f
       violence) provides a constable w ith th e power to stop and search any person or vehicle he thinks fit
       w hether or not he has grounds for suspecting th at weapons or such like are being carried. Such
       powers can only be exercised in a specified location for a specified period of time. These provisions
       are already exercised in connection w ith football where there is a perceived threat or risk of
       violence or serious disorder.

6.8    Section 60 powers can be extended to include provisions in terms of alcohol and sporting events.
       In th e first instance, the provisions should be applied to football b u t there m ay calls from other
       sports - and indeed some entertainm ent venues - for similar provisions to apply to them . Further
       consideration is also required on w hether such authorisation should be available for a period of up
       to tw enty four hours.

6.9    Section 13B of the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act 1989 provides quite similar
       though distinct powers for terrorism to those contained in section 60. These distinctions include
       the requirem ent to inform the Secretary of State of the exercise of these stop and search powers;
       and th e ability of th e Secretary of State to either cancel or confirm th e use of these provisions.

6-10   The process contained in th is recom m endation requires th e consent of the Secretary of State from
       th e outset. It is proposed th a t he should be notified at the tim e of th e application w hether or n o t it
       is proposed to make use of these new stop and search powers. However, there would n o t be any
       requirem ent to notify any subsequent decision to the contrary or to notify any subsequent
       extension of these powers.

6.11 This proposal would break significant new ground in criminalising the purchase of alcohol by th e
     general public, including those w ith n o interest in football, and its possession in public by people
     who have no intention of attending a m atch. This measure would n o t be intended to disrupt social
     activity every time a designated football m atch is being played. It would be for use only on those
     exceptional situations where police and intelligence reports indicate th e potential for significant
     levels of trouble.
7 Dealing with Category Cs

  '    W at conspiracy and incitement should be added to the list of relevant football-related offences.



7.1    Part 1 of th e Crim inal Law Act 1977 provides for the offence of conspiracy. Section 1 provides for
       an offence if a person agrees w ith any other person or persons th a t a course of conduct should be
       followed w hich will, am ong other things, am ount to or involve th e com m ission of an offence or
       offences by one or more parties to th e agreement. The substantive offence m ust toe com m itted in
       th e United Kingdom.

7.2    Section 1A as inserted by section 5 of the Criminal Justice (Terrorism and Conspiracy) Act 1998
       sets o u t th e conditions which need to be satisfied in relation to England and Wales for an offence
       of conspiracy to com m it offences outside th e U nited Kingdom. The substantive offence m ust
       constitute an offence in England and Wales and in th e country in w hich It was com m itted.
       Proceedings under this provision m ay only be instituted by or w ith th e consent of th e Attorney
       General.

7.3    Incitem ent is a com m on law offence consisting of inciting another to com m it an offence even
        th o u g h the offence is n o t com m itted. W here th e offence has been com m itted, th e incitem ent is
       m erged in th e complete offence and the inciters are liable as accessories.

7.4    It w ould be necessary to designate these as football-rel ated offences and provide a wider timescale
        in which they could be considered as offences related to football. Indeed, it m ay be necessary to
        apply these offences w ithout timescale but on th e basis th a t there was evidence to indicate th at
        th e inciter or conspirator was involved in th e planning or encouragem ent of others to com m it
        offences at or around football matches.

7.5    These options w ould rely on conviction in order to exercise th e banning process. W hether
        prosecution is feasible or even considered appropriate in view of th e potential for compromising
        intelligence is a m atter w hich should be considered o n a case by case basis. The convicting court
        would be required to make a declaration of relevance confirming th at th e offence was football-related.

 7.6   At present, there is no available legal process to take action against those considered Category C
        but w ithout conviction. Curtailing their activities has to rely o n intelligence and policing m ethods
        u ntil such tim e as th ey are convicted of a football-related offence. Adding these offences would
        assist in th a t process.
That consideration should be given to the courts the power to impose orders to prevent non-convicted
persons from attending matches.



The banning process has no im pact on an individual unless he has a conviction for a football-
related offence. The Category C individual is more likely to avoid such a conviction as he is the
instigator rather th an perpetrator of football hooliganism.

The effectiveness of taking action against Category Cs w ithout conviction was illustrated during
France '98. Based on intelligence inform ation supplied to them , the French authorities served
expulsion notices on identified individuals. This m eant th a t th e French authorities were able to
take action on the basis of UK-supplied football intelligence even though we were unable to do
anything ourselves except m onitor th e m ovem ent of such potential troublemakers.

There is scope, however, to consider making provision for the courts to consider issuing orders
against those w ithout football-related convictions. The Crime and Disorder Act 1998 makes
provision for two new civil orders, anti-social behaviour orders and sex offenders orders. Both
orders are intended to be preventative and provide for th e courts to impose any prohibition
considered necessary for th e purpose of, in the case of the sex offender order, protecting the
public; and in the case of the anti-sodal behaviour order, protecting persons in the local and
adjoining local governm ent area. These new provisions provide a precedent for provisions w hich
m ight deal with Category Cs w ithout conviction, although th e sex offenders order does w ith one
exception rely on conviction or caution.

The categorisation of hooligans is a m atter for th e Football U nit at NCIS. Their decision on the
level of category is based on intelligence available to them . That intelligence m ay be insufficient to
secure a conviction but there m ay be sufficient inform ation to indicate th at the person is or is
likely to be involved in acts associated with football hooliganism, or is likely to be an organiser of
hooliganism by others.

During th e passage of the Crime and Disorder Act an am endm ent was tabled by th e Opposition,
although n o t put to a vote which proposed th e introduction of "Football Behaviour Orders". The
proposal was to allow a chief officer of police to apply to a magistrates court for an Order if a
person had acted in such a way "as to give reasonably cause to believe th a t an Order is necessary to
prevent him disturbing good order at any designated football m atch outside the United Kingdom
or during the period before or after any designated football m atch...". The court could impose an
order preventing the person from doing anything described in the Order, including any
prohibitions necessary for th e purpose of m aintaining good order.

Broadly the same effect could be achieved - and w ithout introducing a new class of order - if the
legislation were am ended to allow th e police to apply to a court to impose a Restriction or
Exclusion Order (international or domestic banning order) w ithout requiring th e person to be
convicted of a football-related offence. The court would be able to impose an order on the basis of
any inform ation put before it which gave it sufficient reason to believe th a t making an order
would help to prevent violence or disorder at or in connection w ith designated football matches.
7.13 There would be some difficulties w ith such a proposal. The first would be evidential. In th e
     absence of a football-related conviction, th e inform ation w hich th e police would be able to put
     before a court would ptobably be intelligence of some kind. In m any cases, the intelligence
     evidence would n o t be admissible because it w ould be in th e nature of hearsay. A further
     consideration would be, th a t even if intelligence evidence were in an admissible form, th e police
     w ould have to consider w hether it was in th e public interest for th e nature of intelligence evidence
     routinely to be p u t before th e courts. Such evidence would typically include m aterial from
     inform ants. The result m ight well be th a t th e police, although having persuasive intelligence
     evidence, w ould n o t consider it in th e public interest to p u t th a t before th e court in order to
     obtain a b anning order. Those aspects would need to be explored further w ith the police and NCIS.

7.14 Any provisions w ould need to be carefully draw n to m eet ECHR and EU obligations. The domestic
     measures contained In th e Crime and Disorder Act on sex offenders and anti-sodal behaviour are
       dealing w ith recognised and identifiable problem s w hich are of great im portance to the
       com m unity. Applying comparable measures to preventing hooliganism abroad could be seen as
       disproportionate to th e mischief. The use of such provisions to lim it free m ovem ent abroad would
       also be w ithout precedent.

7.15   The detail of any provisions in this area w ould need to be considered very carefully to ensure th a t
       international obligations were n o t contravened. It could certainly not have retrospective effect -
       th e actions or behaviour causing th e police to believe th a t th e person was likely to be involved in
       hooliganism would have to take place after th e com m encem ent of th e legislation. A history of
       earlier involvem ent in organising hooliganism w ould n o t be sufficient.

7.16   These considerations m ean th a t we cannot be confident th a t it would be possible to devise
       provisions w hich would be effective and w hich w ould m eet our international obligations. But th e
       proposal m erits further detailed consideration.
    8 Automatic requirement by the
      courts to issue restriction and
      exclusion orders

    Restriction Orders


_     .    _             ssnsxs/ft                   v-:   ’: : v



          That^ffieSissue of restriction orders (international banning orders) is required in all cases where a
          person is convicted of football-related offence and there is sufficient evidence that to do so would
          help prevent violence or disorder at designated football matches played overseas.




                    ;   . ..         -


          Thatthe3threshold for imposingrestriction orders should be reduced from "satisfied" to one of
          reasonable grounds.



                                         ... ....


          That thn'rpquirements for reporting of football-related convictions by foreign jurisdiction should be
          simplified.



    8.1   An application for a restriction order is a m atter for th e prosecutor in consultation w ith th e police.
          It should be established from th e case papers w hether th e offence is football-related- C urrent
          instructions to police, prosecutors and th e courts recom m end th a t a restriction order should be
          applied for w hen it is established th a t th e offence falls in to th a t category. T hat guidance also
          recom m ends th a t w hen it is n o t obvious from th e case papers, th e prosecutor should obtain
          further details from th e police to confirm or otherwise th e association w ith football.

    8.2   It is th e n a m atter for th e court to be satisfied th a t th e offence is football-related an d w ith
          reference to designated football m atches. The court also has to be satisfied th a t m aking such an
          order w ould help prevent violence or disorder at or in connection w ith designated football
          m atches. If this evidence is placed before th e court and to th e court's satisfaction, th e n a restriction
          Order should be issued.


8.3       The onus lies o n police an d prosecutors to ensure th a t sufficient evidence is placed before th e court
          to satisfy all th e criteria. In cases where th a t criteria is fully m et, it is proposed th a t th e court has a
          duty to issue a restriction order. However, w ithin th a t requirem ent, th e co urt retains a discretion to
          consider w hether sufficient evidence has been subm itted to satisfy th e court th a t th e person is
          likely to cause trouble at overseas m atches.


    8.4   The restriction order is in place to deal w ith attendance at designated m atches played outside
          England and Wales. This places a reporting requirem ent on th e offender a t tim es of key m atches.
      Tf th e offender has never attended a m atch outside England and Wales n o r from inform ation
      obtained during the investigation appears unlikely to ever do so, the tim e of the court and the
      bureaucracy of th e enforcing authority will be wrongly and expensively targetted. It would be an
      ineffective use of resources to require th e autom atic issue of orders sim ply o n the basis of a
      football-related conviction. The duty to issue a restriction order requires th e additional elem ent of
      the potential for causing trouble overseas. The courts w ould, in circumstances w here it refused the
      application for a restriction order, be required in open court to give th e reasons for refusal.

8.5   This proposal would reflect th e provisions of section 58 of the Crim inal Justice Act 1991. This deals
      w ith th e issue of a com m unity sentence on a m inor requiring the parent or guardian to ensure the
      m inor's com pliance w ith th e sentence. The court is required to issue such a sentence if th e m inor
      has been convicted of an offence and th e court is satisfied th a t to do so was desirable in th e
      interests of preventing further offences. W here th e court does n o t issue such a sentence, it is
      required to disclose th e reasons for n o t doing so in open court.



Recommendation 26
8.6   As indicated here, th e existing legislation requires for th e court to be "satisfied" th a t m aking such
      an order would help prevent violence or disorder at or in connection w ith designated football
      matches. That places a high threshold for th e court to consider before issuing a restriction order. It
      is proposed th a t for international banning orders, th e court is required to have reasonable belief
      th a t th e making of such an order is likely to help prevent trouble a t designated matches.



Recommendation 27
8.7   This is a proposed technical change to allow easier exchange w ith foreign jurisdictions of
      inform ation on convictions. This should assist in speeding-up th e process of notification of
      convictions from those countries w ith w hich we have a bilateral agreem ent and at the same, assist
      in securing bilateral agreements w ith other countries - m ost notably Belgium and th e Netherlands
       in advance of Euro 2000.




Exclusion Orders



       i n a t u i       dn eAuu^uu uiu*;i yuumcauC banning order) is required in aLl eases where 3 person
       is competed of football-related offence and there is sufficient evidence that to do so would help
       prevent violence or disorder at designated football matches played in England and Wales*




       Tllatthejhreshold for imposing^restriction orders should be reduced from ""satisfied" to one of
       reasonable grounds.
8.8    Part IV of th e Public O rder Act 1986 gives th e court powers to make an exclusion order prohibiting
       a person from attending all designated m atches in England and Wales w here a person has been
       convicted of a football-related offence; and th e court is satisfied th a t such an order would help
       prevent violence or disorder at football m atches.


8.9    As w ith restriction orders (paragraphs 8.1 - 8-5 above) it is proposed th a t th e court gives
       consideration to th e issue of an exclusion order. The d uty to give such an order w ould require
       conviction for a football-related offence and th e additional elem ent of th e potential for causing
       trouble at m atches in England and Wales. W here th e court refused such an application, th e reasons
       for refusal, as w ith restriction orders, w ould be required to be given in o p en court.

8.10   Again, as w ith restriction orders, requiring th e court to be "satisfied” before m aking an exclusion
       order places a high threshold for th e court. It is proposed to require the court to have reasonable
       belief th a t th e m aking of an exclusion order is likely to prevent trouble at designated m atches in
       England and Wales.




9 Failure of overseas jurisdiction to
  seek a prosecution


       Thatthe|<burts In England arid Wales should be able to consider prosecution of those deported from
       an overseas country in connection with designated matches without prosecution.



9.1    The o p tion of prosecution or deportation often leads some countries to opt for th e latter. It is
       quicker, less expensive an d rids th a t country of th e problem . It also prevents th e oppo rtunity for
       action to be taken against th e individual w hen they return to England an d Wales.

9.2    However, this option is n o t supported for a num ber of reasons. Firstly, football-related offences are
       often less serious and th e o p tion of extraterritoriality or dual crim inality should be retained for th e
       m ore serious offences. Secondly, th e cost of prosecution and th e process of gathering evidence let
       alone th e prosecution itself m ay n o t be in th e public interest. Lastly, such a pow er in place m ay
       actually encourage overseas countries to autom atically o p t for th e deportation route in the
       knowledge th a t prosecuting action m ay be taken on their return to th is country.
10 Use of electronic monitoring
10.1 This item is included simply to highlight th e potential future use of technology in dealing w ith
     those m ade subject to reporting requirem ents for m atches played overseas or for b anning orders in
     respect of th e dom estic game.


10.2   Section 37 of the Crim inal Justice Act 1991 as am ended b y section 100 of th e Crime and Disorder
       Act 1998 provides for a curfew condition to be included in a licence for a person released under
       licence conditions. The new provision includes requirem ents for securing th e electronic
       m onitoring of his whereabouts during th e period of tim e specified by th e licence.

10.3   It would be possible to transfer this provision to a person subject to a restriction order. However,
       the technology is designed to require the person to be a t a certain place at certain tim es of th e day
       u ntil such tu ne as th e date on w hich the released person b u t for his release would have served one-
       half of his sentence. Applying this to th e restriction order process w ith a potential life of ten years
       would represent a significant ineffective use of resources. T hat is because the person subject to a
       restriction order may only have reporting requirem ents placed on him a handful of tim es each
       year. There would also be practical difficulties w ith rem oving an d re-applying the m onitoring
       equipm ent during th e periods w hen th e person was n o t subject to reporting requirem ents.

10.4   There is em erging technology in use in th e United States to help m onitor the whereabouts and
       circum stances of offenders. The Telephone Call-In Program (TCIP) requires th e person to use a
       specified telephone to call-in to a central location p o in t at specified times. By use of voice
       identification, the com puterised system is able to identify th e person and through th e use of the
       telephone, identify from where th e call is being made.

10.5   There is also a (very small) local pilot project being carried out by Kent Probation Services in
       conjunction w ith Group 4 on a device known as "Voice Trap". This involves th e use of a pager to
       identify the location of th e person. The pilot study is expected to report towards th e end of 1998.

10.6   The benefits of new technology are two-fold: firstly, it could provide a system whereby th e person
       can effectively fulfil reporting requirem ents w ith th e least inconvenience; and secondly, it could
       help reduce th e resource im plications on Jocal police by allowing th e person to report to a central
       location w hich is able to m onitor his whereabouts at th e required reporting times. This would be
       particularly relevant in the case of a significant increase in th e num ber of restriction orders.

10.7   Developm ents in this area will be followed to establish if th ey can be put to effective use in dealing
       w ith those subject to orders for football-related offences.
