SCCS(91) 2ND MEETING
POLICE ADVISORY BOARD FOR ENGLAND AND WALES
STANDING COMKITTEE ON CONDITIONS OF SERVICE
Minutes of a meeting held in Room 749. Queen Anne's Gata. o h


Present *
        «

      Mr I M Burns                 Chairman

      Mr M Watson                       Association of County
      Mr T D W Molander                 Councils

      Mr P Michaelson                   Association of
      Mr D Axe                          Me tropo1itan
                                        Authorities

      Mr D Cooke                        Metropolitan Police

       Mr P Ryan                        Association of Chief
       Miss M Barton                    Police Officers

       Mr P G Wall                      Superintendents'
       Mr V Jones                       Association



                                         Police Federation



       Mr R West                   HM Inspectorate of
                                   Constabulary

       Mrs P G W Catto
       Miss J B Rumble              )    Home Office
       Mr S Rimmer                  )
       Miss I Cole                  Secretariat

In Attendance
                                    Police Federation

       Mr C Rayner                  Officejf of Manpower
                                    Economics

       Mr P white                   Local Government Management
                                    Board


Apologies for Absence


The Chairman said that apologies for absence had been
received from Mr Rea, who was to have been one of the

 a: 007080IC
 representatives of the Association of County Councils,
 and from Mr Bundred. who was to have represented the
Association of Metropolitan Authorities. The Chairman
welcomed Mr Molander and Mr Axe who replaced them.
Apologies had also been received from Mr Mitch el 1 . who
was to have represented the Commissioner.                       In his
place the Chairman welcomed Mr Cooke. He also noted
that Mr Rimmer. F2 Division of the Home Office was due
to attend and speak to Agenda item 8 . Finally, the
Chairman welcomed Hiss Cole, a new member of the
Secretariat.

ITEM ls_MINPTEB OF THE LAST MEETTWI3


2.        The minutes of the last meeting were approved.

ITEM 2 : MATTERS ARISING


fa) New Application Form


3.        Mr    Ryan,     representing    ACPO,   and     speaking    on
behalf   of           ACPO    Training  Committee, introduced
SCCS(91)15.            The   draft submitted to the previous
meeting         had       been     reconsidered    and,     following
discussions with the Home Office,                  amended to take
account of previous                criticisms and comments.          The
advice of HMSO had been sought to ensure that the
final version was well designed,                    professionally
presented and cost effective.


4.       The proposed form was in two parts - preliminary
and supplementary.               The preliminary part required the
candidate to submit only basic information on which a
decision would be made on whether he was at all
suitable        as    a   candidate.      The   supplementary    form
requested more detailed information as a basis for a
decision on whether the candidate should be called for
interview.    The format of both parts was more



b:   0070801C
        user-friendly, and of a size which was economical for
        printing purposes.

        5.       The Police Service Statement, of Common Purpose
        and Values had been incorporated on the fly sheet of
        the preliminary form. The questions had been compiled
        to ensure that relevant equal opportunities and racial
        equality requirements were met.                 The two-part form
        meant that there would also be a reduction in wastage.
        Mr Rvan acknowledged that this was not a final draft
        because  of   time  constraints:  there were   some
        typographical errors and the form still needed some
        work.

        6.        Mr Watson, representing the Association of County
        Councils, pointed out that if the form was applicable
        to England and Wales, there should be some reference
        to candidates having knowledge of the Welsh languages
        He was also concerned that the form was inconsistent
        in referring both to the police service and police
        forces: some members of the ACC considered that the
        use of the term "force” was obsolete and that the term
        ♦'service" should be used throughout.

        7.         Mr Burns commented that police ’’service" normally
        referred           to   the   police   in   general,   while   "force"
        referred to the police in individual areas.                    It was
         agreed that the form would refer to "other" rather
        than "foreign” languages in order to take in Welsh.


         8.        Mr Rvan       explained      that    following      initial
         discussion at the PAB in December the form would
         continue to be considered in ACPO's internal committee
         procedure.

         9.        Mr Cooke indicated that the Metropolitan Police
         would also give the form further consideration before
         the meeting of the PAB in December.



0A5.1        a: 0070801C
 10. The revised version of the form was found to be
 broadly acceptable. Mr Burns invited members to write
 to ACPO with any drafting points they wished to raise
 and invited ACPO to present the form to the Police
Advisory Board in December.    Any difficulties over
forces 7 accepting the forms should also by then have
emerged.


 (b)      Revision of Police Initial Heeruitnent, Test


      *   Miss      Rumble,   representing       the   Home    Office,
explained that there had been one meeting of the
Steering Group since the last standing Committee
Meeting. At that meeting it had been agreed that
introduction of the new tests should be deferred until
1 January          1992 to allow time for the new practice
leaflets to be sent to candidates. Another point was
that it was essential for those officers responsible
for administering the new test to be fully trained :
arrangements had accordingly been made for two
briefing sessions to be conducted by the consultants
on 22 November at Hutton and 2 December at New
Scotland Yard. All chief officers would be invited to
send at least one representative to one or other of
the sessions and these representatives should be
officers who would be administering the test.
Separate arrangements had been made for the production
of a training video by CPU.                A Home office circular
notifying chief officers of the introduction of the
new test would be issued on 1 November.


12■                  representing    the   Federation,
expressed concern that the Bramshill Quality of
Service Seminar would be taking place in December, and
wondered         whether    this   would   prevent     the    relevant
people from attending the briefing sessions.                     Miss
Rumble          indicated   that   the   dates   of    the    briefing
sessions were moveable, but the Circular emphasised
that      a person who actually administered the tests


b:   007080IC
should attend,       rather than a senior officer, so the
likelihood of overlap seemed minimal.


(cl Incapability Procedure

13.    Mrs     Catto.   representing      the     Home   Office,
introduced SCCS(91) 16.   The first meeting of the
Working Group in ^September had gone veil.   Formal
incapability     procedure   was   very    much    regarded   by
employers generally as a measure of last resort, and
she gave assurances that in the context of any future
Home Office Circular on the subject advice would be
given on management good practice including action to
be taken prior to the initiation of such procedures.
The Working Group had agreed in taking matters forward
to look towards practice by other employers and to the
definition      of   "incapability"    given    in    Employment
Protection Legislation.

14.             "     L on behalf      of the         Federation,
expressed      the   view that the     picture       was not as
favourable as had been presented : that the Federation
would continue to say there was no need for such a
procedure.      Police officers were not employees in any
recognised sense, and this was a matter which had to
be addressed.

15.    Mrs Catto indicated that there would inevitably
be a number of difficult issues which the Working
Group would have to address, and some legal advice
would need to be sought.


16.    Mr Burns concluded the discussion be giving an               HO
undertaking that there would be a further progress
report at the next meeting of the Committee.




 td)    Business Interests


 a; 0070801C
        17.      Miss       Rumble,,     representing          the       Home    Office,
        reported  that   the  draft  regulations had    been
        circulated and agreed. Proof prints would shortly be
        submitted to the Home Secretary for formal approval
        and it was expected that the regulations would be laid
        before Parliament during the week following                                  the
        meeting, to come into effect on 20 November.


        Xe) Amendment to the Discipline Regulations as they
        affect the Metropolitan *>oliga


        18. Mr Burns explained that the amendment to the
        Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 had been agreed
        by the Home Secretary, and made.                     All parties had been
        informed in correspondence and the Home Secretary had
        written        on     the      matter     to     Mr Michael             shersby.
        [Secretary's note : copy of the correspondence between
        the Home Secretary and Mr Shersby is attached.]

        19                on behalf of the Police Federation,
        objected strongly to the method of implementing the
        amendment : there had been no consultation with the
        Metropolitan   Police  Federation.      They   were
        particularly concerned that their views be registered,
        and would be raising the issue                         in    a    forthcoming
        meeting with the Home Secretary.

        (f)    Role of the Custody officer


        20.     Miss    Rumble, on         behalf       of    the     Home      office,
        explained           that     a     Steering           Group        comprising
        representatives             of    ACPO,        the     Federation,          the
        Superintendents' Association,                  HMIC and Home Office
        officials had been set up to oversee the M Division
        review of the custody officer role, and had met once.
        They were now awaiting the report of the review which
        would be discussed at their next meeting in November.




QA5.1   at 007080IC
21.    Mr Burns agreed that the Committee should await
developments.

tty) compulsory Retirement acre

22.                      representing      the    Federation,     was
concerned      that   the   matter    of    aligning    compulsory
retirement      ages in the Metropolitan Police and
provincial      forces was not  being pursued   (see
paragraph 49 of the minutes of the last meeting).

23. Mr Burns assured her that the Home Office could
see no basis for setting the matter aside.  It was,
indeed, under consideration by ACPO.


ITEM 3; PART TIME WORKING AMD JOB SHARING


24-    Miss Rumble introduced SCCS(91) 17.             she reported
on progress to date.              The Project Team which was
established under the auspices of the Working Party on
Population Change and Police Recruitment (WPPC) had
met on four occasions since it was first convened in
January 1991.         It had taken reports on the number of
potential      volunteers;    taken    advice      from the      Equal
Opportunities Commission on a number of issues; agreed
the principal terms of a questionnaire and other
aspects of a study to evaluate the scheme; broadly
agreed the arrangements for a press launch including
lines   to take pending the     completion of   PNB
negotiations; agreed to offer part time working and
job splitting (rather than formal job sharing) for the
Federation       ranks      and    formal        job   sharing     for
 superintendent and ACPO ranks; and looked at similar
 schemes in other European countries.              Negotiations had
 also taken place in the PNB to agree the terms of
 amending regulations to allow the scheme to go ahead.


 25.   The bulk of the issues had been agreed by the PNB
 and the PAB Project Team.           A meeting of the full PNB


 a: 007080JC
was      due        to    take    place    on     29 October      to     allow
conciliation on outstanding issues : until the outcome
of that meeting was known, it could not be said when
the experiment would begin.


26.     The         meeting      agreed    that    further      reports    on
progress regarding the scheme should be made direct to
the Standing              Committee itself,         rather than to the
WPPC.


ITEM 4jt FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE                      TO   POLICE     OFFICERS
INVOLVED IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS


27.     Miss Barton, representing ACPO, stated that all
3 staff         associations         remained      concerned      about   the
contents of Home Office Circular 77/87.                      The circular
did not give adequate support to an officer faced with
substantial              legal    costs.        Members    of     both    the
Superintendent's Association and ACPO had taken out
insurance policies to cover expenditure in such
circumstances but this was not satisfactory, and the
issue needed further discussion. On that basis, ACPO
would be circulating a paper very shortly which could
form a basis for discussion at the                         next    Standing
Committee meeting.


28.     Mr      Wall.       representing          the   Superintendents'
Association, shared ACPO's concern, and indicated that
this was an important issue for the Association.
           representing the Federation, stated that, as a
member         of    the    Joint    Consultative         Committee,      the
Federation was very much part of these discussions,
and wished the              issue to be considered as soon                 as
possible.


29. Mr Michaelson. representing the Association of
Metropolitan  Authorities,   suggested  that   the
Hillsborough case provided an example of the problems
which     could arise.              He was      aware that some        local


a : 007080IC
authority      members,    particularly         those    from    South
Yorkshire,      felt very strongly about this,                 and the
matter would need to be discussed within the
Association before he could adequately comment on
their behalf.

30.    Mr Burns commented that a paper along the lines                    ACPO
suggested by ACPO, including examples of cases where
there had been problems, together with any specific
thoughts on the Home Office Circular, would be useful.
He welcomed the initiative of the Associations.

ITEM      5:    BUSINESS     INTEREBTB      INCOMPATIBLE          WTTH
MEMBERSHIP OF A POLICE FORCE

31.                        representing         the      Federation,
introduced SCCS(91) 18.             She explained that many of
the regulations dealing with restrictions on a police
officer's private life were drafted some time ago,
when forces were much smaller.              There may then have
been a problem regarding a spouse having a business in
the same area as his or her police officer partner,
but circumstances were now different.              Furthermore, in
instances where permission for a particular business
had been refused, and the Federation had intervened
successfully, the business had in any event been lost
during the time taken to challenge the Chief
Constable's refusal.             The whole issue was in need of
reconsideration along the lines proposed in the paper.


32.    Mr Rvan. representing ACPO,              expressed the view
that the proposal was reasonable.                     He would need,
however,       to   take   the    matter   to    the    ACPO    General
Purposes Committee.


33.  Mr Molander, representing the Association                       of
County Councils,  commented that the removal                         of
regulation 7 (b) would mean that the types of licences



 e: 0070BQIC
        covered by regulation            7 (c) would     also need to be
        reviewed.


        34.      Mr Burns concluded the discussion by saying that             ACPO
        the matter would be considered again at the next                       ACC
        meeting of the standing Committee by which tine ACPO
        should have had time to complete their consideration
        of the implications of the Federation's proposal, and
        the Association of County Councils would have been
        able to examine the types of licence which would have
        to be included in regulation 7 (c).


        ITEM 6: RESTRICTIONS ON THE PRIVATE LIVES OF MEMBERS
        OF THE POLICE FORCE            (REGULATION 10. PARAGRAPH 2 OF
        SCHEDULE 21


        35.                  representing  the   Federation,
        introduced SCCS(91) 19. The Federation proposed that
        paragraph 2 of schedule 2 concerning regulation 10 be
        removed : its effect was to force police officers to
        reside in police-provided accommodation, and forbid:
        then to purchase, or indeed continue to live in, their
        own premises until the Chief Constable allowed them to
        do so.         In the latter circumstances an officer might
        be    obliged      to   rent   out   his   own   property.      The
        Federation were firmly of the view that it was now
        time to dispense with this out-of-date restriction.


        36. Mr Rya.n, representing Acpo,       considered the
        proposal reasonable, but would refer the matter to the
        General Purposes Committee.            He commented that chief
        constables must retain scope for flexibility in moving
        officers around.


        37.     Mr Burns agreed that there was an obligation to
        ensure that the whole country was policed effectively.
        The    emphasis     was   upon   putting   police    officers   in
        particular areas rather than in particular houses, and
        it was a debate which was well worth pursuing.


0A5.1   a : 0070301C
         38.              representing the Federation, added
         that if officers chose to travel a long way to work,
         it was entirely a matter for them, provided they were
         not in breach of discipline regulations by, for
         example, attending late, Mr Michaelson. representing
         the Association of Metropolitan Authorities, commented
         that paragraph 1 of Schedule 2 should also be born in
         mind when    considering this    issue.     &r   Exan,
         representing ACPO, expressed his concern that officers
         should not be required to travel too far to attend
         duty.                 representing the Federation,
         pointed out that the Federation were not seeking to
         remove the Chief Constable's right to move an officer
         about: they were merely seeking to give an officer the
         right to live in his own house.

         39.     Miss      Rumble,    representing     the   Home    office,
         indicated that all the implications needed to be
         examined, including the effect on other Regulations.
         There      were     also    issues   here   which   might   be   the
         responsibility of the Police Negotiating Board.


         40.      Mr Michaelson. representing the Association of
         Metropolitan Authorities,  in commenting on the
         Federations's proposed new draft of paragraph 2 of
         schedule 2 , stated that he could see no connection
         between the housing allowance issue and the right of
         an officer to live where he chose.

         41.      Mr Burns agreed that all the contributions were                ACPO
         relevant.         The meeting agreed that the Federation's
         proposal should be explored initially by ACPO.                   This
         might       raise   other    issues,   possibly for the      Police
         Negotiating Board, but these could be considered in
          due course.




0A 5.1    b:   007DB05C
         ITEM 71 RESTRICTIONS OK THE PRIVATE LIFE OF MEMBERS OF
        A POLICE FORCE                (REGULATION 10.         PARAGRAPH 3     (2)   OF
        SCHEDULE g \


        42 ■ \     f         representing   the   Federation,
        introduced SCCS(di) 20, and asked that paragraph 3 of
        the Federation's note be amended to read "We do not
        believe   that  written  notice is     necessary  or
        appropriate...,".   The Federation's view was that a
        more modernistic approach should be adopted towards
        the matter of a police officer taking in lodgers - the
        regulation was no longer relevant in these tines.


        43.     Mr Ryan, representing ACPO, explained that there
        was a historical reason for the regulation, and he
        would need to seek the views of the General Purposes
        Committee.               On   the   face   of   it,     he    could   see   no
        objection to the Federation's proposal, but the matter
        of a boarding house or bed and breakfast accommodation
        being         run   by    a   police     officer      would    need   to    be
        considered.   All the implications                      of the proposal
        would have to be addressed.


        44 . Hr— Wall.   representing the   Superintendent's
        Association, commented that the main issue here was
        rent allowance.               Miss Rumble, representing the Home
        Office, agreed that the Department would consider the
        Federation's proposal in the light of the most recent
        letter from the Secretary of state on rent allowances.


        45. Mr Burns welcomed ACPO's willingness to look at                              ACPO
        the proposal from a management point of view, and                                  BO
        asked     that       they      prepare     a    short    note    on    their
        considerations well in advance of the next meeting.
        In the meantime, the Home Office would also consider
        the implications of the change.




0A5.1   a: 007080IC
ITEM 8 1 CITIZENS' CHARTER - THE WEARING OF KAME TAGS

46.    ^                       representing       the     Federation,
explained that having seen the Citizens' Charter, the
Federation had no choice but to voice their concern.
A similar suggestion by the Home Office was considered
at a Police Advisory Board meeting in December 1982,
when all constituent bodies, following a discussion,
totally rejected the proposal for name -tags.                          The
Federation were disappointed to find that this matter
had been raised again when no consultation has taken
place.         They were deeply dismayed by the briefing
paper circulated by the Hone Office on 22 July which
indicated that this was a matter for chief officers to
decide, but that the Home Office favoured the approach
of introducing name tags, and mentioned the success of
the Thanes Valley Project.                The reasons why a police
officer should not be obliged to wear a name tag were
fourfold:

            i) Some      names,    by   their    very   nature,    could
                  invite derogatory comment.

           ii) Some names could invite derision simply by
                  indicating      the   ethnic   background       of   the
                  officer.


       iii) If the name of the officer was unusual, it
            could easily be found in the telephone
                  directory.      This was a security risk.


           iv) The expenditure for such a scheme could not
                  be   justified:       police   authorities       simply
                  could not afford the cost.


 47.   Mr Burns pointed out that the Citizens' Charter
White Paper had been carefully drafted: it had said no
more       than    "We   favour the       idea             Mr_._RitTvm_er,
 representing the Home Office, endorsed this view.                      He


 a: 007030IC
explained that the formulation of the White Paper had
been a speedy process and that consultation had not
been possible. The concerns expressed about personal
safety were understood, although it was important to
ensure that these were not presented                     as unfair
obstacles to improving customer care.                     The ACPO
Quality of Service Sub-Committee had discussed the
issue and endorsed an "evolutionary" approach, which
would be regularly reviewed.              Individual forces were
also     looking     at    the   issue,    and   Lord Ferrer      had
recently stressed in correspondence with Mr Shersby
that decisions on implementing name badges rested with
chief officers. Other areas of the public sector
would need to be examined and a watch kept on
developments.        Mr Rimmer gave an assurance that the
introduction of name badges would not be promulgated
without proper consultation.    It was recognised that
the Police Service had its own particular requirements
and relationship with the public.                The views of the
Federation were welcomed.


48.    Mr Burns agreed that there was an invasion of
privacy implication to bear in mind, and although
there was a move towards better identification in all
sorts of areas of the public sector, the reason why
the Home Office were not moving towards producing a
circular on the issue was because they,                  too,    were
aware of the dangers identified by the Federation.
The central initiative had come from the Prime
Minister's office and not from individual departments.
In any event, police service personnel were already
far    more   identifiable       than   those    from many      other
services, and        any    further     development   had    to    be
evolutionary.


49. Mr Ryan, on behalf of ACPO, explained that there
was no formal ACPO view on the issue.    j
indicated     that   the    Federation     would   now   take     the
matter to the Joint Consultative Committee.


«s 0070801C
        50.    Mr Burns closed the discussion by commenting that
        there was no specific initiative to introduce name
        tags at present, but this was a topical issue.              It was
        helpful to hear the Federation's anxieties.


        ITEM     a : HOME    AFFAIRS     COMMITTEE   REPORT   ON    POLICE
        SICKNESS


        51.    Miss     Rumble.   representing       the   Home    Office,
        explained that the Home Office response to the HAC
        Report was to be published the following day.  There
        was nothing sinister in this: it was merely a matter
        of printers'        deadlines.     No advance notice of the
        contents of the response could be given.                  However,
        Miss Rumble tabled a letter to all members attaching
        a draft of the first of 2 proposed circulars on the
        subject of police sick absence.              The first circular
        was concerned with the collection of accurate data on
        police sick absence levels. Initially, comments were
        invited by 8 November, but after a short discussion
        this deadline was extended to 15 November.                Any          ALL
        comments on the response to the HAC Report itself                    MEMBERS
        could be made at the next meeting.


        ITEM 10: ANY OTHER BUSINESS


        54.     No new items were raised.


        ITEM 11: DATE OF NEXT MEETING


        55.     It was agreed that the next meeting should be
        held on Monday, 6 April at 2 pm at the Home Office,
        50 Queen Anne's Gate.




CA5.1    a : 007080IC
SCCS{91) 1ST meeting

POLICE ADVISORY BOARD FOR ENGLAND AND WALES
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CONDITIONS OP SERVICE

Minutes of a meeting held in R oobi GZl, Queen Anne’s Gate#— on
19 June 1991


Present ■
     Mr I M Burns              Chairman

     Mr M Watson                    Association of County
     Mr R Beechey                   Councils

     Mr P Michaelson                Association of
     Mr G Bundred                   Metropolitan Authorities

     Mr E Mitchell                  Metropolitan Police
     Commander Farbrother

     Mr P Ryan                       Association of Chief
     Miss M Barton                   Police Officers

     Mr P G Wall                     Superintendents *
     Mr V Jones                      Association


                                     Police Federation



     Mr R West                  HM inspectorate of Constabulary

     Mr R   A Harrington
     Miss   J B Rumble
     Miss   M Wooldridge             Home Office
     Miss   G Moody
     Mr P   Jones
     Mr M   Cook
      Mr J Townley              Secretariat


 In Attendance
                                     Police Federation
                                )

      Mr M Cahill               Office of Manpower Economics

      Mr M Cann                 Local Government Management
                                Board
Apologies for absence

1.   The Chairman said that apologies for absence had been
received from Mr Hirst. Chief Constable of Leicestershire, who
was to have been one of the representatives of the Association
of Chief Police Officers. In his place the Chairman welcomed
Mr P . Rvan. chief Constable of Norfolk. Apologies had also
been received from Mr Hunt who was to have represented the
Association of Metropolitan Authorities and from Messrs._______
and         who were to have been two of the representatives
of the Police Federation. The chairman welcomed
and ____________ who replaced them. He also welcomed
Mr Murray. Home office Unit, CSSB, who had been invited to
speak in respect of agenda item 2(b). Finally, the chairman
indicated that apologies had been received from Mr Bramfitt,
who was to have been one of the representatives from the
Association of Metropolitan Authorities and from Mr Purnell,
representing HMIC. Mr Burns welcomed his replacement,
Mr West..



ITEM 1 : MINUTES OF THE LAST MEETING


2.    The minutes of the last meeting were approved.
Amendments, requested earlier by ACPO and the Police Federation
had been satisfactorily incorporated.



ITEM 2 t MATTERS ARISING

3.     The chairman indicated that the agenda was a lengthy one
and he hoped that, as a result of the meeting, some of the
 items could be removed from the agenda for future meetings.


 (a)   New application form

 4.    Mr Rvan. a representative of ACPO's Training Committee
 introduced the proposed new application form prepared by ACPO.
This was intended for national use if accepted by the
Committee.

5   .       Mr Harrincrton said that a number of aspects of the
proposed form caused the Department concern. The form was
rather too long and would appear daunting to prospective
applicants.         It might also deter some applicants from applying
on the basis that it appeared to require too much detailed
information.

6.                     [confirmed that the Police Federation would
like to see one standard application form for all 4 3 forces.
Mr Bundred indicated that although the Association of.
Metropolitan Authorities had agreed to a proposal from the
Metropolitan Police for a new standard application form in
1987 he thought the form before the meeting was too lengthy.
Mr Mitchell agreed. Moreover the form did not meet the
requirements of the Metropolitan Police who did not consider
that questions about debt, for example, should be asked at the
stage when initial application forms were being completed.
The Metropolitan Police would like to keep their own form.


7-          Mr Rvan indicated that the proposed new form could be
reduced in size by printing on both sides and reducing the
size of the print.          Nevertheless, he could see why the
Metropolitan Police might wish to retain their own form.

    8   .   Mr Burns agreed that a single form was desirable but
    should not be so lengthy. He suggested that a single core
    form should be agreed. Individual forces could made additions
    if desired.

            Mr Harrington was also concerned about the way the form
    handled ethnicity.      He suggested that the standard census
    classification should be used*

    10. Mr Burns concluded the discussion by asking ACPO to look
    again at the form with a view to simplifying it* He suggested
one matter might be considered further within ACPO Training
Committee.   Mr Ryan agreed to this.

(b)    Revision of Police Initial Recruitment Test

11.    Miss Rumble introduced SCCS(91)5.   k Steering Committee
had been appointed to oversee the production of the proposed
new test. The Committee was being asked to agree in principle
the introduction of the new test, to agree that all candidates
should take it and accept the consultants' recommended pass
mark or 'cut-off score* for the first two years, or until
validation has been carried out, whichever was the sooner.


12.    She emphasised that the new test was designed to provide
a proper assessment of an applicant's aptitude. The
validation study to be carried out two years after
introduction would assess the impact in this respect.     Great
care had also been made to ensure that the new PIR would not
be discriminatory with regard to gender or sex. But since,
during the second stage of trialling a relatively small sample
of ethnic minority candidates had been tested both the
consultants preparing the test and the Commission for Racial
Equality had suggested that separate monitoring should take
place from an early stage. This was in any event good
management practice. Members of SCCS were accordingly invited
also to remit to the Steering Committee the task of costing
and making arrangements for such monitoring.

13 .   Mr Murray of the Home Office Unit at CSSB explained the
options regarding cut-off scores or pass marks. The
recommendation of the Steering Committee was that a single
overall pass-mark should be set as opposed to a pass mark for
each individual test.     This was on the basis that an overall
pass mark would be less likely to lead to discrimination.     The
provisional cut-off score would be selected to achieve the
 same pass rate as the current PXR, i-e- about 80%.

 14.   Mr Hunt said that one possible disadvantage of a single
pass mark was that it might allow an individual who fell below
the acceptable standard in a particular test to succeed
nonetheless and if the test scores are merely added together
(as with the current PIR) some tests would have more weight
than others simply because they included more questions or the
range of scores was wider,     Mr Murray confirmed that both
problems would be resolved by standardising scores on
individual sub-tests before totalling and giving each sub-test
a suitable weighting.

15   .   Mr Burns asked for confirmation that the new test could
be regarded as non—discriminatory.      Mr Murray replied that it
could.

     ^             supported the new test and the recommendations
made by the Home Office.     However, she wanted the validation
process to be undertaken more quickly than the two years
envisaged by the consultants. Miss Rumble explained that two
years had been chosen as this was the period from joining to
the end of probation but the timetable was flexible and
monitoring would take place from a much earlier stage.

17. The meeting agreed to implement the new test; that all
candidates should take it and that a common pass mark would be
used. Agreement was also reached on the approach to cut-off
scores recommended by the consultants (overall pass mark).
Finally, the Steering Group was asked to cost and make
arrangements for monitoring the test from the equal
opportunities viewpoint. In a response to a request from
           [it was agreed that an interim report would be
prepared on the monitoring process.

 (c)     Administrative Dismissal on the Grounds_of
         Inefficiency/Incapacity Procedure


 IS.                   [introduced SCCS(9l)6.   The proposal was
 that a Working Group should be established to examine the
 issues referred to in paragraph 6 of the paper. The paper
 also referred to the Group's membership, terms of reference
 and objectives.
19.    Mr Burns suggested the Working Party should be able to
advise on the nomenclature for the procedure which was another
point raised in the paper, Mr Wall said the Superintendents'
Association supported the idea of a Working Party. The Police
Federation agreed as did ACPO.

(d)    Recall of Police Officers from Annual Leave to attend
       Court (Report of the working Group on pre-trial issues)


20.    Miss Wooldridge began by indicating that the Working
Group1s report covered an enormous range of issues and made
numerous recommendations. The main thrust of the report was
that the current system should be properly maintained so that
officers did not have to be called back from annual leave.
Miss Wooldridge emphasised that a great deal of time and
effort was being spent on taking this work forward but also
pointed out that the changes proposed had substantial resource
implications.    In view of this progress on implementing the
changes recommended in the report was bound to be measured.
She suggested that, for the time being, this item should be
taken off the Committee's agenda.

2 1.              said that the Police Federation were grateful
for the Working Group's report. The Federation remained
concerned about the number of their members who were being
recalled from rest days and annual leave to attend court. It
was recognised that the report’s recommendations had
substantial monetary and resource implications for the Home
Office.     But she was keen to ensure that they would
nevertheless be implemented.

 22.   Mr Burns agreed that the Working Group’s recommendations
had substantial resource implications.     As a result he could
 not be precise as to time needed to implement them.
 Nevertheless, the Home Office were keen to move forward as
 quickly as possible since it was clear that the present system
 was a waste of police resources.    In the meantime, it was
 agreed that this item should be removed from the agenda.
(e)      Discipline and Medical Retirement

23   .                on behalf of the Police Federation, objected
to the terminology in paragraphs (2) and (4) of the proposed
amendments to the guidance for Chief Officers : there were
only a few cases where officers had applied for medical
retirement at a time when they were under investigation in
respect of disciplinary matters.

24. Mrs Moody, Home Office, wished to emphasise the
importance of protecting the interests of those officers who
were being properly medically retired.       She reminded the
meeting that examination of the issue followed a
recommendation made by the Home Affairs Committee of the House
of Commons.      The Home Office was required to respond.

25.      Although the Association of Chief Police Officer.s. found
the proposed changes acceptable the Police Federation strongly
objected since they feared that implementation could lead to
chief officers refusing medical retirement to individual
officers.

26.      Mr Beechev. representing the Association of County
Councils, indicated that in his view disciplinary procedures
were being delayed as a result of officers applying for
medical retirement. This was disputed by the Police
Federation representatives. The Association _of Metropolitan
Authorities reminded the meeting that whereas chief officers
were responsible for discipline the Police Authority were
responsible for medical retirement.

 27.      in response to queries Mr Jones, Home Office, said that
 no statistics were Kept regarding the number of officers who
 were recalled from medical retirement on disciplinary grounds.


 28. Mrs Moody pointed out that the Home Office had not
 suggested any amendment to either the discipline or the
 retirement regulations and that its suggestion of amended
guidance to forces was intended to preserve flexibility in
dealing with individual cases. Mr Burns reaffirmed that no
one wished to undermine the right of officers to medical
retirement.

29.    The Police Federation proposed the solution adopted in
other regulations, that, if there was disagreement in respect
of medical evidence as to an officer's fitness to appear at a
disciplinary hearing in a particular case, a third opinion
should be sought and should be binding.

30.    In response Mrs Moody explained that this procedure had
been criticised by the Joint Committee on Statutory
Instruments. The Home Office still considered the best way
forward would be for the Force Medical Officer to seek a
second opinion in the event of any disagreement. The chief
officer could then hear the medical evidence in full in order
to determine whether it provided a good reason for absence.


31.    Mr Burns pointed out to the meeting that the proposals
put forward by the Police Federation would not be compatible
with the discipline regulations. It was for the chief officer
to satisfy himself as to whether or not there was a good
reason for any officer's absence from a disciplinary hearing.
He invited all those present to agree that an amendment to the
guidance to chief officers on complaints and discipline was
the right way to deal with the issue. The precise terms of
such amendments could be settled by letter. The Home Office
was prepared to listen to further representations from the
staff associations, although the draft circular amending
guidance to chief officers on complaints and discipline
procedures was being prepared for issue very shortly. It was
agreed that the matter should be removed from the agenda*

 (f)   Amendment to the Discipline Regulations as they affect
       the Metropolitan Police

32.    Mr Mitchell, representing the Metropolitan Police, said
that the three most serious disciplinary punishments should be
effective immediately from the date of their announcement (as
in other forces). However, he emphasised that any officer who
felt the decision might be wrong would still be able to appeal
to the Commissioner.

33.               representing the Police Federation, said
that the proposed changes to the discipline regulations were
unjust.       Punishments should only be effective from the date
the result of an appeal was known and all such cases should go
before the Commissioner. Mr Mitchell responded by saying that
if an appeal was upheld in these, the most serious of the
disciplinary punishments, the officer would then receive his
pay from the date his punishment had been announced.


34.               representing the Police Federation,
indicated that it now took over a year in some cases to get an
appeal before the Commissioner.  He was this as a result of
failure on the part of the Metropolitan Police to provide
transcripts of disciplinary hearings at an early date.

35.        Mr Burns concluded the discussion by commenting on the
difference in procedures between the Metropolitan and
provincial forces* The Home Secretary would shortly be
considering the draft regulations. The representations made
by the Staff Associations would be reported to him and he
would have them in mind when coming to his decision.        [The
item could be removed from the agenda.]

 (g)       Recovery of costs : PCA directed Disciplinary Tribunals


36     .   Mrs Moody introduced the Home Office paper which updated
 statistics previously given in respect of Disciplinary
 Tribunals directed by the Police Complaints Authority. The
 statistics did not suggest that disciplinary tribunals put an
 officer at significantly less risk of being found guilty than
 the normal disciplinary procedures.

 3 7   , The Police Federation put forward their view that police
 officers who were the subject of disciplinary hearings
directed by the PCA should not have to rely on the Federation
to meet the costs of legal representation.   The Federation
believe that these costs should be met from public funds. The
Superintendents 1 Association supported this view indicating
that they could not afford to meet the costs of members' legal
representation.

38. Mr Burns concluded the discussion by indicating that the
Home Office would find it difficult to justify paying the
costs of police officer's legal representation out of public
funds. He said he would write to the Staff Associations
setting out the Horae Secretary's position.


(h)   Role of the Custody Officer

39.   Miss Wooldridge indicated that the Home Office had had an
opportunity to look into research undertaken by an independent
firm of consultants on the work of the custody officer. The
consultant had not had time to produce a final report and
would not allow his material to be circulated as it stood.
However, she did indicate that the research - which studied
the role of the custody officer in three forces - showed how
differently the role was regarded in different forces.    The
Home Office now proposed to undertake a thorough-going
examination of the way in which custody officer posts were
organised and manned.

40.   The Police Federation acknowledged that custody officers
operated differently in individual forces and accepted that
there was a need for a review of the post. They noted that
there were particular differences between urban and rural
areas.   They hoped that the terms of reference for the Home
Office review would be circulated : the result would have an
impact on every police officer in the country.

41.   Mr Rvan representing the Association of Chief Police
Officers, emphasised that the third paragraph in the Police
Federation's paper on the subject should be examined by the
Home Office Working Party.   He also wished to draw the
Committee's attention to the anomalous situation whereby non­
permanent sergeants were used as custody officers.

42. Mr Bundred representing the Association of Metropolitan
Authorities said he was looking forward to seeing the results
of the review undertaken by the Working Party.

43.       Mr Burns agreed that the way forward was to have the role
of the custody officer comprehensively reviewed.           He
understood that M Division were to provide the Home Office
Working Party with a team and asked that nominations for the
membership of the team should be forwarded to F2 Division.


(i)       Business Interests

44.       Miss Rumble introduced the paper prepared by the Home
office. The draft regulations proposed that police
authorities be required to issue written notification of their
decision regarding police officers' business interests within
28 days from submission of an appeal.           Both the Association of
Metropolitan Authorities and the Association of county
Councils had agreed to this proposal when the subject was last
discussed on the Standing Committee but they had since
expressed doubts about the matter based on the timing of
police authority meetings. One was forward would be for
appeals to be dealt with by a sub-committee.           Was this
acceptable?

45    .                   representing the Police Federation said that
they had no objection to this proposal provided that any sub­
committee taking a decision on the matter of business
interests had the full delegated powers of the police
authority.         Local authority association representatives
considered this was reasonable.

46.       Mr Mitchell representing the Metropolitan Police, wanted
the time limit between appeal and decision extended from 28
days to      6   weeks.     However, Miss Neild and other members
believed that the 28 day period should be adhered to
especially as it had been agreed at previous meetings.

47.   Mr Burns concluded the discussion by indicating that the
Horae Office would prefer to keep to the 28 day period between
the date of appeal and the date of decision by the police
authority.    The Home Office would now go ahead with
implementation of the regulation and a draft circular giving
guidance on the subject.


(k)   Annual Summary of SCCS Work


48.   The Home Office circulated the paper prepared for the
meeting.     A more detailed summary, with the documents referred
to numbered and dated, would be circulated in time for the
next meeting of the Committee.



ITEM 3 ; COMPULSORY RETIREMENT AGE : ALIGNMENT OF METROPOLITAN
POLICE ANP PROVINCIAL POLICE FORCE


(a)   Superintending Ranks


49.   Mr Jones, representing the Superintendents' Association,
requested parity between the retirement ages operating in the
Metropolitan Police and those in provincial forces.     The lower
age of compulsory retirement in the Metropolitan Police for
ranks above sergeant had originally been agreed on the grounds
that a higher retirement age would block promotion and that
life in London was too arduous.     The Association considered
that life in London was no more arduous than in provincial
cities.


50.   Mr Mitchell, representing the Metropolitan Police
indicated that in terms of equity there was a case to be
answered when considering this issue.     However, there were
cost and resource implications to be taken into account.        The
Metropolitan Police would wish to look at these in detail.
51.   Mr Jones representing the Home Office, also recognised
that there was a case to be considered.     The next stage would
be for the Metropolitan Police to find out how many of their
officers would initially want to serve later than the current
compulsory retirement date. He also stressed that the Home
Office would need to consider the full implications of any
change, in terms of costs, career prospects, and best use of
manpower.

52.                representing the Police Federation, said they
wished the proposal to go before the Police Negotiating Board
which would consider carefully the financial implications of
any changes.

53.   Mr Burns said the Home Office was willing to consider the
principle of aligning compulsory retirement ages in the
Metropolitan Police and provincial forces.     But would like to
consider the position again once it had received further
information from the Metropolitan Police regarding the cost
and resource implications of any changes.


(b)   ACPO ranks

54.   Commander Farbrother. representing the Metropolitan
Police, supported the Superintendents' Association's view on
this subject. The last time this issue had been considered
was in 1984 but proposed changes could not be implemented
owing to the reorganisation of the Metropolitan Police.
Mr Mitchell pointed out that although there was a case to be
answered in terms of equity there had only been two occasions
when officers had sought to stay in service after the age of
57.

55.   Mr Cook, representing the Home Office, agreed that the
Home Office would be prepared to look at the question of
retirement dates for ACPO ranks in the Metropolitan force.
Mr Burns, concluded the discussion by indicating that the Home
office would be prepared to consider proposals for changes in
the retirement ages, provided the Metropolitan Police could
supply detailed information on the cost and resource
implications of any such changes.



ITEM 4 : ANY OTHER BUSINESS


56.   No new items were raised.



ITEM 5 : DATE OF NEXT MEETING


57. It was agreed that the next meeting should be held on
Monday 21 October 1991 at 10.3 0 a.m. in Room G21, Home Office,
50 Queen Anne's Gate.




F5 Division
Home Office


September 1991
