South Y orksh ire Jo int S ecretariat
P.O. Box 37, Regent Street,
Barnsley, South Yorkshire S70 2PQ.
                                                   (      2 2 FEB 2001               )<
Fax: Barnsley (01226) 772899
Internet: www.southyorKs.org.uk
W.J. Wilkinson, BA(Econ), CPFA. Clerk and
                                                                    £N
                                                                                                     S O U T H Y O R K S H IR E
                                                        SCANNED
                                                                                                                      PO LIC E
Our ref:    M VO                                                                                                A U TH O R ITY
                                                        SECRETARY
                                                        ASSISTANT
Your ref:   P W /ES P                                   SECBSTA.TT'
                                                        RETAIN           M OTTO 2=
                                                        OHIQJNAL         SCANNED
Date:   20 February 2001


This matter is being dealt with by:     M a u re e n O ad eS                              Direct Line:   772856


Strictly Private and Confidential

Mr P Williams
National Assistant Secretary
Police Superintendents Association
67A Reading
Pangbourne
Berkshire
RG8 7JD

Dear Mr Williams

FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE - DAVID DUCKENFIELD AND BERNARD M U R R A Y

At the conclusion of the private prosecution proceedings instituted by the Hillsborough
Family Support Group against Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray, it was ordered that the costs
of the former officers be paid from central funds. Recent information on the determination
made in favour of Mr Duckenfield suggests that in the case of both officers there will be a
substantial shortfall between the amounts claimed from central funds in the Leeds criminal
proceedings and the amounts awarded to them.

In addition to any shortfall, which may arise in the costs incurred and the costs recovered
in the Leeds criminal proceedings, shortfalls have also arisen between the costs incurred
and those recovered in the South Sefton criminal proceedings and the Powers Judicial
Review. You will recall that the prosecution proceedings were initially commenced in the
South Sefton Magistrates Court. However, following representations from the former
officers the proceedings in South Sefton Magistrates Court were discontinued and fresh
informations were laid in the Leeds Magistrates Court. The Powers Judicial Review,
concerned the review of the decision made by the Authority on the 5 February 1999, that it
did not have the power to provide financial assistance to the former officers.

On Friday of this w eek the Authority will give consideration to their position in relation to
the reimbursement of the legal costs incurred by the former officers. In doing so they will
take account of the offer which your Association m ade in March 1999 with regard to the
costs incurred by the former officers in the Powers Judicial Review. I shall be grateful if
you will give m e a call in the event of there being any new considerations which you wish
m e to draw to the Authority's attention in respect of that offer.




Yours sincerely




M aureen O ad es
Assistant Clerk and Solicitor
