                                        HOME AFFAIRS COMMITTEE
  Enquiries: 071-219 3468                                    COMMITTEE OFFICE
       Fax : 071-219 6606
                                                            HOUSE OF COMMONS
Direct Line : 071-219
                                                              LONDON SW1A OAA




      I enclose a transcript of the evidence given by you to the
      Committee. I should be grateful if you vould examine this and
      make in ink, in your own handwriting, such alterations as
      are:-

      (i)       restricted to the correction of inaccuracies in the
                printing or reporting of the evidence, or

      (ii) restricted to the correction of matters of fact which do
           not materially alter the general sense of any answer.
     Minor alterations to the style or grammar of any answer should
     not be made.

      You should not alter any Question, and if you wish to explain
      or give any additional information, you may either submit a
      footnote to your evidence at the appropriate point, or submit
      a Memorandum.

      I should be grateful further if you would return the corrected
      transcript to reach me within seven days from the date of this
      letter. If special circumstances make this impossible please
      let me know, but if I do not hear from you to that effect, and
      do not receive the corrected transcript within the time
      indicated, the evidence will be published in its original
      form.

     Although your evidence was taken in public, you should not
     make any public reference to this transcript without
     indicating clearly that it is an uncorrected document, and
     that the final form of its publication has not yet been
     approved by the committee.

     Xn addition, evidence given in private is to be treated in
     strict confidence until it has been published by order of the
     House of Commons.




                                  Rosemary Challis
                               Assistant to the Clerk
TRANSCRIPT:         For instructions on its use, see below              Ev, 2




                                HOUSE OF COMMONS

                              MINUTES OF EVIDENCE

                                  TAKEN BEFORE

                           THE HOME AFFAIRS COMMITTEE




                           WEDNESDAY 14 NOVEMBER 1990


     MR C J ANDERTON CBE QPM, ACC MALCOLM GEORGE, CHIEF SUPT P G WALL,
 CHIEF SUPT D CLARKSON QPM, SERGEANT R B COYLES and SERGEANT P V O'BRIEN




Evidence heard in Public                                 Questions 170 - 306




                             USE OF THE TRANSCRIPT

1.   Members and prospective witnesses to whom che transcript is sent in
      strict confidence, under the authority of Mr Speaker and the Committee,
      are asked to note that the text is unpublished and that its use should
      be governed by the guidelines in the following paragraphs.

2.   Members receive copies for the purpose of correcting questions
      addressed by them to wicnesses, and are asked to send any corrections
      to the Committee Clerk as soon as possible.

3.   Prospective witnesses receive copies in preparation for any evidence
      they may subsequently give.

h.   This is an uncorrected and unpublished transcript of evidence taken in
      public and reported to the House.

5.   No public use should be made of the text.
                          WEDNESDAY 14 NOVEMBER 1990




                               Members present:
             Sir John Wheeler, in the Chair
             Mr David Ashby
             Mr Joe Ashton
             Mr Gerald Bermingham
             Dame Janet Fookes
             Mr Roger Gale
             Mr John Greenway
             Mr Keith Vaz
             Mr Mike Woodcock




           MEMORANDA SUBMITTED BY ACPO, THE POLICE SUPERINTENDENTS'

                     ASSOCIATION and THE POLICE FEDERATION

                           EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES




    MR C J ANDERTON CBE QPM, Chief Constable, Greater Manchester

           Constabulary, and ACC MALCOLM GEORGE, Greater Manchester

           Constabulary, ACPO, CHIEF SUPT P G WALL, National Assistant

           Secretary, Hampshire Constabulary, and CHIEF SUPT D CLARKSON QPM,

           Divisional Commander, West Yorkshire Constabulary, Police

           Superintendents' Association, SERGEANT R B COYLES, Vice President

           of the Joint Central Committee, and SERGEANT P V O'BRIEN, Police

           Federation, examined.




                                    Chairman

    170.           This afternoon the Committee will continue with its Inquiry

into policing football hooliganism and we are particularly glad to welcome

to the Committee room this afternoon Mr Anderton,      the Chief Constable of



                                       2
che Greater Manchester Police, who represents ACPO, and, Mr Anderton, we

know you are accompanied by Mr George whom the Committee has had the

pleasure of meeting on a previous Inquiry.       We are glad Co see you again,

Mr George.    Also from the Police Superintendents' Association, Chief

Superintendent Wall, whom the Committee remembers from previous Inquiries,

is here again and Chief Superintendent Clarkson whom I think we have not

had the pleasure of meeting until today.       We welcome you on behalf of the

Superintendents' Association.      From the Police Federation, Sergeant Coyles

and Sergeant O'Brien, we are very glad to see you as representing the

Federation.     The Committee is very grateful to the three organisations for

the memoranda of evidence which you have submitted to us and which we have

considered with very great care.      It is arising from that consideration and

from the other evidence that we have received and from our inquiries thus

far that we wish to pose some questions this afternoon and to raise our

discussion.     If I may begin perhaps by looking to you, Mr Anderton,    in the

first instance, if I could ask you to consider this with the Committee, as

to whether you would agree with the proposition of the National Football

Intelligence Unit that policing outside football grounds has driven the

problem elsewhere?

        (Mr Anderton)   First of all, Mr Chairman, could I thank you and the

Members for your very warm welcome to us all this afternoon and the

opportunity you have given us to appear in front of you.        Thank you for

chat.    To come to the point of your question directly, every time a step is

taken at any public function, and particularly a sportsground, by the

police to contain a problem there, the likelihood is that you will move it

elsewhere.    The same is true if you concentrate police resources in any

part of your area to deal with a particular crime problem, the probability

is it will shift to some other place.        This is a fact of life.   In truth, I




                                         3
m
    would suggest that although there is some evidence that the problem, for

    example, of containing drunkenness in and around football grounds, which

    has been dealt with extremely well by police and other agencies as a result

    of the Control of Alcohol legislation, might have moved the problem a

    little further away, I do not think it is of such a dimension as to cause

    the police undue concern.        I say that not because there is no problem, but

    simply because in the general scheme of things the police have always had

    to contend with outbreaks of public disorder and other football-related

    offences on, for example, journeys between one town and another, in town

    centres adjacent to football grounds and generally in the whole area of

    Association Football grounds, so we will always have a problem akin to

    football in and around football grounds and we will always have an

    associated problem on public transport and in areas akin to football

    grounds.

         171.           Thank you.     Of course I was referring to inside football

    grounds.    I think I used the word "outside1', I meant "inside", but you

    clearly perceived that is what I intended, Mr Anderton.        Could we stay on

    this football theme for the moment please.       The football authorities say,

    and indeed others may say this too, that this whole concept of football

    hooliganism is unfairly placed on the game of football and that it is not a

    responsibility, as it were, for which the football authorities as such

    should be blamed.     To what extent are there parallel problems, do you

    consider, to those of what we call "football hooliganism" at other large

    events, such as rugby league, rugby union, cricket, what are called "rock

    concerts" and even race meeting s ?

         (Mr Anderton')   Yes, sir.     Wherever you have a large collection of

    people there to enjoy a public event, particularly a sport of some kind,

    and wherever people are in an emotional or excited state of mind, and




                                               4
wherever sometimes there is perhaps an excessive consumption of alcohol,

which tends to be the case everywhere these days, there is a risk of some

kind of trouble or disorder or hooliganism occurring.    It is increasingly

evident, I would suggest, now in some rugby league matches, but not all,

and certainly relatively few compared with Association Football, there is

some evidence of troublesome behaviour at rugby union matches and even at

cricket grounds usually associated with some drunken behaviour or other.        I

would distinguish between those aspects of unruly behaviour and that which

is generally regarded as football hooliganism from the point of view that

that which is associated with football often is organised, and organised by

people in a very clever and ultimately criminal fashion.    Many of the

people we have dealt with and   brought to justice and who have been

convicted of serious offences   of football hooliganism orarising from that

sort of conduct are shown to have other criminal convictions.     In

Manchester, for example, in two of the major operations that we have

brought to the courts, at least 50 per cent of those dealt with by the

courts for offences at football grounds were shown to have other criminal

convictions of a serious and violent kind.    In the second major operation,

at least 30 per cent of those dealt with by the courts for football-related

violence had other criminal convictions and there is ample evidence now as

a result of the far more sophisticated means we adopt to deal with these

issues that much of the football hooliganism is carefully planned,

carefully orchestrated and well led by those who are fully intent upon

causing that kind of mayhem.    In that sense I would distinguish football

hooliganism from that which attaches itself incidentally and very often

spontaneously to other sports   events.

     172.   The Committee is    very grateful, Mr Anderton, for your comments

there and, of course, you perhaps add to the evidence that you gave to the




                                       5
Committee, the ACPO evidence, on page 50, paragraph 54, where you refer to

the travelling criminals who commit offences.     Can you attach to your

comments perhaps, for the convenience of this discussion, the likely

numbers who may be involved in this activity and whether there is any link

with other forms of crime or other groups in the community, anarchist

groups, for example?

     fMr Anderton,')   It is difficult to quantify the numbers in such an

absolute way, Chairman.     Certainly those who are involved in the more

serious offences, those who are responsible for organising and leading

serious public disorder at football grounds, those who travel from one

venue or another and select and target particular matches with the

intention of creating disorder and committing crime are, compared to the

total numbers of young people and young men and women who support football,

relatively few in number, but that is not to say that, of course, the

problem is not a serious one.     Although the police have been singularly

successful certainly in the past two or three years, we are still very much

concerned that these people are still out and about, are still associated

with particular football clubs and are still intent upon causing serious

disruption and disorder wherever they go.

     173.          Before I turn to Mr Vaz who wishes to raise a question about

the exclusion orders,    I would like to see if the Police Superintendents'

Association would like to add to Mr Anderton's comments.

     (Mr Wall)    I do not think to any major extent, sir.   It would be true

to say that not every football club suffers from the specific type of

criminal which Mr Anderton has referred to, but they do, of course,

sometimes transfer their allegiance and move from attending a particular

club ground to target another.     That, I think, is a point of interest thac

because there is not a group attached or related to a particular club does




                                        6
•
    not mean you are not likely perhaps to meet that problem at that ground.

    The only other thing I would add, sir, is you were talking earlier about

    different events which might or might not cause problems.         Many events do

    not have groups divided into such partisan groups.         If you are talking

    about pop concerts or those sort of things, or even race meetings, a race

    meeting will have winners and losers, but racing men are not divided into

    two categories in the way football is.

            (Mr Clarkson)     Sir, I am a Divisional Commander and I am in charge of

    Leeds United,       for my sins!   Quite obviously I have a reasonable amount of

    experience dealing with these problems.         I think it is a wider issue than

    this.     I believe that there is a difference between rugby league, there is

    a difference between all those other things and football because it is said

    now that football is the national game and in consequence people are more,

    I believe,     intent on their clubs winning, and particularly so with Leeds

    United because they are doing very well at the time.         I think it is the

    success of the club which breeds the complacency of the supporter.          If

    their club is doing badly and they are looking for some trouble, then that

    is where the trouble starts.         We are lucky because we are doing well, but I

    just wonder what will happen when the club starts losing, so I think the

    complex issue of football is very vast and there is no real finance

    involved and to compare it with others, I am not sure we will get very far.

            174.    I    appreciate that. The Federation,   do you have a comment to

    make at this juncture on what we have been discussing so far?

            (Mr O'Brien)       Just to add, Chairman, as these gentlemen have said,

    these fans now who are intent on            causing troubletravel miles     from their

    home club with the intention of causing trouble.          I come from Carlisle,

    which is a very small town, with a team in the Fourth Division which has

    2,000 or 3,000 spectators, but we have, I believe, one of the most violent




                                                7
groups of spectators in England at the present time who travel to away

matches, intent on causing trouble at other people's grounds.         They

travelled two or three years ago 45 miles from Carlisle to where the

Scottish fans travelled down to the south coast and one man was very

seriously stabbed.     They do not come to the Carlisle club any more.       They

are Carlisle supporters in name, but they travel all over this country.

They were seen on television when England went to Sweden and they caused

aggravation there and that is one of the problems we have with that type of

person.     They are moving away from our ground, but not for football; they

are intent on causing aggravation wherever they go.

     Chairman:     Thank you.   I think this is the right moment to consider

exclusion orders.




                                      Mr Va z

     175.           Mr Anderton, and other witnesses, the Home Office tell us that

"the rigorous enforcement of exclusion orders is not easy to achieve",

while several witnesses, including the police, have pointed to

inconsistencies and problems in the imposition of exclusion orders by the

courts.     Are there any reforms to the exclusion order process which you

would like to suggest?

     (Mr Anderton)    Yes, thank you, Mr V a z , for that question.    It seems to

us at times that the notion of exclusion orders, indeed the reality of

them, has not quite caught on yet, perhaps not even in the police service

itself.     There are three possibilities, which we have indicated in our

written evidence, as to why this may be so.      It may well be that individual

police forces are not pressing for the imposition of exclusion orders where

they might be considered appropriate for football-related offences.          It may

well be, on the other hand, that where the police feel chat this should be
•
    done that the Crown Prosecution Service are less enthusiastic, and it

    ultimately may well, of course, be if the Crown Prosecution Service and the

    police think it would be a jolly good idea, that the magistrates themselves

    do not impose an exclusion order or seem perhaps somewhat reluctant to do

    so.   There are times, of course, when an exclusion order is imposed where

    the time involved is so short, two or three months or even less, when there

    is an opportunity under the law to impose an ord&r for a limitless period

    of time and, of course, some magistrates have operated in a sense outwith

    the law by imposing an order just for one ground or one club and not for

    all football grounds as they ought to do.   Sometimes, of course, when

    someone has been in breach of an exclusion order and the person has been

    brought back before the court, they have, again without proper provision in

    law in addition to punishing them for the breach of the exclusion order,

    which, as you know, can involve imprisonment up to one month and/or a

    penalty of up to £400, have extended the period of the order.   Now, on that

    latter point we would agree that that is perhaps a good thing to do.     We

    would like to see a greater use of the exclusion order first and foremost

    with everyone taking a keener interest and viewing it more seriously than

    appears to be the case at present.   We would like to see magistrates given

    the power in respect of any breach of an exclusion order Co actually extend

    chat order even further on that occasion and, whereas at present the law

    simply requires that people be excluded from attending matches, we would

    like an additional provision introduced hopefully at some convenient time

    if legislation permits and the time of Parliament, which is a difficult

    thing to envisage these days, that they will prevent someone from actually

    attending at or near a ground on a match day because situations are arising

    currently where people against whom an exclusion order has been imposed

    actually arrive at the ground.   They are well known, they are very often




                                          9
leaders of troublesome gangs, they act as a focal point and they are there

to actually organise trouble and create trouble.

    176.    On the issue of sentencing generally, do you share the concern

of the Leicester City Football Club in their evidence to this Committee

that they are, in their words, near despair at the level of sentencing

imposed by magistrates on football hooligans?

     (Mr Anderton^    Well, that is something I have not really considered.

It is a long time now since I actually served in Leicester and was very

familiar with the attitudes of Leicester magistrates and certainly the

problems of the Leicester City Football Club at Filbert Street, but in our

own area of Greater Manchester I think, Mr George, we are reasonably

content with the sort of punishments which are imposed on football

spectators who get into trouble because we have a fairly proud record in

Manchester of dealing with football violence and troublemakers and the

courts and the magistrates have always supported us extremely well.

    177.    How do you think you can improve the liaison between the

courts and the police and the football clubs at a local level as opposed to

the national level, which the organisations obviously have?    Do you think

there is a need to improve that liaison?

     (Mr Anderton~)   Well, certainly without the police giving the

impression that they are entering into some kind of cosy relationship with

the magistrates and the local ---

     178.   Which would never do, would it?

     (Mr Anderton)    I think commonsense requires that the police and the

magistrates meet together whenever they can to discuss these issues.     Now,

one has to remember that certainly in the provinces, it does not apply to

London, of course, but one-third of the membership of a police authori ty is

comprised of magistrates who are very familiar with the problems and are




                                       10
there to discuss these issues with the Chief Constable and his senior

officers.      In addition to that, of course, I think it is fairly common

practice now around the country for the various ground commanders to invite

the local magistrates along to see the problems on the day, to see the sort

of things which are happening, and to discuss these issues and witness them

actually on the ground and that is the best way to inform magistrates of

the sort of things that they perhaps might consider when people come in

front of them for punishment.

        179.   I wonder whether the other witnesses would say whether they

agree with Mr Anderton.

        (Mr Clarkson)   Yes, entirely.   For example, it is by education and

education in two ways.      There is a magistrate in Leeds who is primarily

responsible for dealing with football hooliganism.       It is a lady.   She

visited the Notts Forest games throughout the briefings which took place

and she knows exactly what our problems are and now we know what her

problems are and so our relationship is very, very close.

        (Mr Wall ^   As to the research we carried out for the Superintendents'

Association, I cannot speak for Leicester as I do not know whether there is

a particular situation there, but we did not receive an impression there is

a general and wide problem with the sentencing.       We did not find that.

        180.   You do not think the sentences are too soft?

        (Mr Wall’)   We have not found that.




                                      Mr Ashton

        181.    Mr Anderton, you are from Manchester and, Mr Clarkson, you

look after Leeds.       Last Sunday at Manchester City's ground several hundred

Leeds supporters smashed all the seats in one go.       How many arrests were

made?




                                          11
     (Mr Clarkson)      Three, sir.

     182.      And    how many do you think were       involved inthis sear-smashing?

     (Mr Clarkson)      Again, sir, I think there is no solution.     It is not as

simple as that, I do not think.       Mr Anderton, would you like to add

anything?

     (Mr Anderton)      I think I will ask Mr George, who was responsible more

directly for the police operation on the day, to comment on Mr Ashton's

statement.

     (Mr Georee) What we had at that game was probably 26,000 to 28,000

spectators and 5,000 to 6,000 Leeds fans.         The bulk of the Leeds fans were

situated in what is known as the Platt Lane stand and that is the stand

where the seats were damaged.

    183.      What are those seats made of - plastic?

     (Mr Georae) They are timber and metal construction.

     184.      But    this is a   plastic seat?

     (Mr George') They are a bench-type seat.

     185.     So they were not smashed by someone putting a boot into them?

     (Mr George) I do not know whether, Chairman, I am wise to discuss this

at this stage because the damage which was committed may well be the

subject of a criminal inquiry,

     Mr Ashton:      Well, can I put it to you that this is very important and I

will tell you why; because Lord Justice Taylor has recommended all-seater

stadia which are going to cost the game some £300 million and to which the

Chancellor is giving £18 million per year out of taxation on football.

Now, the Football League are not at all happy with all-seater spectator

stadia and many of us have a feeling that even if you put hooligans into

seats, they will simply stand on them, especially if they are wet or it is

snowing.     They will pick up the pieces and throw them at the referee or at




                                          12
che players, as Leeds United did in Paris some years ago.      Lord Justice

Taylor has specifically asked for seats and not benches.      Now, this is very

important that if all this money is going to be spent, it is not much use

spending it if what is going to happen is what happened at Maine Road last

Sunday.     Now, I do not think it matters if you tell us whether the seats

were made of plastic or whether they were bum-shaped or flat benches which

people can stand on.

     Chairman:     Mr George, in answering Mr Ashton's question, I am sure you

will cry and help us as best you can, but do not, of course, trespass into

any matters before the courts.




                                    Mr Ashton

     186.      But it is a fact that not many of the seats work,

     (Mr Georee’) 1 understand the point which has been well articulated.

They were damaged and, of course, I am aware that the football industry,

both the Football League and the Football Association, in conjunction with

the 92 league clubs, are endeavouring to meet the spirit of Lord Justice

Taylor's recommendations in moving towards all-seater stadia.       What we had

on Sunday was disgraceful.     The amount of damage is such that there cannot

be an innocent interpretation on that amount of damage.       I have been co

many stadia and sat in seats of that, if you like, low quality, but I leave

that seat without damaging it.

     187.      But these were people who absolutely refused to sit down

because they were used to standing up.       They were the sort of people where

if they had been given standing accommodation, they would have all been

very happy instead of paying a bit of a higher price for seats.       Now, as I

understood it, and I am not talking about the people who were arrested, but

the vast majority of them had to stand on the seats because the people in




                                        13
front were standing on their seats and so it went on all the way round.

     (Mr George) Chairman, I can say that that was considered, this issue

of educating fans to use the seats properly and X also agree that, yes,

spectators do stand on seats, but that is in observation.          What we hope to

achieve through good stewarding, good policing is an education process

which moves towards the spirit in meeting Lord Justice Taylor's

recommendations,

     188.   Could I ask you for an opinion, without asking about what

happened on Sunday?   I declare an interest here because I am a Director of

Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.   We are happy to      go along with the all-

seater stadia, but we have said to the Government that       it is very much

better to put in a bench-type, flat surface which they can stand on, but I

understand from the Football League that Lord Justice Taylor insists on

shaped seats which, when you stand on them, makes it very much more

dangerous and people stand on them because of the rain.           In your opinion,

would it be better with a flat,   bench-type seat?

     (Mr George) I do not know, Chairman, whether I       am qualified to comment

on that,

     189.   Well, in terms of preventing hooliganism, would it be better

if they sat on benches rather than shaped seats?

     (Mr George) Now you have qualified it, I can answer that, Chairman, by

saying that the nature of the seat is immaterial to what it creates in

terms of the threat from hooliganism.        There are problems

     190.   But does it provide ammunition?

     (Mr George) X will just finish answering the question.           There are

problems, Chairman, in handling a crowd or a group hellbent on causing

disruption if they are seated.    Now, insofar as the construction goes,

whether it is a bench or a seat type, I suppose it is immaterial, and the




                                        14
way it is bolted down and the fabric of it is the important thing which

prevents the hooligan from ripping it from its foundations and throwing it

as a missile.   I cannot comment beyond that.




                                   Chairman

     191.    Thank you.   The Federation would like to come in here.

     (Mr Coyles) Yes, Chairman.    As is obvious, we have not a great deal of

experience in policing all-seater stadia.     They are a fairly new

innovation, but we have been in consultation with our Scottish colleagues.

We are aware they have submitted a memorandum of evidence to you and that,

we believe and I understand, addresses the particular issue.     They state,

and I summarise it correctly, I hope, that they do not wish to see bench-

type seating, that it simply becomes a runway on which the hooligan can

trample up and down to his heart's content and they believe that single

seats, tipping seats reduce that problem.     We have no experience, they

have, and I suggest that speaks for itself.

     192.    We are grateful for that intervention.    I think, Mr Clarkson,

you would like to add to this as well.

     (Hr Clarkson)   Sir, I follow what Mr Ashton says.    I did a tour in the

closed season of Europe and I went to Holland where there are some very

fine stadia and I personally think it is wider than what Mr Ashton is

saying and indeed Lord Justice Taylor.     A lot of clubs now are out to make

money.   Let us not kid ourselves; that is what they are there for.    They

want 92 European football clubs and a pre-requisite to European football

clubs is that there will be all-seater stadia for all of them, so that is

where the answer is and, therefore, we have got to decide what sort of

seats we require.    I am a member of a Safety Committee and I know, because

I am forced down this road, that my club wants to go into Europe, so,




                                      15
Therefore, we have got to have seats where, as you said, Mr Ashton, your

bum fics and that is exactly what we have to have and they have to be

collapsible so that we can steward them.         It is no good putting seats in if

you cannot steward them.      It is just like being in a cinema.     There has got

to be a sufficient way where the police, the stewards, or whoever it may be

can deal with them.      It has to be simple.    We have to lay down what we

want.



                                     Mr Ashton

        193.   But if it rains, they do not sit on the seats; they stand on

them.

        (Mr Clarkson)   They still can be stewarded.    The stewarding has to be

effective and properly done.      We cannot mess about with that,



                                      Mr Gale

        194.   Mr Ashton said, and I am not entirely certain of the premise

on which he is basing his statement, that these are the kind of people who

if they had been left to stand would have been perfectly happy.         Well,

without interviewing each one individually, I think it would be a little

bit difficult to say.      You, gentlemen, will all be aware because it was

widely reported that the whole subject of the facilities in stadia was

raised and investigated fairly thoroughly by this Committee on Monday and

chat there seemed to be some distinct degree of impression given that the

general level of facilities at the stadia in the United Kingdom was (a)

mediocre at best and (b) much below the kind of standards which are

anticipated and expected in stadia elsewhere in Europe and, of course,

British fans have considerable experience of other countries’ facilities.

I wqnder if perhaps one of the two gentlemen who appear to be regular




                                         16
attenders at football matches could give us the benefit o£ their wisdom and

let us know whether or not they would share the view that the standard of

facilities contributes considerably, as appears to be the impression,

towards the problem that we are discussing.

     (Mr Clarkson)    It certainly does.    Again 1 can only tell you about the

ones X have seen.     It certainly does and you only have to look at the

clubs, which, as I call it, may be in the "Super League" if there is such a

thing, where they provide, I think, very good facilities and there are

those clubs within the same First Division who do not provide them and it

is policing the varying levels of, how do I say, furbishment of a ground

which causes the difficulty because you need tactics and strategies for a

particular ground which may not necessarily be the same in each particular

ground.     So there is a great deal of funds required in the majority of

clubs.

     195.           Can you give us in a nutshell some indication of the kind of

facilities that you think ought to be provided which would make not only

your job easier but the ground safer and the enjoyment greater?

     (Mr Clarkson)    I think if we accept there has got to be all-seater

stadia, which I personally do, and I accept that now whether I like it or

not that is where we are going, therefore, what I would like to see is

greater margins between seats to start with so that when they do come up

automatically, then at least we could get to the man if he is causing a

problem,    if he is drunk or whatever, and deal with him, but in such numbers

that they can come from both sides or indeed from the back and the front as

well, so there has to be the area around the seats where we have access.

So obviously that will cause problems because the clubs are in it for money

and, therefore, if we have these margins the capacity of the ground is

going to be seriously reduced and that is obviously commercially a problem,




                                       17
but we are talking about safety and public order and not commercialism.

     196.            How about the other facilities; things like restaurant

facilities and turnstiles?        Where are the problem areas as far as you are

concerned?

      (Mr Clarkson)       So far as the clubs I have visited are concerned, I do

not see any difficulties with the refreshment areas.        Now, because we have

got segregation, we are trying to do away with segregation by bringing in

family stands.     Family stands demand creches because people now come to

watch the football with their children.         They leave the children in

creches, they l e a v e   children in children's areas underneath the stands, so

that they can go and watch the football, so X believe a lot of the major

clubs are going down that road and that in itself is two-fold; it is

dealing with the children by providing facilities and it is also addressing

the issue of desegregation.

      (Mr Anderton)       The term "stadium", of course, Chairman,    is really

quite evocative and conjures up the notion of some great edifice, some

wonderful establishment full of all the best that can be provided, but the

plain fact of the matter is that a high percentage of football grounds in

this country do not deserve to be called "stadia" quite frankly and they

have lagged behind for generations and it will take an awful lot of money,

to take Mr Ashton's point, to bring them up to what I regard as a very

proper standard, but the hope is, and this surely must be the aim of

everyone associated with football, or any sport for that matter, that the

provision of more civilised conditions will ultimately produce more

civilised behaviour.        I think there has to come a turning point and, in the

first instance, when we introduce all-seater stadia of whatever particular

quality, whether they are firm fixtures or poor quality seats, the

probability is for a while some of those will be torn up.            There will be




                                           18
trouble and people will refuse to sit down, they will stand up when they

want to and they will sit down when they feel like it, but we have to go

through that pain barrier to alter the culture o£ the sport and I think

this is the big challenge which presents itself now no the whole of the

football world.    We have to give the impression that we intend to make it a

civilised sport for civilised people and we will not achieve that until we

improve ground conditions in the way we have discussed this afternoon.



                                    Chairman

     197.           I can see there is some general agreement with that point of

view among the witnesses or is there some disagreement with the Federation?

     fMr O'Brien)      I would say that Mr Gale was being polite when he was

explaining stadia.     They are abysmal.        My colleague talked about some of

the football clubs with creches and restaurants.           He also referred to the

"Super League", and that is the stage we are talking about, the Super

League,     The vast majority of football teams in the four divisions in this

country are abysmal and do nothing for the fans.           They travel 200 or 300

miles to a match on Saturday, they pay good money, they get there and they

find that they are standing out in the pouring rain in the middle of winter

and in the snow, they find appalling facilities where they are standing

against a wall with no roof, they find, if they are lucky, there is a

little shed open where they can get a hot pie, if it is hot, and then they

have a 300-mile trip back.     That is football saying, "This is the stadium.

We want you, the spectator, to pay all our wages to keep us going" and that

is all football has given the fans for the last 50 or 60 years and it is

abysmal,

     Chairman:     Yes, it does sound appalling.




                                           19
                                   Mr Birmingham

       198.         Mr Anderton, no matter how good the stadium is and no matter

how g o o d the policing is, if the crowd will react to the conduct on the

pitch, does the conduct o£ the players not have a very large part to play

sometimes in the conduct of the spectators, particularly looking at the

recent incident between Arsenal and one of the Manchester      teams? Do you

not think we should tackle that problem as well?

       fMr Anderton1)   Yes, sir, Mr Chairman, and I think by and large the

authorities have indicated very recently that that sort of nonsense will be

corrected and that strong punishment will be imposed.      It is a matter of

commonsense,   it seems Co me, and certainly self-evident that where people

in the public eye, whether they are footballers or not, if they engage in

outrageous behaviour,     they are bound to inflame the passions of others who

are associated with the venture.      It can happen here   even in the Houses of

Parliament.    If a Member steps outside the norm, all     hell is let loose and

we witness that from time to time.      It is perfectly true on the football

field.    If the Captain of England does something wrong or the Captain of

Manchester United, or the goalkeeper does something silly and offensive,

then of course it arouses passions and there is bound to be trouble on the

terraces as well.       It is important and necessary that these things are

gripped very quickly, that discipline, and very strong discipline, is

imposed and that when punishments are meted out, the miscreants, whether

they are players, spectators, linesmen, or whoever, know perfectly well

that such conduct is quite unacceptable and will not be tolerated.,

       fMr George1
                 ) I just have an addition to Mr Anderton's comment, if I

may.     ACPO also brought this to the attention of the Football League and

the Referees' Association who take it on very seriously, particularly with

the young players, in an educational process so that is something they are




                                          20
co-operating with.     I just wanted to comment on that.



                                    Chairman

       199.        Before I turn to Mr Greenway, if we could just stay on this

theme of the adequacy of the facilities, could    I   explore with you,

Mr Anderton, how adequate do you see the existing facilities for police

use.    Do you have them to a control, to a standard which you would regard

as suitable?    Do you have facilities for the detaining of people and any

other aspects of what you would want to see for good and effective

policing?

       CMr Anderton)   The short answer to your question, sir, is no, we do

not yet have what we believe we should have in football stadia throughout

the country.    Both Mr Justice Popplewell and more recently Lord Justice

Taylor have recommended, of course, that proper facilities should be made

available at grounds for police and for the other agencies, including, for

example, St John's Ambulance and the medical personnel who are now required

to be in attendance at major football matches.        Many grounds, of course,

certainly those in my own area, in the First Division do have reasonably

good facilities now.     They have good police control rooms and excellent

communications, but there are others which simply do not have that kind of

facility and again we are for the most part dependent upon what the club

itself can provide.     To produce sophisticated control rooms of the sort

which really now are necessary with all the equipment and communications

required for the control and supervision of football matches is a very

costly business and it cannot be done overnight, we accept that, but we do

feel that clubs should make a greater effort and perhaps be materially

assisted in some way through the Football Trust or even through the

Government to provide what is a very necessary means of ensuring adequate




                                        21
police supervision and control at football grounds.



                                 Mr Greenway

     200.         I wonder if we could change tact now.   The Home Secretary on

Monday announced the Government's intention to create four new football

related offences arising out of the recommendation of Lord Justice Taylor's

final report: ticket touting, chanting racial or obscene abuse, running on

to the pitch without reasonable excuse and missile throwing.     Do you

welcome these new offences?   How would you like to see the legislation

framed and what additional implications are there for policing football

arising from them?

     (Mr Anderton)   Well, we certainly applaud the statement of the

Government that these matters are to be addressed in due time.     In point of

fact the actual specific offences were recommended by the Association of

Chief Police Officers to Lord Justice Taylor in their evidence and both Mr

George, who is with me here today, and I, when we met with Lord Justice

Taylor, we urged the introduction and ultimate implementation of these

offences.   We would have liked to have seen them in the current Criminal

Justice Bill soon to be laid before Parliament because we feel there is a

sense of urgency attached to these particular offences: the touting,

missile throwing, running on to the pitch and the increasing frequency of

the use of obscene abuse and racist chants inside football grounds.       The

sooner these matters can be made amendable to the law the better,      It will

give police officers a much better chance, it seems to us, of dealing with

these issues as they occur because certainly there is a very strong feeling

within the police service, and indeed within the Football Supporters

Associations, who themselves are anxious that the misconduct that these

offences are intended to address is something which should be eradicated




                                      22
from the offences.

        201.   I wonder if the other witnesses would like to comment?

        (Mr Clarkson)    The offences are        absolutely necessary and you       willnot

produce otherwise.       First of all it is offering the capability to        dealwith

these offences and the powers to      get the evidence to deal with them.      Where

there is an offence      then we need the powers to search, having got        the

powers of search we can prove the offence.        If you have a pitch invasion -

you can think of it - which is likely to occur where there are 2 or 3,000

on the pitch, we cannot deal with them all and therefore there is a problem

making that arrest situation.      I hope people realise we have not got the

manpower and will never have the manpower.        The particular racial problem

needs to be addressed but we seem to be addressing that by education but 1

believe that is needed by the adoption of black or other coloured players.

That in itself is a policing sort of role and yes there are many issues

other than the offences which need addressing.




                                     Chairman

        202.   I am not sure, Mr Clarkson, I follow you about powers for

searching, what exactly do you mean?

        (Mr Clarkson)   The problem we are having is plastic rocket launchers

from the back to the front.      They are plastic so metal detectors do not

pick them up.     It needs a physical search. You need a power to search for

that.     If you are dealing with ticket touting you watch them covertly and

you have to prove they are selling tickets.        You need these powers of

search to prove the offence.




                                            23
                                   Mr Greenway

     203.    I wonder if I could clarify the position?     Together with one

o£ the clerks I went to Glasgow to see the Cup Final, X am sorry we could

not come to Manchester to fulfil your invitation, it seems to have been an

existing match.   In Scotland the police told us they do not need these

extra powers and they have already adequate powers in common law by way of

breach of the peace.     In your evidence you also say there are common law

powers relating to a breach of the peace, could you explain for us what the

differences are so we have this absolutely right for the record?

     (Mr Clarkson)     Sir, let me explain to you:   I did an operation three

matches ago at Ellen Road involving, I believe it was Manchester I am not

sure now, ticket touts, certainly the touts came from Manchester.      We did a

covert operation and we arrested seven with so many thousand pounds and so

many hundred tickets.     The files went to the Crown Prosecution Service and

they endorsed no further action, insufficient evidence.      The breakdown is

this breach of the peace has got to be immediate and not distanced from the

arrest itself, so therefore the conduct likely to cause a breach of the

peace we arrest them for cannot be something that we speculate on, it has

got to be something there ever present and that is where I stand with the

Crown Prosecution Service.

    204.    So what you are saying is there is a difference whether it is

in the way the law has been interpreted over generations or the way the

courts interpret it, there is a difference,

     fMr Clarkson)     Or the Crown Prosecution Service.

     205.   Presumably this applied before we had the Crown Prosecution

Service where w e were prosecuting for breach of the peace or ticket touts

or missile throwing, what was the outcome, was it satisfactory in the

courts?




                                        24
9
         (Mr Clarkson)    Basically they were bound over or the breach of the

    peace was terminated and never went Co court.

         206.     So there were not even sufficient penalties imposed even if

    you had a satisfactory prosecution?

         (Mr Clarkson')   It is binding over by way of complaint.



                                        Chairman

         207.     I think the Federation might want to come in.

         (Mr Coyles) Again, sir, if I can refer to some of the liaisons we have

    had with out Scottish colleagues.     I do not wish to answer for them because

    if you have any special queries no doubt you will ask them direct.     The

    information we have from them is that historically Scotland has made far

    greater use of the common law powers available, so much so that they are

    far more accepted by police officers, by law officers, and by the courts

    themselves.   I do not profess to understand the full legal position, I am

    not a lawyer, but certainly as I understand ie the position in this country

    is that a breach of the peace can only attract a bound over order result, I

    am told that in Scotland a simple breach of the peace can attract a penalty

    and my Scottish colleagues told me the penalty range you are regularly

    looking at - it is difficult obviously to be precise - is in the range of

    fifty up to two hundred pounds.     That is a very effective penalty indeed

    and it means something to the offender and it certainly means something to

    the police officer because whether you like it or not you cannot divorce

    that fact away from others.    In this country there is a totally different

    perception.




                                           25
                                    Mr Greenway

     208.       So can we be sure there is a clear legal difference which you

gentlemen all believe needs to be addressed by further legislation in this

country with specific penalties, and that you welcome?

     (Mr Anderton)      Yes.

     Mr Greenway:      Can we deal with two aspects of it.   The Chairman, Sir

John, has already raised the issue of search.     I understand in Scotland

under the Criminal Justices Act 1980, which the Scottish police say has

totally transformed the hooligan problem in Scotland,     they are able to

search, the police have the powers to search, spectators outside the

grounds to see whether they have controlled containers.

    Mr Gale:       Inside?




                                    Mr Greenway

     209.   No.     My understanding is that outside   the grounds they have

power to stop and search because that is what I witnessed at Hampden Park,

and the Clerk will tell me if I am wrong, that they had power to stop and

search outside the ground under the Criminal Justices Act.

     (Mr O'Brien')     For drink.

     210.      Yes, to see whether they were attempting to take alcohol into

the ground which in itself is an offence under the Criminal Justices Act ir.

Scotland.

     (Mr Clarkson-)    And indeed as far as this country is concerned that

applies here.

     211.   That applies here?

     (Mr Clarkson)     Yes.

     212.   Even under the Public Order Act?




                                        26
     (Mr Clarksonl         No, under the Control of Alcohol Football Act we have

the power to search        for alcohol,but that is only in relation to alcohol,

we have got to look at the other offences.         The only rule we use, to be

honest winh you; in searching for offensive weapons is the club rules and

the condition of getting into the ground is you will not carry an offensive

weapon or indeed beer, it covers that as well.

     213.     They only apply in the ground?

     (Mr Clarkson)     On the property of the club.

     214.     So are       you saying tous you would find it helpful in

prosecuting any offence       relating to missile throwing and, indeed,

preventing any such offence taking place and similarly with ticket touting,

preventing offences taking place if you had new powers to stop and search

supporters whom you may suspect of having either of the above?

     (Mr George) Yes.       It also protects    the interests of   the policemen.   In

England and Wales he        acts as agent for the club and that perhaps might open

up civil litigation, areas of civil litigation if we have specific criminal

law under which the police could operate at the turnstile, on the concourse

and on the terraces, that would be of great value to the policeman

operating in the execution of his duty.



                                     Mr Bermingham

     215.     How does that catch the ticket touts?

     (Mr George) Y e s .    We deal with him now on technical breach of the

peace, we deal with him on potential criminal conduct of being in

possession of forged tickets.        That achieves the objective for that

particular game.     If, however, we had such specific legislation then again

the interests of the policeman is served in the execution of his duty.




                                           27
                                    Mr Greenway

       2X6.Is it not the case from what you have said that you are having

to stretch a point in order to try and find powers     to deal adequately with

what   you see as a regular problem which Parliament   ought to legislate to

deal with?    Is that the real gist of the point?

       (Mr George1
                 ) We stretch our powers still working within what laws are

available to us.     The breach of the peace element is perhaps the strongest

on which we have to rely.      The consequence of the ticket tout is breach of

segregation and that is a distant breach, what we have to deal with is the

breach of the peace that prevails as and when he is going about his

business.

       217. Yes.

       (Mr Clarkson1)   In my particular case because I have gone down the road

and tested it I can no longer use that power because I have already

received a decision by the Crown Prosecution Service saying you do non meet

the requirement therefore do not do it again,

       218.    I can understand that and to be helpful can I say to you. that

the Chief Constable of Strathclyde, Mr Sloane, personally felt that the

Procurator Fiscal in Glasgow, in Strathclyde, was very supportive of the

breach of the peace prosecutions, as were the courts.      Your experience is

different and we have taken your point on that but I wonder if you could

share with the Committee what ideas you might have as to how we could frame

the legislation relating to ticket touting?       What specifically would you

want to see it provide by way of powers and offences?

       (Mr George)      Chairman, it has to be framed so that it takes him away

from the ground and it has to be framed in a way that prevents the

entrepreneurial conduct from infringing segregation.       That is the broad

answer to it.      How that is achieved, because I recognise the difficulties,




                                         28
ir we say there is no ticket touting per se then it goes underground and it

will still exist;       if we say it should not be at the ground therefore it can

exist five miles away in the pub.       Quite clearly common sense has to

prevail and perhaps the easiest way of framing legislation is to take it

away from the ground, say a distance the parameter of the police force

area,     I say that off the top of my head because it is difficult to put an

actual mileage on it, but it has to be taken away from the ground.

        219.           I think what the Home Secretary has in mind is to say tickets

on match dates other than by someone authorised by the club.

        (Mr Clarkson)    Which we say would be regardless of where it took

place.     My problem in Leeds City Centre is we have touting and, therefore,

we cannot have a location.        It has got to be on suspicion and on a gain, a

financial gain.        The dilemma we have, and this is the case the supporters

are making o u t , they say what about me when I have bought two. my son has

gone sick and I have to get rid of one.        There has got to be a gain.

        Mr Greenway:     Does there need to be a financial gain under the new

legislation, presumably not because the Chairman and I were told by the

Chief Superintendent, Chief Superintendent Hopkins, at Axsenal Football

Club the other Saturday that touts are occasionally left with tickets that

they cannot sell and they give them away at less than face value.          We have

been told this by other people.        You would not want a gain impact?

        Chairman:   I think the Committee is well seised of these areas and we

are aware of the differences between the criminal law system in Scotland

and England and Wales and in the memorandum of evidence we published on

page 31 it sets these out.        Of course, under Scottish common law there are

such delightful offences as malicious mischief, reckless conduct and the

Sheriff Court has wider powers to deal with these.        We are well seized of

chese differences and we will ponder the legislation implications in the




                                          29
9
    light of these inquiries and what you have described to us today.



                                     Mr Greenway

         220.          There is another difference which I would like to raise with

    you and that is the profile of policing.     In Scotland they adopted an

    extremely high profile method of policing.     My impression is from visiting

    many grounds around this country that there are variations even within the

    United Kingdom.   I noticed, I think at Manchester, on Sunday on television

    a number of your officers standing at running track level facing the ground

    and that is what we saw at Scotland but at Arsenal they take it differently

    and at lower division clubs they take it differently.     Do you feel chat

    there is any merit in suggesting a particular method of policing for all

    football grounds or do you feel we should retain the local flexibility

    there is now?

         (Mr Andertonl   Yes, sir, if X may I would strongly recommend we retain

    that local flexibility.   No-one knows better than the ground commander and

    those there to assist him, including his assistant chief constable

    operations perhaps at headquarters, what the likely risks are attendant on

    any particular ground as a matter of practice and history, or what might be

    attendant upon a particular match as a result of some special

    circumstances.    I think it really has to be left to the local police and

    the police commander in particular as to what levels of policing are

    required both inside and outside the ground and the fact that differences

    do on the face of it appear to exist in similar circumstances should not

    suggest that different approaches have been taken.     It is important that

    this degree of flexibility is built into systems of policing, not just in

    relation to football but in everything that we do.




                                          30
                                      Mr Gale

     221.           Pursuing that, Sir John, 1 would like to raise with our

witnesses some of the questions concerning police conduct that were put to

us by the Football Supporters' Association and others on Monday.      It will

not surprise you perhaps to know that they in turn felt that there were

occasions when members of the constabulary at various levels took a hostile

view towards supporters in general and some in particular.      I wonder

whether you can offer any observations concerning the treatment of, for

example, the different treatment on occasions, between home fans and away

fans?    Do you have any standard policy?

        (Mr Anderton)   We are well seized, as you have indicated, of the

concerns that have been expressed by the Football Supporters' Association

and the National Federation of Football Supporters’ Clubs.      We, of course,

have now set up a machinery which allows for regular dialogue and they meet

with ray assistant chief constable, Mr George, who is the secretary of the

ACPO sub-committee on hooliganism in sport of which I have been Chairman

for the past seven years, to address these particular issues.      What they

sometimes choose to forget perhaps, if not ignore, is that local police

commanders and local forces actually deal with supporters and spectators or

with particular fixtures in the football calender according to the

perceived threat on the one hand or the intelligence which has been

received suggesting the likelihood of trouble or simply on the basis of

what happened last time out.      It may well be that one particular force or

ground commander adopts a slightly more heavy handed approach but usually

based on very hard experience of what happened on the previous occasion.

There is room for difference and there is room again for a degree of

flexibility in our methods of approach for dealing with a particular group

of supporters whom we attract to our grounds on Saturday.




                                         31
    222.             I can well see che particular experience is going to colour

somebody's attitude particularly if it is a particular team or a particular

group of supporters known to have a reputation for causing trouble.        We can

only refer   to   the anecdotal evidence that we received on Monday, a

reference for example to one group of police officers at a particular

ground treating visiting fans with good humour, getting on the bus and

saying: "What a shower, we hope you beat them",     A completely different set

of circumstances is where police officers stop a coach and on one

particular occasion we were told even the team coach on the motorway and

held there until minutes before the match ostensibly to allow all the home

supporters in first to separate them.      There does seem to be an underlying

atmosphere of discontent among the football supporters.      You have Indicated

to some extent how you are addressing that through the ACPO liaison but we

are told again it is very much varied from force to force.      Why, for

example, do some forces deal very happily with Football Supporters'

Association representatives and others not at all?

     (Mr Anderton)      I hope, sir, that if that has been evident in the past

it will be corrected in the future because we have now established a firm

basis for regular discussion and liaison with the Football Supporters'

Associations.      We are in the process of advising all chief constables and

all ground commanders and force football liaison officers of the local

points of contact with the representatives of the Football Supporters'

Associations with a view to removing some of these perceptions which have

tended to raise doubts in people's minds as to the efficacy of policing.            I

would not deny, nor would I suppose any of my colleagues here, that from

time to time slightly different approaches are adopted or that sometimes

situations arise where an individual police officer, for example, has been

less Chan sensible In his handling of a particular situation or in his




                                         32
treatment of a particular group of supporters.    This is true of all aspects

of policing and I am not going to suggest here today that everything we do

is perfect and right on every occasion, clearly it is not and we do make

mistakes.   When natters are brought to our attention, for example the

stopping of a coach and holding it for no good reason, it would seem, away

from the ground until some late point in the day, I am not aware of any

such thing happening and no such complaint has been brought to our

attention centrally of that particular sort.

     223.     Is there any attempt made by you to co-ordinate the attitudes

of police forces so there is some reasonable pattern across the country?

     (Mr_Ander£on)   Yes.   May I ask Mr George who is involved in this on a

regular basis to answer that, Chairman.

     CMr Georee^ Thank you, Chairman.    As we all appreciate the sub­

committee has representatives from all of the 43 police forces and

consistently this is a topic on the agenda about attitude and one of the

key features in that is the briefings and debriefings on football.       I think

perhaps,    not because of the Hillsborough situation but because of

progression, we are trying to standardise without interfering with the

discretion of ground commanders a standardised approach.    Now, one way

forward is that liaison with the FSA and the National Federation because

they have a point to make and it cannot be ignored.    Whether they are truly

representative of the total support of football is another matter but

nevertheless the points in many instances have validity and they are not

ignored.    I feed it back through the national arena through our sub­

committee to be disseminated through police forces to hopefully achieve

some common attitude.

     224.     What you have said so far sounds extremely encouraging and in

the right direction and I hope the Football Supporters' Association will




                                        33
take some comfort from that if reported, it certainly will be in our

report.     To take that a stage further the statement was made, and I will

have to paraphrase it, that the police, particularly senior police, do not

understand because none of them are football supporters and if there were

more policeman interested in football involved rhen we would have a better

understanding.     Would you address yourself to that?     Are there football

supporters amongst the police?

     fMr Anderton)       I think a lot of chief police officers would he

severely affronted by the suggestion that they are not true football

supporters.     In Mr George here we have the most addicted Oldham Athletic

supporter you are likely to meet and with jolly good cause, they are doing

extremely well, are they not?

     225.            As that is a matter of record I hope you are not jeopardising

any future career.       One final point, the final criticism was made, and I

guess it is true of magistrates courts where one magistrate will fine and

one will send to prison, that there does seem to be concern abouc the

discrepancy in the treatment where one person in the football ground will

be cautioned whereas somebody else may be ejected from the ground.         Again,

is there any attempt to standardise the approach?

            Ande.rton)   This is extremely difficult.   It is almost as bad as

trying to suggest that an offence committed in Milton Keynes that goes

before the magistrates there should effect a particular penalty and

something of an exactly similar order in Salford in Greater Manchester is

dealt with quite differently.       I do not know how you actually overcome that

potential difference of view as to the seriousness of an offence and what

sort of penalty or reprimand it should attract.         If you are concerned not

so much with what the courts do with it as to how the police approach it in

the first instance then perhaps there may be some room for closer study of




                                          34
che basic police action in dealing with particular kinds of incidents

within grounds and outside grounds which fall to be dealt with by the

police and in that regard I think we are addressing some of those issues.



                                   Mr Ashton

     226.           The Football Supporters' Association said why should it be an

offence to carry an umbrella into a ground at one match when it was raining

and not at another and some police forces even class an umbrella as an

offensive weapon.    Surely there should be some common code of conduct or

rules laid down apart from the committee you have talked about which allows

umbrellas everywhere.    The Football Supporters' Club said at one ground you

will be arrested for making a masturbation gesture, as probably you should

with the obscene laws, but at others you will not.    The wide variations in

the 43 police forces are phenomenal throughout the country.     The

Supporters' Association does not object to rules, what it does object to is

a different set of rules at every ground and a different police force

making up their own rules as they go along.

     (Mr_Anderton)    I do not agree that they are making up their own rules.

This is the stuff, if 1 may say so, of the whole essence and nature of

policing and the amount of discretion that is vested in individual police

officers on the ground and in those who supervise them in their various

police officer positions.     It may well be that in a particular case at a

particular match at a particular venue the possession of banners and

umbrellas and so on has been the source of some trouble in the past.       It

may well be that in respect of a particular fixture the possession of

articles of that kind has tended to create a more threatening atmosphere

which is likely to precipitate a degree of violence.     If that kind of

ambience exists, if that kind of feeling is present, then 1 think it is




                                        35
responsible and necessary for the individual ground commander or police

officer in charge to exercise a judgement of his own as Co whac proper

action Che police should cake in order to ensure that no outbreak of public

disorder occurs.        In another area the possession of an umbrella or some

other kind of article of chat sore that could, although innocent in itself,

be used for some kind of unlawful purpose never presents any kind of

problem and a different view might well be taken.        We do have co be

flexible and we cannot creace ground rules which would be automatically

applicable to every situation,

       227.          But with respect you are not flexible.    Can I point out to you

that this practice of holding back coaches until five minutes to three at

the edge of the motorway ------        Ican give.you an example this year when my

team played in Bath and the police there held back every bus at 2.15        on the

edge of the motorway.        They then let them go to the ground at ten minutes

to three and they got to the ground twenty minutes after the match had

kicked off and obviously they were not in a very pleasant mood.        Now that

creates hooliganism in an act of revenge that the police have made us miss

half    the    match, wehave travelled 150 miles and we        are hungry, we cannon

even    get    an hamburger because we are late and that       builds up a resentment,

does it not?

       fMr Anderton')     It is a difficult question for me to answer and I am

sure    my colleagues will endeavour to do so if they can.     Unless there was

some perceived threat or difficulty, unless there was some local problem

that absolutely required Chat coaches should be held back in that sort of

way 1 cannot envisage circumsCances in which we, for example, would choose

co do that.

       Mr Ashton-.        Well can I tell you why, because there is a feeling

among supporters that the Police Federation, and I quote, "regard all away




                                           36
supporters as a nuisance, that the game would be better if away supporters

were banned like they are at Luton and if they can make it very difficult,

inconvenient, expensive, uncomfortable and miserable for the away

supporters they will stop coming".



                                     Chairman

        228.    Is that true?

        (Mr_QlBrien)   If anybody is making it uncomfortable for the fans, it

is the clubs doing it, it is not the police.



                                    Mr Ashton

        229.    I am talking about them being delayed on the motorway quite

deliberately.

        (Mr O'Brien)   Sometimes, Mr Ashton, they are delayed on the motorway

because they are not allowed to arrive at the ground until one hour before

kick off.      If they arrive within ten or fifteen minutes, quarter past two

as you said, for a three o'clock kick off quite often they are held in

certain areas until the traffic patrol car or motorcycle can escort those

people in safety from the motorway to the ground.

        230.    Even if it makes them late?

        (Mr O'Brien)   No, if you heard me I said   that is crazy, to make them

late.     Quite often you also hold them back because if four or   five coaches

arrive at a particular time, especially at      the smaller clubs, you cannot

get those people through the turnstile quickly so you bring the coaches in

two at a time or three at a time, as the Commander says, and the turnstiles

can now cope with the certain number of people they have brought off the

motorway.      What you said about making them late is crazy, if any police

officer did that I would want his head.




                                        37
       231.      What abouC last Saturday when the West Ham fans were lane

getting ineo Millwall and 2,000 of them ran riot outside the ground an

Millwall, several cars were damaged, a great deal of damage was done

because the fans got there late for various reasons outside the ground.

This    is a major cause of friction.    Would it not be better to make sure

they    get into the ground before the kick off in order that it helps.

       fMr O'Brien)      In most cases, to my knowledge, we try to do chat in a

reasonable mannerwithin the hour with safety for the fans, a        police escort

to get them through the areas up to the ground and to get them through the

turnstile as quickly as possible.

       232.       Let me ask you if you read page 96 of the published report,

the memorandum of evidence from the Football Supporters’ Association. I

think you should read it because they say here 19th August 1989:          "400

Aston Villa fans arrived in Nottingham at five minutes to three because the

train was late.       They were locked up in a 35 yard by 5 yard cage topped

with barbed wire which was then locked.         They were imprisoned for an hour

in cranroed conditions and even those with tickets were noc allowed to

leave.        The police refused to apologise and said they had to keep the

football fans away from ordinary spectators.         9th December 1989:   a serious

 incident of crushing occurred at a match between Middlesbrough and Leeds

United and they say the Chief Superintendent admitted the capacity of the

 terrace was deliberately exceeded for segregation reasons."        There are

 about five or six pages of very detailed evidence here that these delaying

 tactics or the problems of transit from train or coach to the ground is a

 major cause of friction and yet has your committee discussed it and has any

 code of conduct or regulations been laid down?

        fMr George) The committee take evidence from anybody that lives on the

 route from the coach station or the train station to football grounds




                                           33
because that is part of the consideration of the police operation, the

general member of the public who has to be subjected to it.     We do not in a

voluntary way wish to escort fans in that way but sometimes it is necessary

co delay chem ixi order that they can be safely escorted to protect them and

the general public.     Now then, when we talk about people being delayed for

kick offs, and 1 cannot be sure in my own mind whether there are exact

circumstances, but there was one case where a large group was kept at a

railway station and were not allowed to go to the ground and were asked to

leave the railway station after they had been detained.     That was shortly

after the 15% rules were introduced in stadia where the ground commander

had realised ■ he was very conscious of capacity ■ that the ground was

filled to capacity.     There was no chance of him being able to accommodate

them in the ground and, therefore, quite against the wishes of the ground

commander he had to have them directed elsewhere and that was a problem.

When it comes to the delaying of fans deliberately X cannot answer to that

because all I can say is given the emphasis on delayed kick offs every

ground commander every Saturday is very conscious of that and also of

monitoring the number of people on terraces.     If it is an all ticket

fixture he knows how many are anticipated and by simple calculation if he

realises he is down on the numbers there is no way he would encourage a

deliberate delay of spectators to that ground whether they are home or away

fans.     If away fans are treated in a less courteous way, for whatever

reason, then my association or the police service in general certainly

would not countenance that under any circumstances.




                                    Mr Ashby

        233.        Can you just clarify for me what powers do the police have in

fact to stop people with tickets from going into the football ground?




                                       39
     (Mr George') People with tickets?

     234.    Yes.

     (Mr George) People with tickets we would not ordinarily stop going to a

match,

     235.   But extraordinarily what powers do you have?

     (Mr George^ Very few other than if the ground is full to capacity but

there would not be that situation if they had all ticket, they would not be

stopped because the ground commander would know that he has got that spare

capacity.

     23G.   We have seen this and I was wondering what powers the police

actually have to do any of these things we have seen?

     (Mr George) It is only in the circumstances of the perceived risk to

public disorder as in the miners' strike where, if you like, road checks

were imposed because of the threat to breaches of the law.        That is one

power we would fall back on if we had a football match that we identified

as having a serious potential for public disorder.      There is also the

control of alcohol which would give us powers away from the turnstiles to

get nearer the ground where the powers become more specific acting as

agents for the club.




                                   Chairman

     237.   The Road Traffic Acts do not apply to people, do they?

     (Mr Clarkson)   Sir, can I just come in on that?     The traffic

commissioners have wider powers and indeed we do exercise powers to stop

them through the traffic commissioners, to say you will not arrive within

one hour of the game.   We have that authority through the traffic

commissioners to do that and that is what we do.     Mr George m e n t i o n e d the

Kent case and the miners' strike and the turn back policy and,          yes, we




                                         40
have that if we perceive there is a need.     We have that facility.   There is

always a power for that to be taken.     What X think we have to be looking at

a little bit before that is how do we educate those operating this to work

and this is what we do.     Every club that comes to Leeds United supplies us

with the names of the Supporters' Club and we have very close dialogue with

the Supporters' Club and we know which coaches are coming and we supply the

routes.     We do not hold coaches up at Leeds.

     238.        Shall we try and sum up this debate we    are having to

establish, if I can just try and clarify the position with our witnesses,

the role of the ACPO sub-committee which is to try and institute among the

43 police forces a best practice policy in which you seek to co-ordinate

the arrangements between those who transport the fans to the matches, in

which you have regard to the wishes of the local residents because alas

many of these old stadia are located in inner city areas, and that you try

and manage all this in the best interests of everyone, including the fans

themselves, and you employ today's technology of radio communications so

that those who are managing the progression of coaches into an inner city

area are in      touch with Che ground commander who is      controlling.Withall

that your intention is to try and manage all of      these differentaspects of

the issue in the best possible way.     Is that what the ACPO sub-committee

seeks to do?

     (Mr Andertonl     Yes, sir, to the very best of its ability.   We have

made enormous strides over the past few years in all of those areas that

you mentioned with the very willing co-operation of all concerned, both the

Football Supporters' Association most recently and certainly before that

the football authorities and the individual clubs.
       Mr Ashby:   Could I ask you is it not really a problem as to whether

the police have sufficient crowd management powers, is that something which

we should direct to the Home Office or do members of ACPO have anything to

say.    You obviously have powers over coaches under the Road Traffic Act but

what are your powers in terras of crowd management, your real powers?

       Chairman : Mr Ashby, it will help you to know that before you came to

the Committee as you were detained in your duties elsewhere we did actually

review some aspects of the question you have asked the witnesses and you

will be able to catch up with that when you receive the evidence,




                                    Mr Ashton

       239.   Mr Chairman, can I ask a question which is very important.

There are 43 differences in fencing, now 95 people were killed at

Hillsborough because they were pushed against the fence and Lord Justice

Taylor recommended that they should come down.       As yet it is an absolute

hotch-potch, some clubs have taken them down and some have not, some say it

is the police orders, some say the police do not order it or it is the

local council.     Why is it such a shambles as regards the different policies

as to whether these fences are down or not?

       (Mr Anderton)   As you know, Chairman, the provision of fencing at

football stadia is now part of the requirement of the safety certificate

applicable to that ground.

       240,   Segregation, for instance.     I am talking about fencing around

the pitch from the ground to the pitch.

       (Mr Anderton)   Yes indeed, and, of course,   it may or may not have the

support of the police and there are certain grounds in this country where

the police have asked for it to be there and it has not been provided and

vice versa.    It is a matter of judgment for the local advisory committee




                                        42
and the safety conusiittee as to whether they feel it is appropriate in a

particular set of circumstances.

     241.        Could I ask you one final question.   Obviously we have heard

about the differences in Che 43 police forces, the local authorities, the

fencing, the coaches, is it not a fact that the football licensing

authority which is just being set up and became operative, I think, six

weeks ago, is it not a fact that they must, or should, have the power to

co-ordinate all this because the present set-up is obviously full of wide

inconsistencies?

     (Mr Anderton)      I am sure, Chairman, that Mr Ashton has put his finger

on a very important point here and we are all hoping that the FLA, as it is

now being called so commonly, will achieve all of those objectives, that

they will be very active in seeking uniformity of standards throughout the

country.       They will, in fact, monitor and supervise all of these aspects of

safety.

     242.        You would not accept them having powers over you but would you

perhaps agree to accept their advice to maintain some consistency?

        (Mr Anderton)    The police service, sir, have a very good reputation

for accepting advice from every quarter where it is appropriate.




                                     Mr Woodcock

        243.     Could I touch very briefly on two important areas, firstly the

question of scheduling of matches and secondly the question of segregation.

First of all, on the question of scheduling matches, following the disorder

in Bournemouth last year the Football League appear to have undertaken not

to disregard police advice on match scheduling.        Are you satisfied with

that?     Are you satisfied than the police will have an effective veto on

match scheduling?




                                          43
     (Mr Anderton)       Yes.   Could I ask the secretary of my sub-committee who

is especially deputed to oversee the scheduling of matches now, and was

personally instrumental in the scheduling of the matches for the current

football season,- to answer the particular point.

     (Hr George) Thank you, Chairman.       Yes, immediately following the

Bournemouth incident and the senior members of the Football League

attending and speaking to the Home Secretary there was an immediate and

positive response from the Football League and they invited me and the ACPO

representative to attend the League offices and in fact work through the

proposed fixtures for the current season that we are now in, the idea being

to remove those sensitive games that ordinarily would have been scheduled

for Bank Holiday weekends at perhaps seaside resorts.        One difficulty was

defining seaside resorts, without sounding flippant was Liverpool a seaside

resort.     As you can imagine with 92 League clubs and various cup

competitions,    it was a very difficult task and I must credit the Football

League for the positive and professional way they have addressed that,

allowing us to have some input into it together with the clubs.        Even then

after probably half a dozen re-runs of the computer printout over a two or

three week period it was very rewarding that the League said, well, it is

not carved in stone and if as the season goes on there are changes in

emphasis, issues that develop, they would allow us to have some influence

in changing it in conjunction and consultation with the football clubs and

that has prevailed.

     244.     You feel that the arrangements are satisfactory, you do not

want anything further?

     (Mr George')N o .

     245.     Even though the Police federation,     I understand, proposed at

one stage the police should have the ultimate power to ban?




                                          44
       (Mr Clarkson)   We still have the power to ban a match.

       246.   How do you have that power?

       (Mr George) Provided Che certificate gives us that power.

       (Mr Clarkson)   What we do is by way of the licensing authorities and

the magistrates and then the chief constable under the police action can

withdraw services where he may supply manpower and the chief constable has

the ultimate judgment as to whether he supplies manpower, so we always have

the right to say we cannot police that.

       (Mr George) We cannot ban a match, we can only say we will not police

it.




                                     Chairman

       247.   There is a subtlety here which would have the effect of

disallowing the match.

       (Mr Anderton)   They would have the power.

       (Mr Covles) Chairman, we did not ask for the power to ban matches, we

suggested that matches be included under Part 2 of the Public Order Act

which deals with processions and assemblies and gives the police the right

to go to the local authority, in effect an independent arbiter, if you

like, between police and clubs.     They are the people who ban in those

circumstances and that, we still believe, is a very handy backstop when and

if commercial pressures defeat the procedure that Mr George has outlined to

you.

       248.   Can we just hold that for a moment and go back to ACPO so we

can have the state of the art position on whether you believe policehave

adequacy of powers to deal with the sort of problems that we are

contemplating?

       (Mr Anderton)   My short answer, sir, is yes.




                                        45
                                  Mr Woodcock

     249.           I chink we can leave that question there.    Could I turn to the

question of segregation where we appear to have two very distinct views.

The National Football Intelligence Unit appears to argue against

segregation of fans at football matches.      I recall they argue that it leads

to tribalistic behaviour, it does not necessarily prevent violence because

it has been organised beforehand and it is very costly in terms of police

manpower.     The superintendents say that the segregation has proved most

successful.    ACPO, as I understand it,     stands somewhere in the middle and

say they recognise that there are two schools of thought without coming

down on either side.     Could we please have the basic arguments for and

against?

     (Mr Anderton)     I do not really think, sir, that we are concerned to

represent our view as either for or against.       I think that all the

associations are generally of one accord on this and I would suggest that

the officers of the NFIU with whom we have discussed this matter are of

precisely the same view as all of us here today and you are yet to hear the

evidence of those officers.     It is simply a question of emphasis and a

question of language.     The plain fact of the matter is in an ideal world of

course we would all like to see the end of segregation-       Indeed, you have

non-rugby league matches, a much tougher game, with spectators watching

what I would say is a real man's sport where excitement is high and where

physical contact is the order of the day and yet physical segregation of

supporters has never been contemplated because you do not get that kind of

trouble on the terraces.     Where historically and by tradition the system

has developed, where warring factions fight each other from the very venues

where they set out to watch a match, along the highways and byways and on

public transport, within the environs of the ground and then inside the




                                        46
ground, the police per force have to do something about it and we have

developed over the years the strategy of containment, means of corralling

and escorting huge numbers of spectators from stations and bus stations     zo


grounds and then inside the grounds we have been obliged, with the

assistance of the various clubs, to actually keep these warring factions

apart.   The effect is, of course, over a period of time you seem    to be, on

the face of it, highlighting the problem, you seem to be adding to the

notion as the NFIU officers have further represented of tribalism where

they stand on the terraces and they point and gesticulate towards the

opponents and tensions are heightened.    That, I suspect, is inevitable.

Were we to remove those constraints, were we to abandon all forms of

segregation, then certainly we see no prospect of the police being able to

contain the disorder that would result from such a course of action.     In an

ideal world we would like to see it all end, perhaps with the measures

which have been discussed earlier today about improved stadia and better

conditions, spectators will themselves realise that the temperature and

tempo of football and the business of watching does not require this kind

of confrontation and conflict at every match they attend.    Until such time

as spectators choose to behave sensibly and responsibly and in a civilised

fashion the police and the clubs together will still have to maintain a

form of segregation which maintains public order.    It is as simple as that.

     250.         You feel that the NFIU would probably say although they think

it aids tribalistic behaviour, it does not always prevent violence which

has been organised beforehand, that it is costly to police these matches

and that even though they say that they would agree with a form of

segregation?

     (Mr Anderton)   I think you will find that they share the same view

that I have expressed.




                                     47
     (Mr Wall')    Mr Chairman, what we ate crying to do now, which I think is

exactly what Mr Anderton is saying, is with the introduction of families we

are now trying to bring women and children into the game and, indeed,

putting in desegregated stands: the south stands, the family stands, as

desegregated.     That is a step forward to desegregation but not yet.



                                    Chairman

     251.       I think Dame Janet Fookes would like to raise the question

about covert operations.     Of course, Mr Anderton, the Committee would not

wish you to reveal any of those that would aid the enemy.     We also believe

you may be able to comment on aspects of the Manchester experience.




                                Dame Janet Fookes

     252.       The Home Office have referred evidence to us about the

collapse of some trials because of irregularities in police evidence

following covert operations.     Have you any comments to make about this and

have procedures been improved so that it is no longer a problem?

     (Mr Anderton)     I think procedures have been improved, certainly

important lessons have been learned from the collapse of the prosecutions

you have mentioned.     Without going into the precise details as to why those

prosecutions which in most respects ought to have stood and ought to have

continued in, the end collapsed, it has to be said that it is important now

for the police to make sure when they go about any kind of police

operation, overt or covert, where evidence is being gathered over a long

period of time as a result of various forms of surveillance that it is

evidence which is sustainable in court, has been correctly obtained,

properly recorded, carefully analysed and represented in the ca s e file that

is acceptable to the Crown Prosecution Service.      Perhaps the Members here




                                        48
will be aware, certainly I know the Chairman is, that it is now the

practice in all forces, I think, certainly in my own in Greater Manchester

under the direct authority of Mr George here that when we mount, as we have

on several occasions, covert operations we enjoin in our project right from

the outset a senior member of the Crown Prosecution Service who actually

supervises the acquisition and quality of the evidence as it is collected

and adduced so that when the time comes for final police action to be

taken, for persons to be arrested, we know that the evidence that will be

applicable to each and every defendant, or accused person, will be

sustainable in a court of law and has already been carefully evaluated by

the Crown Prosecution Service.    They are not facing it for the first time

and wondering whether the methods, and I think it really boils down to this

or did in the cases in question, adopted by the police for the compilation

of evidence were faultless in every respect.

    253.    That sounds like good practice, is that applied outside your

own area of Greater Manchester?

     (Mr Anderton)    So far as I understand it at present, yes.

     (Mr Clarkson)    It certainly is.    In West Yorkshire we were one of the

few successful covert operations in which they were caught and sent to

prison. We do use the CPS facilities.

    254.    Would you regard Che operations that have already taken place

as having a marked impact on gangs of this sort?        Is it less of a problem

now than it was?

     (Mr Anderton).   I would like to feel that the persons who have been

dealt with and in some cases sentenced to further lengthy terms of

imprisonment will result in a de-escalation of the sort of problems that we

have been concerned to describe today.        What we are not sure about is

whether we have got to the root of the problem in every area.        What we are




                                         49
not sure about is whether the continuing outbreaks of serious public

disorder, which still occur and have done of late, are the result again of

some orchestrated form of violence and gang warfare within the football

scene.   We have to target situations, we have to put     men under deep cover

covertly and we have to find these people even before we     can begin to

actually operate against them.      That has been our success in the past and I

am sure as time goes on we will discover that there are other gangs, other

people operating in a very criminal way within the football world whom we

need to deal with and bring before a court of law.

     255.    I presume in some cases the violence is      too neat,     too

efficient, if I might put it that way, to have been purely spontaneous?

     fMr Anderton>   Most certainly, yes.

     256.    That might give you a clue as to where to start looking

because that must be the first problem, must it not?

     (Mr Anderton)   Indeed, yes.    Many of these outbreaks which appear to

be spontaneous are nothing of the kind, they are carefully planned,

carefully calculated and far from being spontaneous.




                                     Mr Ashton

     257.     I wonder if we could turn to the costs of the policing.       Now,

you are aware last week I think it was the Audit Commission brought out a

report "Taking Care of the Coppers" which was very critical and said that

the police were undercharging soccer clubs by £2 million.       When we met the

Football League on Monday they were highly critical of this report and also

of the way in which they had to pay for the cost of the policing.       They

protested strongly that it was up to the chief constable, or the local

police officer, how many constables or policemen he sent down, how many

hours they were there, what he charged per hour,and that there were




                                         50
enormous variations in this once again throughout the country.          Would you

like to comment on that?

     (Mr Anderton)     Yes.    I think all of those points are valid.     Certainly

from an historical point of view we would suggest that we have for some

time now, certainly over the past few years, been addressing all of those

issues and you will be aware from our own evidence that my committee have

produced a formula which has been more or less accepted by the Home Office

and by the representatives of the local authority associations which will

allow for a form of standardised charging for police services at football

matches given that you do need to allow some kind of discretion, for

example, on the amount of time that an officer needs to get to a ground.

In an area like mine which is fairly tight, albeit a large conurbation,

officers do not have to travel for hours in order to get to a ground to

perform duty.     In some of the large shire counties you have to allow a much

more substantial period of travelling time to build into the cost of that

particular officer.     Leaving those particular elements aside we do now have

a nationally agreed formula which has been more recently discussed, and Mr

George represented me at a meeting at the Home Office which should be

referred to soon in a fresh Home Office circular.

    258.    That has already come out.

     (Mr Anderton)     No, it has not   come out yet.

     259.       I understood from the   Football League that it had come out.

     (Mr Anderton)     No.    A draft circular was sent out on consultation but

a further circular is to be produced.          It has not yet been sent to police

authorities or to chief constables but we hope to have it very soon.          I do

know that the football authorities are already lodging as strongly as

possible a protest wich the Home Secretary over the basic question of the

intention of the police at the request of the Audit Commission, and indeed




                                          51
of Lord Justice Taylor for the most part, to recover a full economic cost

of employing a police officer on duty under Section 15 of the Police Act

arrangements for special service on duty at football.

     260.       Can I put it to you chat the Audit Commission formula, if that

is the one you are talking about, would mean a charge of £100 per constable

per match would mean for many of the smaller clubs, for instance in a game

between Wimbledon and Plymouth Argyle at the Rumbelows cup a month ago, the

whole of the gate money went to the police.          If this is levied, if that is

your formula,    the clubs just simply cannot afford to do it.

     fMr Andertonl     Well, there is another alternative, of course, and that

is for the clubs to come to some proper kind of arrangement for the

policing of the ground where the function of ensuring proper supervision

from the point of view of public order and public safety are being shared

between the police and properly appointed and trained stewards.           X think

what we are likely to see in the future, in light of the prospect of these

increased charges,    is a greater determination on the part of football

clubs, assisted by the football authorities, to increase the number of

carefully selected and properly trained stewards, trained perhaps under the

aegis of the local police force to reduce the numbers ultimately of regular

police officers who would otherwise be required for duty.

     261.       Can I take it you are prepared to negotiate with the clubs on

how many constables they need which you have never done before, have you?

     (Mr Anderton)     Yes, we have sir.        We have always discussed the number

of police officers whom we believe, according to our judgment and the

nature of the game in hand, will be required to police a particular match

inside the ground.     Do not forget, sir, if you look at the total cost of

the police in the community at most of our games, the average game, we only

ever recover about 30% of the total cost of policing from that particular




                                           52
club.

     262.     Can I stop you there.   The figures show that, for instance,

some of the clubs like Scunthorpe and Halifax playing in the same league,

some 2,000 or 3,000 crowd, 30/40 miles apart, Halifax would pay 40 pence

per spectator and Scunthorpe would pay 5 pence per spectator.      This often

results simply from the generosity of the chief constable.      In Lancashire

you are very generous, you are very good, I will say that, others are not

so good.    Now because of the inconsistencies, would it not be simpler for

the police authorities to come to a deal with the Football League and the

Home Office and say they will accept   2%   of the gate or some sort of simple

levy so that the clubs would know where they stood before the season

started and then as the gates went up and they needed more policing they

would pay more money; if the gates went down they would pay less.

     (Mr_Anderton)    I am glad you mentioned the police authority, sir,

because it is, at the end of the day, their statutory responsibility not

that of the police constable to determine with football clubs what profit

charges should be levied.    It is not a police matter, it is a matter for

the police authority under law to determine what charges should be paid by

clubs for the services and the use of the police authority's officers.       On

the matter of a levy, percentage of the gate or as some people have

suggested a levy on the actual price of the ticket, there are flaws in that

argument because it rather suggests that every game is the same

irrespective of the number of supporters.     You can have 20,000 spectators

at one ground which would produce a particular levy which may or may not

cover the number of police officers involved and how do you determine that

beforehand?

    263.      You take the rough with the smooth.




                                       53
m
         (Mr Andsreon') Well, X am not so sure that that would be a sensible

    approach because you can have 20,000 supporters at another ground and you

    might need twice the number of police officers because of the particular

    nature of the fixture.

         264.    Are you aware there are very strong complaints?    For instance,

    I come from Halifax where two spectators went to watch Torquay in a midweek

    match at Halifax, they won a raffle for two seats on the bus.    Nine

    policemen stood behind them, one on a horse and they then had to ask

    permission - the Torquay spectator and his lad - whether they could cross

    over and get a hot dog.    This is the sort of ludicrous situation you get:

    fifty policemen at Rotherham guarding 40 Brentford supporters. This cannot

    go on.   It is making the police a laughing stock and the spectators feel

    resentment as though they are paying for it.     Can we not come to some sort

    of levy and you decide how many you send?

         (Mr Anderton)    Sir, could I just make the point, with all due respect

    I cannot really, from my position here, comment on particular examples of

    that sort which seem to be extreme.    I could say if you to Central Park,

    Wigan to watch that very beloved game of rugby league where, at a fixture

    between Wigan and St Helens attracting 25,000 spectators, you have 12

    constables inside the ground with not an ounce of trouble.     So you really

    do have to look at situations as they are,     However large or small the

    spectators you may have differing levels of policing according to the

    perceived threat of that particular situation.

         265.    Would you be prepared to examine the possibility of a

    percentage of the gate money so the clubs would know where they stood?

         (Mr Anderton')   It is an idea perhaps worth looking at but I am not

    really confident that it will produce the best solution to the problem.




                                           54
m
        Chairman:   Is not the problem with Mr Ashton and his percentage idea

    that it would not, of itself, encourage good behaviour?



                                           Mr Ashton

        266.     The fans do not know how much they are paying. With a

    percentage they would, they would be able to say: "3% of my £5 I am paying

    here is going to the police."

         (Mr Anderton')   I think there is only one solution to this, one is to

    ensure by virtue of proper local discussion that in every situation there

    is an agreed level of policing and whatever number of officers is required

    is actually paid for under an agreed formula between the clubs and the

    local police authority.        It should not surely be beyond our wit and

    expertise to produce a proper formula for the recovery of an economic cost

    of employing police officers for those particular duties virtually at the

    request of the clubs.

         267.    Can I cake        you up on that before you move on because you have

    to have a police force whether there is football or not.        In the past the

    clubs paid for the overtime, if a police constable worked Saturday

    afternoon overtime, that is what they paid for.

         (Mr Anderton)      Yes.

         268.    They said whether there was a match or not the cost of the

    pension, the rent allowance, the boot allowance, insurance stamp all that

    was a core charge.    Now, what is happening with the Audit Commission report

    is that they are saying that the core charge has to be lumped on to

    football. This means a club like Rotherham who paid £1,000 will now pay £5

    or £6,000 in three or four years time and the clubs will just not be able

    to meet that sort of funds.        Now there are some very rich clubs who can

    afford to pay and the percentage argument, I put it to you, is that there




                                               55
will not be any football if this goes on because as the Football League

told us the little clubs will go out of business.

     (Mr Anderton)   I cannot really comment on that, Sir, I am afraid.

     (Mr O'Brien)    I would just like to say, Mr Ashton was saying about a

percentage, is he saying that football is special and that it will only

apply to football or are you then saying to the chief constables and police

authorities the percentage should also apply to rugby, etc, because I go

along with what Mr Ashton says.     If you apply that why should somebody like

Widnes playing with 20,000 spectators get the same bill for only having 12

officers on duty —

     269.   Different percentage.

     (Mr O'Brien1)   You are going to have to change according to which game

you are playing.

     270.   Yes, you negotiate a different percentage.

     (Mr O'Brien)    You are talking about policing.    We are going to have a

police force whether we have football or not, football is not special.     The

Football League is not special.     The police service in general is there for

the benefit of the community and on most Saturdays when there are football

games being played away the general community suffers drastically with the

withdrawal of manpower from the streets of our towns and cities to police

football matches on the rates or on the poll tax as it now is because

football has not paid its fair crack at the whip for twenty or thirty

years. It   is time football payed       for the policing it requires.

     271.   Can I put it to you     that football is a very important safety

valve for exuberant wild teenagers and if that safety valve was not there

it would burst out somewhere else and maybe that is why they have a lot

more crime in New York and Washington where the kids cannot afford to go to

a football match and do not have a team to follow as they have maybe in




                                        56
Manchester or Sheffield and that society should realise chat safety valve

is a necessity.

      (Mr O'Brien')     If that is the case, and I do not argue that it is a

safety valve, i£ that is the case let us have it out as a social issue and

let the county councils or the local authorities decide they will subside

football and give them £2 or £3 million to offset what is required to run

it.

      272.    That in effect is what they have been doing but the Audit

Commission will now stop that.

      (Mr O'Brien)      We all know the politicians, local councillors make a

debate on this issue and the general public say: "Yes I agree with you Mr

Ashton, this is a social problem, football is a good safety valve, somebody

should pay this money".

      Chairman:       Mr O'Brien we had better call   this line of discussion to a

halt because I    think as Mr Ashton       appreciatesthe Committee itself is going

to have an interesting discussion when it comes to formulating its report.



                                      Mr Ashton

      273.    Can I just raise one thing on the policing.        There is a strong

feeling among football spectators that chief constables use the game to

reward their lads and that often kick-off times are fixed, for instance, on

Boxing Day morning, not for the benefit of the fans but because the police

can finish by 1 o'clock and they all get their overtime for a day's money

and they can go home.       You do not in Manchester, you kick-off at 3 o ’clock

and the fans are very grateful.       You kick-off at 3 o'clock on New Year's

Day and you do not have any Sunday fixtures but in some cities there is a

strong feeling    that: "Here we are again, boys, we are getting up at the

crack of dawn,    six o'clock on New Year's Day,      to travel to Newcastle or to




                                           57
■ »



      Sheffield because the Chief Constable insists on kicking off at 11 o'clock,

      12 o'clock, lunchtime kick-off, which is probably done for the benefit of

      the police and not for the benefit of the fans".     There is that feeling of

      resentment.    Now do you think there should be better consultations to stop

      the annoyance from turning into hooliganism?

           (Mr Anderton)    1 would certainly refute any suggestion that chief

      constables insist upon kick-off times in order to reward at Christmas or

      any other time of the year their hard working officers who perhaps would

      much prefer to be at home anyway.    The last place I would want to be on

      Christmas Day or New Year's Day or Boxing Day or Easter Monday is messing

      around outside a football ground trying to keep spectators in order,

          274.      They get paid overtime for it.

           (Mr Andertonl    Even wich the overtime, chief constables do not get

      overtime, we are not —



                                          Chairman

           275,     Mr Anderton, I see the Federation very strongly agree with

      this point,

           (Mr Georgel Can X give you a bit of information to show there is very

      careful planning in the fixtures.    Last year's FA semi finals, there was

      one semi-final in the West Midlands, one in Manchester and. one had a 12

      o'clock kick-off and one had a 3 o'clock kick-off.     The planning for that

      was negotiated with the FA weeks in advance.    It was not an arbitrary

      ruling of mercenary ideas, it was done on good practicalities.     There was

      some debate that it should have been reversed --




                                             58
                                   Mr Ashton

     276.    They got two television fees, that is why they did it.

     (Mr_.Clarkson)   My particular reality was this: I have Chelsea on

Boxing Day and the reason why I have a 12 o'clock kick-off on Boxing Day is

purely drink, no other reason, not overtime.     Because the problem is if you

bring people on at 12 o'clock it is not a normal shift pattern so some

adjustments need to be made.     It may in fact cost me more manpower, not for

financial reasons at all.

     277.    Is that not also a deterrent to the Chelsea fans who then have

to set off at 7 o'clock on Boxing Day morning and you might be thinking:

"Well that will help to persuade them to stay in London rather than come up

here causing trouble"?

     (Mr Clarkson)    It is interesting you say that because the consequence

of what you have just said is that now we      are relaying matches.   What we

are looking for is to encourage away supporters not to travel on

contentious matches, Leeds v Chelsea is very much a contentious match.           We

are trying to encourage them to relay the match at Chelsea on Boxing Day

and only send up those supporters who are really keen to come and therefore

there will, we hope, be a relay match at Chelsea on Boxing Day.

     278.    One final quickie on the Football Licensing Authority, is this

an aspect - we are going to question them      the week after next - you think

they should have an involvement in, where      you can put it to them that the

fixture scheduling    is *11 wrong and ought to be rearranged?

     fMr Clarkson1)    I look to the FLA as a help to me as the match

commander because I see they can be an arbiter in many decisions.       We have

to address many issues.     One of the issues I have at Ellen Road is the

ground is owned by the politicians, it is owned    by Leeds City Council.        The

club lease the ground so I have three people to deal with and I am very




                                       59
m
    much involved in politics so I see the FIA will very much help me.



                                     Mr Bermingham

         279.    Apart    from the fact that I might profess to supporting Wigan

    instead of my home    team, St Helens, I agree with what you said about the

    rugby league matches, that they seem to be well attended and policed with

    the minimum number of people.    Turning away from all that, Lord Justice

    Taylor recommended that the scope for attendance centres should be extended

    so that they are proposed for football related offences for people over the

    age of 21.   The Government rejected that, -were you disappointed by that

    decision?

         (Mr Anderton-)   We were neither disappointed nor particularly enthused

    by the notion or the decision.    When the question was put to us in

    discussion by Lord Justice Taylor before he published his final report as

    to whether a widening of the scope of attendance centres and the imposition

    of those orders could possibly be helpful, we went along with the idea in

    principal and said that yes it might be a useful adjunct to what might be

    done to deal with errant supporters but there are problems for the police.

    As you know most attendance centres, if not all in the country, are

    actually managed by the local police force, they are staffed and manned by

    our own officers who do it on a voluntary basis every alternate Saturday

    afternoon for a couple of hours at some appointed place.     If you are going

    to increase the scope of the numbers of people who attend in the first

    place and more particularly have people there of the age of 21 years and

    over which puts an entirely new dimension on the notion of attendance

    centres then, of course, you have got a very different situation to handle.

    Whilst in principle some kind of use of an enlarged attendance centre

    system could be beneficial from the police point of view we see a number of




                                           60
&
    problems.     First, it would have to operate every Saturday and not alternate

    Saturdays, secondly what consideration would have to be given to manning

    them by people other than the police so you would need an entirely new

    structure of management: altogether.

         280.     Can I interrupt you there.     Obviously what you are saying

    effectively is the concept has some attraction but it needs investment and

    it needs to be further thought through?

         (Mr Anderton)    It certainly needs thinking further through and, of

    course,   if there are breaches of the attendance centre orders on the

    particular day in question who is to go searching for the person who failed

    to turn up?

         281.     Yes, I comprehend the point.

         (Mr Anderton)    We see there are many practical difficulties involved.

         282.     The idea in its simple terms is a good one but it does need        to

    be thought through in practice?

         (Mr_.Anderton)   Anything which prevents a football hooligan from going

    to the game on a Saturday is to be supported in principle.

         283.       Can I turn briefly to the National Football IntelligenceUnit.

    Do all police forces co-operate fully with the Unit? A simple yes or no.

         (Mr Anderton)    I think that is a question you must put to the officer

    in charge of the unit who is in day to day liaison and contact with all the

    various police forces, only he will know exactly which forces provide him

    with the information he needs as quickly as he would like to get it.         I

    chink we are in early days yet, the Unit has only operated for a relatively

    short time and the experience of all new situations is you have to give

    them time and you have to get them used to the idea of passing intelligence

    and information along and naturally using the resources of that Unit.




                                           61
s
         (Mr Georee)    Most forces that have football grounds are willing to

    second officers, that is one indication of support, another is that at the

    end of every football match we receive    a   match report from the officers.

         284.     I do not intend to even waste your time if you do not have the

    direct answer.     Do you think that Scottish officers attached to the Unit

    would help?

         (Mr Anderton)    A Scottish officer was attached during the period of

    the World C u p , in fact I think two officers were attached and then were

    withdrawn and went back to their forces.       I think perhaps it would be

    helpful if we had an officer from Scotland attached to the Unit, yes,

         285.     Do you think the budget is adequate?

         (Mr Anderton')    No~

         286.     Thank you.

         (Mr Anderton)     Could I add to that, sir, and say in my opinion it is

    grossly inadequate.

         287.     You can add certainly to that and I would support you.

         (Mr Anderton)     Thank you.

         288.     Lastly, what happens, what are the other     areas the

    Intelligence gathering NFIU provide?

         (Mr George) It is confined to football.

         289.     It Is obviously confined to football but     on a broader scope

    rather than just liaison with the clubs.       It does assist, for example,

    because officers at matches will spot certain patterns of behaviour that

    may indicate a development of burglaries or other types of crime in that

    area, is it useful in that way?

         (Mr Anderton)     Yes indeed.   Where there is, of course, an established

    link between people who involve themselves in football violence and other

    types of crime there is obviously a link between the two systems of




                                             62
m
    intelligence.

           Mr Bermingham: 1 am very grateful, I could give you an example of that

    happening.

           Chairman:   The Committee will follow up separately the questions to

    the NFIU so we have that information.



                                         Mr Ashby

           290.    Can I turn to matters abroad.    First of all, how effective is

    the TREVI network of football correspondence and do you have any

    difficulties in establishing contacts with foreign police forces in advance

    of matches?

           (Mr Anderton')   Sir, can I ask Mr George to respond in the light of his

    recent experience.

           291.    You were in Italy?

           (Mr George) That is right, sir, yes.     Itis effective   but you have   to

    bear in mind that the TREVI rule only relates to EEC countries.          I found

    from my experience in Italy and since with the European Cup Winners' Cup at

    Manchester United that when you go outside the EEC through the Foreign and

    Commonwealth Office with the relationship there, with the international

    contact within the FA that there are bridges of contact and I do not know

    of any difficulty outside the TREVI rule that has been experienced.

    Certainly the TREVI rule within the EEC countries functions extremely well.

           292.    You do say that the overt presence of British police officers

    has helped the Italian police to calm the volatile situation of the World

    Cup.    Would you welcome the deployment of uniformed, highly visible British

    police officers at various matches      abroad in the future?

           (Mr George) The answer to that   is itdepends what you want out      of the

    operation.    The overt presence merely acts as a liaison with the club, the




                                             63
team and the local Environment,    they are there to guide as it were and

perhaps help with advice.    If you have a perceived problem whereby you need

eo provide information and intelligence probably to the host police force

then the value really lies in che covert presence.

     293.     Mr George, the supporters yesterday who gave evidence, I am

not sure which group it was —

     (Mr George1
               ) It was the FSA.

     294.     —   FSA, that is right, they spoke very highly of the way in

which the Dutch police accompanied their supporters at the World Cup where

they were with the supporters, mingling with them, supporting them and

playing a very supportive role.     They did contrast that with the way other

police forces, in particular our police force, was policing the matches in

Cagliari.    Have you any comments to make upon than, the method of policing?

     (Mr George) FIFA certainly acknowledged that our policing strategy is

of excellence and the Dutch police have a system similar to our's but it is

not as sophisticated.    What they had in Cagliari and Sardinia was the PR

role, as you adequately described, where they provided assistance with

directions and to a degree were identified as football fans.     The police

officers identified themselves as football fans, that was not our terms of

reference.    Given the unfortunate reputation of the English fans abroad our

emphasis was to prevent incidents and protect our national image and that

is why the covert presence was paramount in our operation and, in fact, was

successful because many incidents of potential disorder were prevented

because we were able to supply information before the event which allowed

the Italians to deploy resources to prevent it.      I know there were two

incidents which received a lot of publicity, one in Cagliari and one in

Rimini and I would not welcome those to be repeated again but they were

prevented, because of the information we supplied, from developing into




                                        64
0

    much more serious situations.

         295.    That accounts for some allegations made about the over­

    reaction of the Italian police based on information rather than on actual

    facts.

         (Mr George) If you are suggesting that the information created the

    over-reaction I am afraid that is not true.

         296.    You do not know how it is interpreted on the spot, do you?

         (Mr George) No. butt if you let me finish, right from day one with chac

    international operation the Italians made it quite clear that they would

    not countenance any anti-social behaviour that interfered with the welfare

    of the local community.    Yes, there was an extremely heavy police presence,

    a lot more than we would have here in the United Kingdom butt that was their

    police strategy and we went there as visitors with that understanding.       It

    was made quite clear to the Supporters' Association chat their policing

    strategy would be that.

         Mr Ashby:     Yes, I speak highly of the Italian police.    I have a nephew

    in the Italian police, I cannot speak against them.

         Chairman:     Thank you very much.    The Committee's sources of influence

    are far and wide.    Could I just take up one small point arising from the

    exchange between Mr Ashton and yourself on this question of the quality and

    standard of stewards.     It occurs to me that ACPO will have to take a very

    positive role in this.    Will you be developing standards that you would

    expect the clubs to apply in respect of stewards, particularly in relation

    to the suitability of the individual and the training that individual would

    have to receive?    Unless ACFO lays this down it occurs to me that it will

    not be very successful.




                                              65
                                   Mr Ashton

    297.          Before you answer that will they be bouncers, will these

people be bouncers?

     fMr Anderton)    X certainly hope not, Chairman, with all due respect.

We do not want bouncers, we do not want people dealing with football

spectators and supporters in such an insensitive way.    We want people who

are attuned to our whole football scene, who are sensitive to the wishes

and aspirations of the football spectators, who are strong enough and firm

enough and sufficiently well disciplined and properly trained themselves to

exercise the necessary authority when it is required and that is an element

chat has sadly been lacking rather too often.    Yes, I think the first point

I would wish   to make of course is that the whole question of stewarding is

well covered   and documented in the Green Guide which gives excellent

guidelines to clubs as to what is required of them.     What we have done

within the police service and within my sub-committee working group, and in

consultation   with the National Forward Planning Unit at Scotland Yard,    is

to produce a   kind of blueprint for the training of stewards which is

currently circulating through all police forces as a discussion document.

Once we have brought it back to my sub-committee in the next two or three

weeks and we refine it and ensure it covers all the necessary aspects of

matters of concern to us at present, then we would hope we could then go

into a proper dialogue with the football authorities and the individual

clubs and set up proper training for stewards with the assistance of the

police.    Essentially it is the responsibility of football clubs to select

and appoint stewards and to have them properly trained.     It is not for us

as a police service to accept that full responsibility but we are ready to

assist.




                                       66
     (Mr_.Clarkson)    Lord Justice Taylor brought in the aspects of stewards

and brought in the 18-55 range and what seems to be developing now in our

particular area is private security.         We now in our ground have 250

stewards and quite obviously there is a reduction to some extent of police

officers but that has been brought about by Lord Justice Taylor who said in

the interim all perimeter gates will be manned by police officers and in

his final report he watered that down and said or stewards.        Now what we

are moving towards is educating the stewards by using training packages.

We took the responsibility of training stewards, both private security and

the club stewards-     There are 150 private security and 100 club stewards.

     298.            Can I put it to you that Leeds has a special problem

obviously.     The average club steward gets about eight to ten pounds a week,

he is about 50 or 60 years old, he loves the club so he gets free admission

into the ground, he wears a yellow thing around his neck with an

advertising sign on it and he is there, he sees it, purely to show people

to their seats or to tell them where they ought to be with their ticket.

If there is a ruckus he gets lost, and I do not blame him because I would

as well, he is not paid to settle these sorts of disturbances he fetches a

policeman.     We have then, obviously, got a very, very wide gap between that

guy who says if you kick off earlier than 7.30 I cannot get there from work

in time.     You have got the difference between what exists and what you are

talking about and the distance is so great the costing is so big you are

really moving into a very wide field,

     (Mr Anderton)     We clearly will not change the situation overnight, we

are choosing the ideal position on this.        I think it is the way we really

ought to go and the police will be happy to see that kind of positive

system of stewarding developing and we will be very ready to assist in the

development of such a system,




                                        67
    299.       Is not effectively what you are saying this: that if you are

going to police football grounds properly and steward them properly it is

going to cost money and that money will have to come from the football

supporters.    If the football supporter does not cause problems and the

problems are on the pitch then we will not need such a great extent of

security and/or policing and perhaps the game will be cheaper.        It is very

much in the supporters' hands.

     (Mr Anderton1
                 ) Yes, it is a chicken and egg situation and we accept

that.

     300.      Those stewards, let me call them bouncers because that is what

you would need if you reduce the policemen, they would not have the powers

of arrest, they may cause more aggression among the crowd like bouncers in

nightclubs do, look what the existing police force do.      Clubs have looked

at this.    Our club has looked at this and weighed up the balance because

with bouncers in nightclubs there are many many complaints about them and

if this turned into bouncers inside football grounds or a crack squad of

half a dozen with crash helmets and truncheons that went in where there was

a fight,    it can cause more problems than the good old policemen.

        (Mr Anderton)   This is where the ground rules have to be applied

responsibly, where the terms of reference and the job specification have to

be clearly laid down and agreed and as Mr Justice Fopplewell and Lord

Justice Taylor have clearly indicated in their several reports the areas        of


responsibility are between the police on duty inside the ground and

appointed stewards should be very clearly and positively defined so that we

know what it is we are there to do.      It is not the job of stewards to start

arresting people who commit crimes and indulge in public disorder inside

the ground.     That is what the police are there to prevent.




                                         68
m

                                        Chairman

        301.       It is these points I had very much in mind when I asked

    whether ACPO would have a very positive role in preparing the

    specifications for these issues otherwise it could go disastrously wrong.

         (Mr Anderton)    Yes, sir, absolutely correct.     We have already had a

    number of discussions with the FA and Football League to that end.



                                    Dame Janet Fookes

         302.      Just a small supplementary question:     is there a role for the

    special constabulary?     Are they used currently to any great degree?    Could

    they be used much more as a midway point between regular police officers

    and stewards?

         (Mr Anderton1     They are certainly used in my area on a regular basis

    mainly in connection with policing outside the ground, assisting the

    spectators to the ground, covering traffic patrol duties and that sort of

    thing.   They are a regular feature of the policing at football grounds I

    think in most police force areas.

         303.       Inside the grounds or outside the grounds?

         (Mr Anderton'l    Outside the grounds.

         304.   • What about inside the grounds which is what I was specifically

    thinking of.

         (Mr Clarkson)     In my particular case they are not used inside the

    ground, I try to keep them out of conflict.

         (Mr George') Some grounds use them inside the grounds with the stewards

    and in conjunction with the regular police.         They do provide a valuable

    service and in fact we find it is not just the police division where the

    ground is situated but special volunteers from all points of the force area

    to assist on keeping it.




                                            69
                                       Chairman

        305.         A final question, Mr Anderton, before we conclude today is

this;     I believe it is the intention to establish a standard national

course for police ground commanders, when is that course likely to be

operative?

        (Mr Anderton)     It is already operative, sir.   We pioneered it in

Greater Manchester and then a working group was set up which brought

together other ideas to improve upon our own and a joint working group

which lay between my own sub-committee and the ACPO training committee has

now produced a package which is being used in four centres, in Greater

Manchester, in the West Midlands at Tallyho training centre, in the

Metropolitan Police area and in Kent.        We now have four national centres

for che regular training of ground commanders and we hope this will develop

as time goes on so that all officers of senior rank engaged on football

duty throughout the grounds will have had some kind of training to assist

them in their work.



                                    Dame Janet Fookes

         506 .   Wtiat about Brandshill?

         (Mr Anderton')   We have had a seminar, a national seminar, at

 Brandshill where responsibilities, duties and functions were drawn up and

 discussed.      Mr George, who oversees this on my behalf and on behalf of my

 committee, would like to comment on the assistance we get from other

 agencies on the matter of ground commander training.

         fMr George) The ground commander training involves all aspects.       As you

 can imagine we get co-operation from the NFIU, we have local authorities

 and the fire services involved, all of the essential services have an input

 and that is why we can only concentrate on four centres.          It would be very




                                             70
difficult to have more than that.   At the national seminar we were

privileged Mr Jacobs attended as one of his functions as Chairman of the

Licensing Authority and I regarded that seminar as considerably productive.

We also have, and have had, for some years at the end of every season a

conference of ground commanders for each of the four divisions and at that

also lessons are learned, best practices and that helps, we hope, to

introduce some standard practice.   All the intentions are to produce best

practice in the interests of football and the football spectator.

     Chairman:   Well, this has been a very long session but such has been

the helpfulness of the answers that the witnesses have given to the

Committee I am sure my colleagues would like me to express our appreciation

to the witnesses, to you, Mr Anderton, and.the contributions you have made

and that of ACPO and, of course, to the Superintendents' Association and to

the Police Federation.   It has been a very useful session this afternoon.

We are very grateful to all of you for the helpful way you have answered

the many questions we have put to you.




                                      71
