A




           DISASTERS PLANNING FOR A CARING RESPONSE

             REPORT OF THE DISASTERS WORKING PARTY

               PSYCHOLOGICAL AND SOCIAL ASPECTS



                   SECTION I: INTRODUCTION




    Draft - Not for Publication
    For Consultation Purposes Only                    Aug. 1990
                        1. INTRODUCTION

1.1 Terms of Reference
The Disasters Working Party was set up by the Department of
Health to look into what lessons have been learned about
providing psychological and social support following a disaster,
and to make recommendations and present a report. The terms of
reference are as follows:

          1) What steps should be taken to prepare to provide
social and psychological support in the aftermath of such
disasters;
          2) How best to achieve coordination among agencies in
the arrangement of necessary support;
          3) How the lessons learned from recent experience might
best be disseminated;
          4) Setting up an information service.

1.2 Membership
The Working Party began meeting in February 1989. Its membership
was selected by the Department of Health, Cruse - Bereavement
Care, the Association of County Councils and the Association of
Metropolitan Authorities.      The membership was chosen on the
basis   of  their   experience   in  responding   to  disasters,
representation from across the U.K., and a selection of some of
the organisations and professional groups involved in responding
to the longer term needs arising from a disaster. A list of the
members is included with the report.

1.3 Process

1.3.1. Issues
The Working Party began by sharing their own experiences,
including reporting on the responses to Zeebrugge, the Bradford
City Fire, the Kings cross Fire, Hungerford, Kegworth, Piper
Alpha and Aberfan.   From their reports, they discussed the wide
range of issues which they felt the working party should address.
A researcher was employed from June 1989 to conduct a
consultation process and to collect and present materials about
what had been learned about providing social and psychological
support following disasters.

1.3.2 Literature Review
The researcher began by reviewing the available literature on
disaster support, and collecting materials from social service
departments and health authorities on exisiting plans for
disaster responses.

1.3.3 Individual Interviews
A series of interviews were then conducted with those with direct
experience of disasters, including social workers, volunteers
from the Samaritans, Cruse, the Red Cross, the Salvation Army,
SSAFA and WRVS, psychologists, psychiatrists, psychotherapists,
counsellors, the police, the fire services, ambulance officers,
Accident and Emergency nurses, emergency planning officers,
police welfare departments, relatives and survivors from Kings

                                1
Cross, Lockerbie, Kegworth, Enniskillen, Clapham and Piper Alpha,
researchers, general practitioners, trainers, undertakers and
local government officers.

1.3.4 "Action Flan Recommendations"
Following these interviews, a series of recommendations were put
together in the form of an action plan which was used as the
basis for discussion in a series of seven discussion symposia
around the country.

1.3.5 Discussion symposia
The symposia were held March - June 1990 in Belfast, Edinburgh,
Manchester, Birmingham, Bristol and London.          A number of
extremely useful comments were made during the process of
discussion, and in evaluative reports sent to the Working Party.
These have now been added to the Guidelines for an Action Plan,
Section II of the report, and summarised in the introduction.

1.3.6 Organisation Consultation
The next stage of the process is to consult more formally with
organisations, using the material gathered from the individual
interviews and the symposia.    Section I and Section II of the
report are now being sent out to a number of the organisations
involved in disaster responses for consultation purposes, to be
returned by the end of September so that a final revised report
can be made by the end of the year.




                                2
                 2. SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS

2.1 Disaster Response Coordinator
Social Service and Social Work Departments should play a lead
role in coordinating social and psychological support services
following a disaster.    This recommendation does not imply that
Social Services should provide all the services in the event of
a disaster. It does imply that every local authority would have
a clear idea of who Is responsible for coordinating the long term
response following a disaster, in addition to any planning,
preparation and training beforehand.

It is also the recommendation of the working party that this
section of the response be under the overall coordination of the
Emergency Planning Officer and the Chief Executive's office.

2.2 Disaster Response Finance
The terms of reference of the Working Party clearly state that
any recommendations made are to be within existing resources.
Therefore no recommendations are made about additional finance.

During the process of consultation, however, the limited nature
of existing support for the planning and training stage before
a disaster happens, and in particular for the psychological
aspects of a disaster, was the single most dominant issue to run
through every symposium in the general discussion. In addition,
the difficulty in justifying continued financial support for
disaster support teams out of already limited resources was a
significant issue in many of the disasters already experienced.

In light of this, the Working Party raises the following points
for consideration:

2.2.1 Training
In order to provide adequate training, money will have to      be
spent on planning and training by local authorities.

2.2.2. use of Reserves
The cost of experiencing a disaster cannot be budgeted       for,
therefore reserves will have to be used.

2.2.3. Central Government contribution to Disasters
If central government decides to give money to disasters, they
should consider giving it to support the costs of the support
services, and not just to the disaster fund.

2.2.4. Financial policy Clarification
There is a lack of clarity about the policy for financial support
following a disaster.       There is a need to clarify the
implications of dealing with a national or international disaster
locally.

2.2.5. Right to Counselling
Counselling services should not depend on the ability of the
individual or of the local authority to pay for them.   They

                                3
9
    should be provided to those who need them.

    2.2.6. Companies' Financial Involvement
    Companies should consider their financial responsibility in terms
    of   an  immediate   payment   to  individuals  involved,   their
    contribution   to   the   support   services,  and  compensation
    settlements.

    2.2.7 Central Disaster Fund
    It would be useful to create a central disaster fund to which any
    disaster could apply for resources, with clear guidelines on the
    conditions and process for applying to the fund.

    2 .2 . 8
          statutory Responsibility
    The question should be raised whether legislation which places
    a statutory responsibility for planning for civil emergencies
    would release money for planning and training.

    2.3 Support services
    A wide range of support services have been found useful following
    a disaster.     The Working Party recommends that social and
    psychological support be coordinated by the Director of Social
    Services following a disaster.    It is recommended that support
    services be planned for a minimum period of two years, and that
    the initial contact of such services be ^ proactive. It is
    recommended that support services be multi-disciplinary, making
    full use of all local voluntary and professional resources.    It
    is recommended that such services be planned in advance of any
    disaster, and that such planning allows for contact to be made
    between the different organisations and individuals and for joint
    training to take place prior to and following a disaster.




                                    4
                       3.BACKGROUND PAPER

              DISASTERS AND PSYCHOLOGICAL SUPPORT

3.1 Introduction
The rate of disasters has increased by 50% in the last decade,
according to statistics gathered by the Bradford Disaster
Prevention and Limitation Unit1. Public awareness of the events
has raised a number of questions for local authorities regarding
their role in meeting the needs of those affected by the
disasters. In recent years, in addition to providing the rescue
operation through the emergency services, and undertaking repair
to infrastructure, local authorities have begun to set up
helplines and counselling services to provide preventive mental
health care.    This paper outlines the development of these
services, covering the reasons why they are essential.

3.2 RESEARCH SUMMARY

3.2.x Earlier Studies
Much of the early work on the effects of traumatic events comes
from research studies on the psychological effects of surgical
illness,  surgery and physical injury.        In addition,   the
experience of war veterans, particularly following the Vietnam
War, has been studied intensively.      In the 197 0s and 1980s
studies were done in the USA and in Australia following both
natural and technological disasters to discover what the long
term psychological effects of the disasters were on the bereaved
and on the survivors.2

3.2.2. Percentage Affected by Disaster
What has been learned is that the victims’ reactions to disaster
transform personality and character-3 Studies indicate that from
40-70% of those directly involved experience acute traumatic
stress during the first month following the disaster, and that
after one year this has dropped off to 25-40%.        15-20% may
experience chronic levels of anxiety which remain high for
periods of longer than two years.4

3.2.3. Post Traumatic stress Disorder
Such has been the level of reaction to disasters that Post
Traumatic Stress Disorder has become recognised, since 1980, as
a recognisable set of symptoms caused by a traumatic event which
can be assessed for purposes of treatment and compensation.5

3.2.4. Vulnerable Groups
The levels of response vary with the severity of the disaster,
the directness of the experience of the individuals involved, and
previous stressful life events.     Some groups are particularly
vulnerable:  children,   old people,     those with psychiatric
disorders, those who have been multiply bereaved, and those who
see themselves as responsible for the disaster.      The chronic
effects of technological disasters are consistently higher than
those of natural disasters.          Certain physical   injuries,
particularly burns which are disfiguring or disabling, may lead

                                5
to higher levels of post traumatic stress.


3.2.5. Effects of Post Traumatic Stress
The effects of post traumatic stress can be felt in a number of
ways, each of which have implications for general and mental
health. Physical reactions include difficulty sleeping, fatigue,
headaches, nausea, above average susceptibility to illness.
Psychological reactions include anxiety, phobias, nightmares,
withdrawal, depression, irritability and anger. The combination
of these effects may lead to difficulty in working, difficulty
in maintaing normal relationships within the family,         and
increased dependence on alchohol or drugs.

3.3 COUNSELLING SERVICES

3 .3 .1 . Research Evaluating Responses
While most research to date has concentrated on clarifying what
the needs of those involved in disasters are, less conclusive
work has been done on how to meet those needs. Within the UK, the
research being done by the Stress Unit at the Middlesex hospital,
and the evaluation of the response of Social Services to
Hillsborough, should lead to clearer guidelines about the types
of counselling and support which are most effective.

3.3.2. Research Evidence
There is good evidence that early intervention which is pro­
active and includes elements of debriefing and supportive
counselling alleviates prolonged le ve ls of stress .6 In addition,
research conducted on the effects of bereavement counselling in
non-disaster situations shows that it does reduce the risk of
depression .7

3.3.3. Support Services
The following types of support have been found to be useful in
a number of disasters:
a. Immediate Support in the early stages for relatives and
survivors to find out what has happened, to identify bodies, and
to make arrangements for funerals and for the care of injured
people, and to provide accomodation where necessary.
b. Pro-active initial contact -    a counsellor to make contact
with all those directly involved to offer them the opportunity
to talk through the experience and their feelings,- to assess the
risk factors; to inform them about the range of reactions which
are normal, given the exceptional circumstances; and to inform
them about where they can receive help-
c. Critical Incident stress Debriefing - particularly for those
involved in the rescue or for groups of survivors, a structured
meeting where as a group they can retell their experience,
discuss their feelings, share what they have learned from the
experience in terms of their own response and ways of coping as
a group, and learn about normal reactions to stress.
d* Self help groups - groups of people who have shared the same
experience, as survivors, bereaved, or spouses of survivors, who
find support and understanding from others who know what they are
talking about.

                                 6
e. Family counselling - a chance for the couple or family as a
unit to talk through their experiences, particularly to work
through any difficulties in the parental or marital relationship
which have come about as a result of the disaster.
f . Individual counselling - a supportive counselling relationship
which supports the individual in reestablishing equilibrium in
their lives.
g. Brief focal psychotherapy - a limited number of sessions with
a therapist to help work out and understand why the victim has
responded in the way they have to the disaster, and to discuss
ways of coping.
h. psychological support in overcoming anxieties and phobias.
i. Psychiatric treatment in cases of severe depression or
suicidal behaviour, where it might be appropriate to understand
more about previous life experiences and learned patterns of
coping, as well as using mood controlling drugs for short periods
of time. Both depression and suicidal thoughts and behaviour are
common or normal responses to disaster experiences; referral to
a psychiatrist does not imply abnormal behaviour in this context.
3 . Community work - a way of facilitating the process of the
community at large coming to terms with what has happened to
them, and to regain control of their community.
K. Youth work - working with groups of children to talk through
their experiences.

3.4 THE ORGANISATION OF THE RESPONSE

3.4.1 Reason for Counselling Services
The basic reason for setting up counselling services following
a disaster is to alleviate the effects of the stress of the
disaster on the individuals involved. By doing so, long term and
chronic demands on the health and social services may be reduced.
For a minority of those involved in disasters, longer term
effects may include inability to work because of chronic anxiety
or depression, a very costly result for the individual and for
society.

3.4.2. Timing
For most people involved in a disaster, help may only be needed
in the immediate aftermath, or for a very short period of time.
In establishing how long a service is needed, attention has to
be paid to meeting people's needs for information and support
in the immediate aftermath, then an assessment process of those
involved and whether they need further support in coping, as well
as coordinating the provision of whatever support is needed. All
support teams have had new referrals after one or even two years,
from people who initially coped well but found that they needed
to talk through their experience at a later stage.     People may
require   more  support   at   times  of   anniversaries,   legal
proceedings, and holidays. A number of services have recommended
that some sort of support service/referral system should be set
up for a period of two years, which can be scaled up or down as
appropriate.

3.4.3. Effects on the Community
In many cases a disaster happens not just to individuals, but to

                                7
a community. Attention should also be given to the needs of the
community as it copes with the disaster itself, with the invasion
of outsiders offering help, and with the association of the
community 1s name with disaster. Recognition should be given to
the community's need to find meaning in what happened, and to
participate in decisions about its "recovery".     A significant
number of communities have found that one of the longer term
results of the disaster has been a strengthening of community
spirit and community development.

3.4.4. Coordination between organisations
Following a disaster there seems to be a natural desire to want
to help, and often both individuals and organisations try and do
something.   This can result in initially increasing chaos and
confusion, and can actually delay help from getting to those who
need it.     It can also lead to bitter rivalries between
organisations who are trying to do what they do best, in
isolation from, or ignorance of, what everyone else is doing.
Without clear communication, coordination and planning before a
disaster happens between all the organisations involved, there
is little that can be done to avoid this rivalry and confusion.
It seems essential that one organisation, in most cases Social
Services, take a clear lead in coordinating the response after
the rescue operation is completed.    This has implications for
coordinated planning and preparation*

References

1. Paper presented by Dr.Kellner, Bradford Disaster Prevention
and Limitation Unit Inaugural Conference, September 1989,
Bradford University.

2. J.L.Titchener, Clinical Intervention After Natural and
Technological Disasters, in M a r y Lystad (ed), 1988, Menta1,Health
Response to Mass Emergencies: Theory and Practice, New York,
Brunner/Mazel

3’. Idem.

4. Beverley Raphael, 19S6, When        Disaster   Strikes,   London,
Hutchinson Education, pp 179-190

5. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Health Disorders,
3rd   Edition,  (DSM III), 1980,     the  American   Psychiatric
Association

6.    D r .P .Herlofsen, Post Disaster Trauma Management Among
Rescuers, talk presented at the International Aviation Emergency
Management Conference, 11 Oct. 1989

7. Dr.C.M.Parkes, 1980, Bereavement Counselling: Does it Work?,
British Medical Journal.281:9-10




                                 8
DEFINITIONS OF TERMS

Aftermath - period of disaster which follows the ending of the
rescue phase

Counselling  -   emotional  support  and/or  advice  given    by
inidividuals who have been selected and trained to do so

Disaster - an event producing one or more of the following:
          a) more than 10 deaths
          b) more than 10 seriously injured
          c) more than 10 homes destroyed or seriously damaged
          d) severe terror affecting more than 20 people
          e) a rescue and support operation which local services
cannot provide on their own

Impact - period from the onset of a disaster to the end of the
rescue operation? the time during which the police are in charge

Injured - people present at a disaster who have been physically
injured but not killed

Long term - refers to a period following the impact phase which
may continue for approximately two years

Survivors - people present at a disaster who have not been killed

Victims - all disaster-affected persons




                                9
(Zeebrugge; October 87 storm)


voluntary organisations
M r .S *Rodway
British Red Cross

D r .C .Murray Parkes
Chairman, Cruse - consultant Psychiatrist
(Aberfan, Bradford, Zeebrugge, Armenian earthquake)

Dr.D.Black
Vice Chairman, Cruse - consultant Psychiatrist
(Bradford, zeebrugge)

Personal Experience of Bereavement in a Disaster

Ms.w.Harrison
Bradford
(Coordinator of Bradford Fire Support Services; brother
and father burned in the fire)

observers

Mr.M.Harrison
Department of Health

Miss J.Downey
Social Services Inspectorate
Department of Health

Miss N.Penfold
Civil Emergencies Secretariat
Home Office

Benearcher
Ms. C.Mead
Cruse - Bereavement Care




                       11
