PCA
POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY                                       10 Great George Street
                                                                  London   SW1P    3AE



MOLLY MEACHER
Deputy Chairman




                                                                        9 - AUG 2001

Policing Acute Behavioural Disturbance
                                                                     ^QijOF EJii-—-


Experts from the UK and the United States presented the latest medical research into acute
behavioural disturbance and its implications for policing. Having seen a welcome drop in deaths
in care and custody we were keen to ensure that deaths involving restraint - which are often
controversial and tragic - should also be prevented.

The meeting was attended by force medical examiners, leading forensic pathologists and
representatives from the police service.

As a result o f the seminar it was decided that advice on the policing of acute behavioural
disturbance should be produced. The booklet has been carefully checked by some o f the experts
who took part in the conference. I am particularly indebted to
Mr Graham Cook, accident and emergency consultant at Maidstone Hospital, Dr Richard
Shepherd of the forensic medicine unit at St George’s Hospital and Dr Guy Norfolk from the
Association o f Police Surgeons.

The booklet has been written for use by both officers and police surgeons. We hope that it can
be widely circulated within the police service and brought to the attention o f training
departments and others who may have to deal with acutely disturbed people.

You are at liberty to produce extra copies for non-commercial use. We can also supply the
booklet as a Word document on request. We are also adding the advice to our web site
www.pca.gov.uk.


                                        Yours sincerely




                                     MOLLY MEACHER
       PCA
      POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY




Policing Acute Behavioural
        Disturbance




                                    July 2001
                                   CONTENTS




                                                             Page No.



1.   Introduction                                               3


2.   Police Management of Acute Behavioural Disturbance         6


3.   Custody Officer to bring to the attention of treating
     Physicians                                                 8


4.   Pathologists - essential actions                           9


     References                                                 10


     Glossary                                                   11




                                          2
INTRODUCTION


Some of the most distressing and high profile cases of deaths in police custody in
recent years have been those where the detainee has died following police restraint,
which has often been applied in response to an acute behavioural disturbance. In
these tragic cases there may be no anatomical evidence found at post mortem
examination to establish why the person died. Yet the culpability or otherwise of
police officers involved in restraining the individual will hinge on the cause of death.
If the phrase "restraint asphyxia" is used this will raise serious questions about the
reasonableness of the force used. At its most extreme such a death may lead to a
murder charge against a police officer.

The PCA, a body o f lay Members and staff, relies entirely upon the evidence of
pathologists, medical consultants, forensic medical examiners and the toxicology tests
to determine the cause of death. However, time and again in these cases there is no
agreement between the medical professionals. In a handful of cases, up to five
opinions have been sought in an attempt to Tesolve the conflict. Instead of helping to
resolve matters, the family become suspicious of the motives of the PCA Member.

The aim of this paper is to set out some straightforward guidance for police officers,
forensic medical examiners and pathologists which, if followed, would greatly assist
in preventing some deaths and identifying the causes of others.

ACUTE BEHAVIOURAL DISTURBANCE

The individuals who are most at risk of sudden death during restraint appear to be
those exhibiting an extreme form of acute behavioural disturbance which goes far
beyond the "distressed" state often encountered by the Police.

Presenting features

The main features of the extreme state are a period o f agitation, excitability, perhaps
paranoia, coupled with great strength, aggression and non-pain compliance. Sudden
collapse and death may follow.

Causes

There are many possible causes. These include head injury, brain tumours, delirium
from high temperature, heat exhaustion and endocrine disorders such as high blood
sugar or low blood sugar and thyroid disease. Therapeutic (anti-psychotic) drugs and
others (cocaine etc.) can also precipitate these episodes.

It is not clear whether restraint does increase the likelihood of death of a detainee
suffering an acute behavioural disturbance. Exertion, exhaustion and the sheer act of
resisting restraint carry a sudden death rate.




                                            3
Enlargement of the heart can be found as a result of natural disease (high blood
pressure) or following abuse of drugs (cocaine). Such enlargement of the heart also
increases the risk of sudden death from the development of abnormal cardiac rhythms.
It is thought possible, though not yet proven, that cocaine can also affect the
dopamine receptors and the kappa 2 receptors in the brain, thus increasing the risk
level.


Signs post mortem

Very high temperature at the time of death.

Petechiae around the eyes may be present. However they are not diagnostic and they
have also been recorded in cases of individuals with heart failure, where there is no
question of strangulation. (Karch) Petechiae can also occur as a result of resuscitative
attempts.    They may not be apparent until some time has elapsed after death.
Photographic documentation of the absence of petechiae is just as important as
documentation of their presence.

Neurochemical abnormalities in the brain - affecting dopamine transporters, kappa2
receptors, serotonin receptors. These can only be detected by specialised analysis in
samples taken very quickly after death. Tests do not yet form part of the 'standard'
post mortem protocol.

An enlarged heart, abnormalities in the ultra structure and in the blood vessels that
supply the heart. A concentrically enlarged heart, which may be associated with
cocaine use, has a relative under-supply of blood vessels to heart muscle at all times
leading to a relative decrease in blood supply and the risk of the development of
arhythmias or to hypoxia.

If present, blood level o f cocaine will be either low or moderate but will generally not
be o f a toxic level from overdose.



POSITIONAL ASPHYXIA

Definition

Death which results from a body position that interferes with the ability to breathe.
Positional asphyxia is a recognised cause of death.

W hy does positional asphyxia occur?

Compression of the trunk limits chest movement and may splint the diaphragm
preventing the diaphragm moving up and down between the chest and the abdomen.
These diaphragmatic movements are essential to the breathing process. We know
that people who have their chest squeezed die because they are unable to breathe
adequately.    Such individuals die due to traumatic asphyxia. The Hillsborough
tragedy was an example of this. Such deaths are more likely to occur in the context of


                                            4
either "cocaine induced bizarre or frenzied behaviour,... or drugs and alcohol
intoxication,....” (Petty and McDonough).

Some forms o f police restraint may increase the risk of asphyxia though the degree of
risk associated with different holds is far from clear. The position of a person’s body
may also contribute to asphyxia though again the degree of risk associated with the
position of the body remains uncertain.        Nat Cary pointed out that "if you put
someone with a beer belly on their front, you will squeeze their abdominal contents,
such that their diaphragm is relatively ineffective." (Cary p.31)

Further, the individual may hold their breath in an attempt to lift their body in order to
be able to breathe. This is akin to a weight lifter tensing their abdominal muscles and
holding their breath in order to lift a weight. Nat Cary's research indicated that a
sequence of breath holding, in a situation of high exertion could cause potentially
dangerous heart rhythm disturbance.

Exhaustion may also play a part. There may have been a chase before the individual
has been detained. In a struggle with six or more police officers that describe
becoming exhausted, the individual will certainly be exhausted. Underlying ischemic
heart disease, if present, could lead to a sudden cardiac death.

Post mortem signs

Petechiae around the eyes. It is possible, however, to die in a crushing situation
without there being many signs at autopsy. (Cary p 30)

Nat Cary argued that there is likely to be no anatomical cause of death. (Cary p.39).




                                             5
POLICE MANAGEMENT OF ACUTE BEHAVIOURAL DISTURBANCE

We are not concerned here with the management of a detainee displaying a violent
temper. Such an individual can be controlled using tried and tested police restraint
techniques. Anyone displaying an acute behavioural disturbance should, however, be
treated as a medical emergency. Such individuals may be dangerous to others or to
themselves. Management is therefore difficult.        Officers are unlikely to know
whether the patient has a cardio vascular problem or a psychiatric disorder or indeed
whether the patient is abusing drugs. All these factors may increase the risk of death.
The cause of the acute behavioural disturbance should not affect the response of
officers.

Police officers are used to dealing with difficult, often abusive and disruptive
individuals. They should be aware of the more extreme situations discussed in this
guidance paper.

For example: if a member of the public is naked and acting strangely in a public
place; or if they are talking incoherently and failing to respond to simple commands
or to respond to questions intelligibly, the risk of sudden death may be very great.

WHAT OFFICERS SHOULD AND SHOULD NOT DO

       •   If possible contain rather than restrain and
       •   summon an ambulance immediately.
       •   Make every effort to ensure transportation to hospital by ambulance, not in
           a police vehicle if possible. (The public perception will be that officers
           used force in the police vehicle). However, care should not be delayed
           waiting for an ambulance.
       •   Do not use CS spray. It may not subdue the individual and it will create
           needless liability.
       •   Do not hogtie victim, (i.e. do not He the person on their front and tie their
           hands and feet together behind their back) It is not an approved procedure
           and may cause death.
       •   If possible don’t transport an 'acute behavioural disturbance' patient
           unattended by medical/paramedical personnel in a police van.
       •   Always take such a patient direct to an A & E department of a hospital -
           NOT to a psychiatric unit unless specifically authorised.
       •   Clear protocols are needed as to how to restrain such an individual and
           training is essential.
       •   Notify doctor immediately of any death of a detainee with an acute
           behavioural disturbance.




                                           6
Essential do's and don'ts when restraint is unavoidable

If the person has a knife or gun, taking them down to the prone position may be
absolutely necessary. However, "the prone position should be avoided if at all
possible, and the period that someone is restrained in the prone position must be
minimised.1' (Cary p. 38)

The amount of time that restraint is applied is as important as the form of
restraint and the position of the detainee. Prolonged restraint and prolonged
struggling will result in exhaustion, possibly without subjective awareness of this,
which can result in sudden death.

If possible, avoid the situations in which prolonged restraint and prolonged struggling,
become necessary.

If the person has to be restrained, avoid pressing down on the trunk. Use the limbs.
Binding the ankles and wrists will be considerably safer than kneeling on the back of
someone's chest.




                                            7
CUSTODY OFFICER - BRING TO THE ATTENTION OF THE TREATING
PHYSICIANS THE FOLLOWING CHECK LIST OF ESSENTIAL ACTIONS

To assist the patient

Ensure rapid transfer to hospital. Accompany the individual to hospital and 'hand
over’ formally to A & E staff.

Rapid tranquillisation should only be performed where equipment for cardio­
pulmonary resuscitation is present and where staff are trained to undertake such
activity.

To determine the cause of Death

AUTOPSY MUST BE DONE WITHIN 12 HOURS OF DEATH.
The FME or other treating physician should tell the police and coroner of the
importance of an early autopsy. The needs o f the relatives to have a representative
present will need to be taken into account, however.

The following tests must be undertaken if the cause of death is to be established in
cases o f agitation and restraint followed by sudden death.

Essential actions of FME and other treating physicians

1. Take core temperature hourly so that you can extrapolate backwards. Rectal
   temperature is the preferred method.
         If there is a possibility o f sexual abuse then take a swab first before taking
          the rectal temperature.
          Or can use an electronic thermometer applied to the external ear canal to
          take the ear temperature.

2. Record ambient temperature.

3. Record whether thyroid/cricoid pressure is used when trying to intubate.

4. Record number o f times intubation attempted and name the person who undertook
   the attempts.

5. Record oxygen saturation (using pulse oximeter) during transportation




                                           8
ESSENTIAL ACTIONS OF PATHOLOGIST AT POST MORTEM


 1.    Record time from death to autopsy.

 2.    Record temperature at autopsy.

 3.    Remove heart and fix prior to examination. Take microscopic sections of the
       heart, (one slide will not be sufficient). Measure heart weight and normalise
       for height and size. A small increase in heart size is sufficient to greatly
       increase the risk of sudden death. Measure the wall thickness o f the heart.
       Obtain urine, blood samples from right heart, and also brain tissue for
       toxicologic testing and record sites of sampling.

 4.    To obtain the necessary readings on cocaine the brain must be tested.
       Cocaine crosses the blood-brain barrier instantly.           It is the precise
       measurements in the brain o f cocaine and benzoylecgonine which will provide
       information about cocaine use. (Karch lecture to PCA seminar, p. 10).
       Remove brain, place 1 cm slices on baking sheet, rinse with saline, freeze with
       dry ice, and ship to neurochemistry reference lab for testing. Then perform &
       photograph neck dissection (this prevents artifacts simulating neck trauma).

' 5.   Due consideration needs to be given to the blood level o f cocainewhether or
       not the level is within the "toxic" overdose range.


 IF AUTOPSY CANNOT BE UNDERTAKEN WITHIN TWELVE HOURS THEN
 IT IS ESSENTIAL THAT THE FOLLOWING STEP IS TAKEN:

 If permission of the next of kin can be obtained, drill hole behind the ear and do
 receptor measurements rather than remove the brain at that stage.

 6.    Take ambient temperature at the time of death or as soon after as possible,
        giving the time o f the temperature reading.

  7.   Take core temperature at the time of death or as soon as possible thereafter,
        giving the time of the temperature reading.




                                            9
                                 REFERENCES



From the Pathology o f Drug Abuse, 3rd Ed. S B Karch. PCA Seminar May 2000.

(Petty, C. and E. McDonough (1995) Positional asphyxia-sudden death.

Chan, Vilke et al. 1997 "Restraint position and positional asphyxia" Ann. Emerg.
Med. 30(5): 578-86.

Chan, Vilke et al. 1998 "Reexamination of custody restraint position and positional
asphyxia". Am J. Forensic Med. Pathol. 19(3): 201-5.

Schmidt and Snowden 1999) "The effects o f positional restraint on heart rate and
oxygen saturation". J. Emerg. Med. 17(5): 777-82.

Elfawal 2000 "Sudden unexplained death syndrome" Med. Sci. Law 4)(1): 45-51.

Positional Asphyxia, N Cary. PCA Seminar May 2000.

Excited Delirium and Positional Asphyxia, S Winbery, Ph.D.M.D.. PCA seminar
May 2000.



NB The Metropolitan Police have produced an excellent training video ‘Preventing
Deaths in Custody’ which includes useful sections on restraint deaths.




                                         10
                                   GLOSSARY




Ambient temperature                    Surrounding temperature (eg cell
                                       temperature)


Cricoid pressure                       Pressure over the front o f the windpipe


Hypoxia                                Low oxygen


Ischemic heart disease                 Heart disease due to poor blood supply to
                                       the heart


Petechiae                              Minute areas of bleeding looking like
                                       very small red spots in the skin or eyes


Receptors in the brain including       Cells which receive messages from
Dopamine, kappa2 and serotonin         chemicals causing alterations in
Receptors                              behaviour


Ultra structure                        The heart structure as seen under the
                                       microscope




                                      11
Policing Acute Behavioural Disturbance

Published by:

Police Complaints Authority
10 Great George Street
LONDON
SW1P 3AE

© Crown Copyright 2001

This material may be freely reproduced except for sale or advertising purposes.

ISBN 0-9533157-6-2




                                          12
