     POLICE SUPERINTENDENTS’ ASSOCIATION OF ENGLAND AND WALE&




*      Thirty Seventh
    Annual Joint Meeting
        of Districts




          BLACKPOOL
    24th-27th September 1990
D   -
                                     THIRTY-SEVaml
                           ANNUAL JOINT MEETING OP DISTRICTS
                                      AT BLACKPOOL
                               24TH - 27TH SEPTETfiER 1990



                                     M I N U T E S


     TUESDAY. 25TH SEPTBBBR 1990


1.   ATTENDANCE

     All Districts and Branches were represented.

     AVON a SOMERSET (C)         DEVON a CORNWALL (C)          HERTFORDSHIRE (DJ
     E. Holt                     C. Moore                      R. Carter
     J. Masters                  B. Rollings                   J. Nicolson
     S . Sunmerhays
     D. Roberts                  DORSET (C)                    HUNBERSIDE (A)
                                 L. Burns                      C. Wray
     BEDFORDSHIRE (D)            R. Daubeney                   J. Taylor
     G. Banks                    B. Thornley                   P. Vine
     A, Marlow
                                 DURHAM (A)                    KENT (D)
     CAMBRIDGESHIRE (D)          B. Mackenzie                  T. O'Connor
     D. Creek                    W. Hills                      J. Wright
     D. Street                                                 D. Voice
                                 DYFED-POWYS (C)
     CHESHIRE (A)                D. Parkinson                  LANCASHIRE (A)
     J. Beale                    D. Evans                      W. Darwin
     M. Rooney                                                 R. Metcalf
                                 ESSEX CD)                     K. Mackay
     CITY OF LONDON (E)          M. Curtis                     J. Taylor
     R. Friend                   w. pirxe
     T. Hillier                  I. Wright                     LEICESTERSHIRE (B)
                                                               D. Adams
     CLEVELAND (A)               GUOUCESTHISHIRE (C)           A, Stagg
     A. Bruce                    G. Cooper                     B. Walker
     J. Ferguson                 E. Eynon
     B. Gleesan                                                LINCOLNSHIRE (B)
                                 G.M.P. (B)                    R. Davey
     CUNBRIA (A)                 D. Cocker                     K. Harpham
     C. Heslop                   F. Halligan
     J. Williams                 J. Houghton                   MERSEYSIDE (A)
     J. Wilson                   J. Potts                      D. Anderton
                                 D. Thornton                   P. Davenport
     DERBYSHIRE (A)              W. Walker                     G. Johnston
     C. Day                                                    R. Salisbury
     C. Hickman                  GWENT (C)                     M. Woosey
     K. Newton                   J. Adams
                                                               METROPOLITAN (E)
                                 HAMPSHIRE (C)                 V. Jones
                                 E. Day                        D. Golding
                                 M. Harland                    D. Sowter
                                 A. Thompson                   J. Ricketts

                                             1
WSraOBQLITAN (B)
J.   Cooper             R.   Greenwood         T. Hewitt
M.   Mills              J.   Nesbit
P.   Pridige            A.   Greaves           ASSISTANT SECRETARY
R.   Pearce             T.   Stuart            P. Wall
K.   Fletcher
R.   Glen               STAFFORDSHIRE          CO-OPTED MSffiER
A.   Whittick           K. Houlston            P. Sullivan
N.   McAllister         P. Rushton
R.   Havard             G. Stoddard            HIESS OFFICER
R.   Young                                     B. Ledgard
D.   Swinden            SUFFOLK (D)
A.   Evershed           R. Dewing
J,   McStravick         L. Jolley
A.   Wareing
A.   McLean             SURREY (D)
J.   Cooper             R. Elliott
I.   siessar            K. Hurst
K.   Rowe               T. Saunders
R.   Hawor-th
N.   Mulvihill          SUSSEX (D)
R.   Spencgr-Knott      W. Barrowdale
                        R. Custance
NORFOLK CD)             J. McKinney
P. Maxwell              M. Godley
J. Mansfield
R. Sandal1              THINGS VALLEY (D)
                        D. Clark
NGRTHANFItttSHIRE (B)   C. Todd
G. Leesing              L. Ekins
E. Parry                J. Ainsworth
P. Scott-Lee
                        WARWICKSHIRE (B)
NOKMIvBRIA (A)          F. Garratt
E. Holder               G. Nfanford
P. Routledge
J. Sanderson            WEST KERCIA (B)
D. Wright               A. Warren

NORTH WALES (B)         WEST MIDLANDS CD)
B. Davies               D. Mason
R, Jones                W. Chidley
T. Povah                P. Cross
                        B. Ashton
NORTH YORKSHIRE (A)     M. Gough
M. Ekins                R, Longstaff
G. Scutt
                        WEST YORKSHIRE (A)
N31TINGHU£H£KE (A)      T. Davey
D, Beaumont             A. Dobson
N. Spencer              S. Sabey
J. Tunney               D. Stone
                        G. Miles
SOUTH WALES (C)
E. Dutfield             WILTSHIRE        Co)
A. Greaves              R. Illman
C. Jones                J. Read
A. Bowen                B. Reed

                                    2
2.   WELCOME TO DELEGATES AND GUESTS

          The President, Superintendent D.P. Roberts, LL.B, welcomed delegates
     and guests and introduced members of the Executive Conmittee.

3.   ADOPTION OF STANDING ORDERS

          Stewards were appointed from Districts and Conference Standing Orders
     were adopted.

4.   MINUTES OF LAST VESTING

          The minutes of the meeting held at the Palace Hotel, Torquay on the
     25th - 28th September 1989 had been circulated, were approved as a true
     record and signed.

5.   M M T E R S ARISING

           There were no matters arising.

6.   OPENING OF M2JTING

          At 0915 hours the Chief Constable of the Lancashire Constabulary, R.B.
     Johnson, Esq, CBE, QPM, was welcomed by the President and invited to address
     the meeting. His opening address is reproduced at Appendix ’A'.

7.   ADDRESS BY PRESIDENT AND HQMB SECRETARY

          Hie President welcomed the Horae Secretary, The Right Honourable David
     Waddington, QC, MP.   The President and the Home Secretary addressed the
     meeting. Their speeches are reproduced at Appendices 'B' and 'C'.

8.   POLICE NEGOTIATING BOARD




                                            3
FNB Standing Committee 'D'




                             4
PNB Standing Conmittee 'E'




POLICE ADVISORY BOARD



PAB Standing Conmittee on Conditions of Service
    10.   TRAINING




m




                     6
11.   TREASURER'S REFCRT




                                                                 ft


12.   FACING THE FACTS - ASSESSTMr; THK mrrtk car thb NTMgTTRS




                                                                      I
                                           7                          1
13.   THE FUTURE OF THE SUPERINTO1D0JT5' ASSOCIATION OF ENGLAND AND WILES




14.   ANNUAL REPORT - OIHHt ITEMS




15.   DEFEATING THE FRAUDSTER WITHIN THE EUROPEAN OOfcMJNITY




                                            o
16.    MDTIQNS

16.1 1.      Subscript ions -   Executive Committee




16-2 Mat ions 2 and 3

       2-   Subscriptions - Payment by Installments      :   'D' District




       3-   Subscriptions - Payment to Central Ptinffe   :   *D' District




       Both motions were carried,

16.3   Mat ions 4 and 5

       4.   Rule Change - Subscriptions   :   ’D' District


                                                                            m




                                              9
       5.   Rule Change - Subscriptions      :   'D' District




       Both motions were carried.

16.4   6.    Review of Association      : 'B* District




       The motion was carried

16.5   7.    Direct Bitrv    : Durham




       The motion was c a m e a .

16.6   Motion - Kent Branch




17.    TOPICAL DEBATE

            The Crime Statistics, which had been released during Conference, were
       discussed in detail. The time allowed was limited.

18.    ANY OTHER BUSINESS

             No items of other business were drought forward.




                                                 10
20.   VENUE OF ANNUAL JOINT MEETINGS 1991 AND 1992

           The Secretary reported that accoramodation had been reserved at the
      Palace Hotel, Torquay for 1991 and recommended that the Imperial Hotel,
      Blackpool be the venue for 1992. This was approved.

21.   FRATBRNAL GREETINGS

           Superintendent D. NfecLean, President of the     Association of Scottish
      Police Superintendents and Chief Superintendent P.     McCullagh, President of
      the Police Superintendents' Association Northern      Ireland expressed their
      thanks for the hospitality and the welcome they had   received.

22.   APPRECIATIONS

           The President wished that thanks to the Secretary, Assistant Secretary,
                   and            be recorded for the part they had played In the
      organisation of Conference and administration.   On behalf of thB delegates
      he thanked the guests for attending and expressed appreciation for the work
      of Chief Superintendent B. Ledgard who had acted as press officer;        He     fih
      thanked the delegates and the Executive Committee making special mention of
      those members who were attending for the last time.

23.   CLOSURE

          Hie meeting closed at 1220hours.


      SECRETARY'S NOTE

           These papers represent an abbreviated siunnary of the main business of
      the Annual Joint Meeting of Districts. Transcripts of individual items and
      copies of presentations made are still available on request from the
      National Office.




                                          11
                                                               APPENDIX   'A1



                            OONFHIENCE OPENING


                       R.B. Johnson, Esq. CBB, (gM

              Chief Constable of the Lancashire Constabulary



     I welcome all the delegates of the Police Superintendents' Association
at this, your Annual Conference, to Blackpool.

     I know that it will provide the setting for a fertile and productive
Conference.

      It is never a 'oad time to have a conference, particularly when it is
held in Blackpool, and this year there are certainly many topical and
iiqportant policing issues to discuss.   I have little doubt that during the
course of this conference those issues will be dealt with positively and in
a forthright manner by all the delegates.

     An introspective look at today's policing scene I regret to say leaves
me with feelings of unease about the present and apprehension as to the
future.

     Vie must all be uneasy about the present.    The Service is getting a bad
press - sometimes justified, but more often not.      I must say that some of
our critics siii^ilify the policing role to an alarming degree.

     I do wish that those who judge us had a better understanding of the
sheer complexity of modern policing, of its diversity and of its limited
resources trying desperately to meet unattainable expectations.

     Value for money, to coin a phrase, is nothing new to the Service.    If.
it is then we must ask the question, what has the Home Office, the
Inspectorate and Treasurers of Local Authorities been doing over the years.

     Chief Constables unreservedly acknowledge the credo of value for money,
but do question how it is to be assessed. Not, I would submit, on the same
lines as the local Spa shop or Sainsbury's, admirable organisations as they
undoubtedly are.

     Our stocktaking must take into account all the goods on the shelves-
no selectivity as some of our stock will not be profitable in the market
place.

      Hats spring to mind.    We have a large store of those.    Our officers
 wear more hats, when called upon, than Toany Cooper ever possessed. To name
 Out a few: firemen, ambulance workers, social workers, school crossing
 wardens and many, many-more. The present "chapeau" worn by many officers of
 my Force is that ofprison    warder. As if that is not enough, our officers
 are expected to wear a number of hats at the same time, which makes a hydra
 headed police officer an invaluable asset.

      Our young officers must be confused as to what is required of them as
 they switch from pen to breathalyser, to firearm to tape recorder, to riot
 shield to video machine.
     Even more so when retrospective judgements are made of their
performance, which sometimes fail to take account of the environment in
which they function and the multifarious skills they are expected to bring
to their work.

     Will all this be tabulated at the check-out - to determine value for
money?

      Our more vociferous critics tell us to "get our act together". A fair
conroent you may think, but the Service has to be sure of the act it is
expected to perform. That is why I am uneasy.

     X said it at your last conference in Blackpool and I say it again, we
desperately need to redefine the police role in society - we must draw the
lines - we must have a better job description if we are to be judged on
giving value for money.

      What of the future?    1992 looms large. What about this emerald isle
set in a silver sea attached to the Channel Tunnel?      Questions spring to
mind.    What E.E.C. citizens, jurisdiction, differing legal systems?      The
implications of change on the British Police Service      are immense. We have
no answers yet.     Only politicians can determine our future in thisregard.
The Service, however, must be prepared to state its position on these
issues.

     Much work is being done and will need to be done in order that we can
be ready with an informed, professional and intellectual rationale. I note
that this forms     part of your Conference Agenda.

     Then there is the spectre of a national police force which has been
with us for many years.     The arguments for and against are being
regurgitated.

     There is a feeling in the Service that much of the future of British
policing has been predetermined. That lying in a desk at Queen Anne's Gate
is a blue-print for the future structure of the Police Service. There may
well be - and it will make interesting reading!

     My great hope is that the Service has the ability, and is allowed to
make its case in order to influence the decisions which will affect its
future. We have every right to be apprehensive.

     Back to that stocktaking exercise if I may.   Our stock is not so bad
despite the difficulties of modern policing.   I reject emotive words that
have been uttered by some in the Service like crisis, despond, low morale,
as inappropriate to Service vocabulary when describing the state of
policing. In my view it is over the top and inaccurate.

     There is, of course, room for improvement and we must all work towards
improvement,
     We have achieved much as a Service.    The three Staff Associations are
playing their part.   They have undergone the most searching self analysis.
Indeed, they have turned themselves inside out, examined every orifice and
will continue to do so with a view to dealing with problems in the Service
to enhance the police image and improve performance.

     None more so than the Police Federation,             who   deserv e   our
congratulations for their realism and motivation.
         Despite the knockers   I am convincedthat we still enjoy the goodwill of
    the public we serve. May    it ever he so, hut we must strive to maintain that
    goodwill.

         What price goodwill?    Priceless I would submit.    On that we could
    package and sell it.    Plenty of buyers, including some other professions,
    same of whom are our most ardent criticsand who themselves are in dire need
    of it.   There would be less need for talk about value for money.       The
    Service would have a very healthy credit balance.

         I hope your conference goes well.   It is important to the Service that
    it goes well. Knowing as I do your President, your officers and many of you
    here, I know it will be a constructive and successful conference.

         I wish I could leave you with two hats: Solomon's to help you come to
    the right decisions about the present, and Blackpool's Gypsy Petrulengo Hat
    to prophesy the future of British policing.




m




                                           t4
                                                                APPENDIX   'B'



                               PRESIDENT'S ADDRESS

        TO THE HOME SECRETARY THE RT. tCN. D W I D BftDDINGTOM. QC. MP
                                 AND DELB&Vng                        '

                        Superintendent P.P. Roberts. LL.B
                         Avon and Somerset Constabulary



     Home Secretary, welcome to our Annual Joint Nfeeting of Districts.
Thank you for accepting our invitation and for continuing the practice of
your predecessors in joining us at our Conference. Regretfully you have not
met us since you were appointed to your office, I hope that by being here
today the first steps can be taken towards your understanding of our
Association and the police experience we can offer you as Secretary of State
of the Home Department.

     Previous Presidents of this Association have taken this occasion as an
opportunity to look back over the past year and also to look forward to the
future.  I am not goingto depart from this practice, but the main emphasis
of what I have to say will be concerned with the lead up to the 21st
century.

     Looking back over the past twelve months there are four areas that I
shall make reference to.

Football/Hillsborough

     The tragic shadow of Hillsborough still casts its shade over our
Service and will continue to do so.    We are relieved and reassured by the
decision of the Director of Public Prosecutions that there is to be no
criminal prosecution against any police officers. That decision does not in
any way detract from the extreme responsibility all, who have any
involvement with football matches, must carry to ensure that such a tragedy
never happens again.

     The Lord Justice Taylor Reports have been available for some time, yet
the progress in implementing the recommendations seems, from a survey we
have carried out, to be a slow process at some grounds. We are pleased to
note the recent appointment of the chairman and six members of the Football
Licensing Authority, but regret that this Authority is not yet effective and
many of Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations still need urgent attention.

     The end of the last football season does not auger well for the
future.   Since the start of the football season it is good to note the
absence of the mindless violence that was characteristic of last season, we
all hope it will continue.

     It is members of our Association who have direct operational
responsibility at football events, and whilst there are better training
courses now available, there is an urgent need to provide conditions of
service that will enable them to carry out their responsibilities in the
confidence that they will receive all the legal and operational support to
professionally fulfil this task.




                                      15
     Horae Office Circular 77/87 sets out guidelines where police authorities
may provide legal representation to police officers for litigation that
arises from carrying out their duties.        The Circular gives the police
authority a discretion on whether to provide legal representation.      As an
Association we want to see this discretion changed to a mandatory
obligation, so that a police officer who is acting in accordance with good
policing practice is automatically provided with legal advice and
representation where any legal processes are taken or conteaplated.

     You will, I am sure Hems Secretary, be sensitive to this issue. Clearly
there is the need for much discussion, but I cannot emphasise too strongly
the deeply held view within our Association that this change is needed so
there is removed from our members the worry of where legal advice, and if
necessary representation will come from.

Comnittee ’D' Negotiations




Retirement on Grounds of Inefficiency
Hie Operational Policing Review




                                       *




                                  17
     The Future




•   |
    ________________
     The Open Service




m




                        18
                   *



partnership




              19
20
Our Association




Conclusion




                  21
                                                            APPENDIX   'C1



             AECRBSS BY THE KT„ U K . Q\VID WftPPINGTON. QC, MP

                              M B   SBuRKIAKY

                            25th Septenter 1990



     Mr President, this is the first time I have had the opportunity to
address the Superintendents’ Association Conference and I am very grateful
to you for the invitation to come and join you here in Blackpool.

     superintendents and Chief Superintendents are. as operational
conmanders, the linchpin of the service. But you are also the planners and
managers, responsible not only for the management of major criminal
investigations but also for the management of change - change in policing
needs and priorities; change in resource and personnel management; change in
the response of the service to the shifting face of crime both national and
international, and change in the needs and expectations of the coamunity.

     1 welcome the positive and entirely forward looking Conference
programme.   You have your sights on the issues of the future.as well as
those of the moment.     You are looking at international crime, with an
opportunity to learn from the experience of Interpol. You are looking at
priorities and opportunities in criminal investigation nationally, and you
are considering how your own organisation needs to he adapted so that it can
continue to make its contribution to policy formulation in Government and in
the service.

     I should like, if I may, Mr President, to respond to some of the
detailed questions which you put to me in your speech, before going on to
address the wider issues which you raised,

     I will start with rent allowance, although it was not the first item on
your agenda. The matter has been debated fully. There is really no more to
be said; and I too hope that it can now be put behind us. I can assure you
that the decision to set aside important aspects of the award of the
Arbitration Tribunal was not taken lightly. What is more important, it did
not reflect any lack of commitment on our part to the police negotiation and
arbitration arrangements.

      Next, capital controls.   I know that these are causing you particular
 concern at present, especially the constraints on vehicles, plant and
 equipment.   There has been a very marked increase indeed in spending on
 these items in the last year or so and the Government must control its 51%
 contribution to this type of expenditure.    I have, however, been made fully
 aware by you, Mr President, and by chief officers, and by members of many
 police authorities of the difficulties which you currently face.     I cannot
 promise to be able to ease the iianediate position, although if by any chance
 the allocation for a force is not taken up, we will aim to redistribute it
 to other forces. I shall do my level best to ease matters in the future.




                                       22
Football Safety




                                   *




Violence Against the Police




                                   %




                              23
    Operational Policing Review




*




                                  24
Retirement on Grounds of Inefficiency




Partnership Approach




                                   25
Conclusion

     Mr President, I think it is clear from what you have said, and, 1 hope,
from ray reply, that the role of the police officer is rapidly expanding
beyond its traditional limits.      Your Association and its members fully
recognise that and I applaud you for it. ■ You are leading by example, to
change the culture of your organisation while continuing to develop the
openness and responsiveness of your service.    This is a challenging task.
It is also one in which you can he assured of the support of the chief
officers, myself, and iqy department. Your task is not an easy one. But I
hereby declare my confidence in you, not just as professional crime fighters
but as professional managers of a service and committed members of the
community, to fully measure up to this challenge.




                                                                 27



     Printed by Stvletype Printing Ltd.. GlenflarmJcy Park, Newtownabbcy, BT36 7R J.   Telephone (0232) 342725.   Fax: (0233) 848225.
