                  POLICE NEGOTIATING BOARD
                                            STAFF         SIDE

   15-17 Langley Road • Surbiton • Surrey KT66LP                Tel 0181 399 2224 ■ Fax 0181 390 8998


Your ref:    HQX/ACHB7KC

Our ref:     JM/GT/059/96/9                                                                       28 June 1999


                                        UON OF V
      R J Wood Esq. QPM
      Negotiating Secretary
      CPOSA
                                                                              \           TO&f=
      Derbyshire Constabulary                                                     o   »



      PO Box 4 - Butterl.ey Hall
      Fipley
      Derbyshire DE5 3RS

      Dear Mr. Wood

      Financial Assistance to Police Officers in Legal Proceedings

      Many thanks for your letter of 22nd June 1999.

      You may or may not appreciate that as a result of the outcome of the High Court judgment
      concerning the South Yorkshire issues, I had already asked on behalf of tlie Police Federation of
      England &. Wales that the matter of financial assistance to police officers in. proceedings be
      included as an item for the meeting of the Police Advisory Board (SCCS) on 5th July 1999; my
      purpose being to establish further dialogue, as I am more than aware of the limited Home Office
      advices on a Police Authority’s discretion.

      As I have said, I have raised this on behalf of the Police Federation, given the existence of other
      separate Police Advisory Boards in Scotland and Northern Ireland, On the other hand, if it is your
      wish that the issue should be considered by the Staff Side as a whole, then I am more than
      prepared to agenda your request.

      Finally, Paul O’Brien from the PFEW has led on this subject in particular. Therefore, in the hope
      that we are able to convince others through the PAB(SCCS) of the need to redraft the circular,
      I believe that the reconstitution of a previous Service Group, inclusive of APA/Home Office
      representatives, should be suggested at the England and Wales PAB(SCCS) as the way forward.
      Accordingly, I have copied this reply to Peter Williams in anticipation o f the forthcoming
      Advisory Board meeting.

      Yours sincerely



      TeffMdseley
      Staff Side Secretary




 Please reply to the Secretary Staff Side
                                                    Negotiating   Mr. Robert Wood QPM
CPOSA                                               Swfg £ .iy    Assistant Chief Constable
The C'hiel Police Officers' Staff Association                     Derbyshire Constabulary
                                                                  PO Box 4, Butterley Hall,
                                                                  RIPLEY,
                                                                  Derbyshire. DE5 3RS

                                                     Our ref:      HQX/ACHR/KC
                                                     Tel No;       01773 572002
                                                     Date:         22 June 1999

Mr J Moseley
Joint Staff Staff Secretary
Police Federation                                                 JCC SECRETARY
15/17 Langley Road
Surbiton                                                              2 5 JUN 1999
Surrey KT6 6LP
                                                                      RECEIVED
Dear

FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS

I am sure that you will have had sight of the enclosed copy letter circulated by the APA.

We are of the view, in light of the judgement, that we should now at least make farther
representations to the Home Office to clarify HO Circular 4/1998 in respect of funding
other legal proceedings, including criminal cases. Your views on re-opening our case to
require police authorities to exercise discretion in favour of funding legal proceedings
when satisfied that the officer(s) have acted in good faith would also be appreciated. This
case and the concern it has raised does provide us with an ideal opportunity.

I look forward to hearing from you.

Yours sincerely




R J Wood QPM
Negotiating Secretary

Enc
                                                                                                       A ssociation


 police circular
                                                                                                 r    o f Police
                                                                                                      1Authorities,




 Police Authority Letter 27/99


 To     Clerks and Treasurers to Police Authorities

        Copy sent direct to Chairmen



~ Financial Assistance to Police Officers in Legal
  Proceedings

  Reports on a recent High Court judgem ent which confirms th a t police authorities can
  provide financial assistance to police officers in legal proceedings, including criminal cases.



  Contact: Robin Wilkinson (0171 664 3169)



 Dear Colleague

 FINANICAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS


 This circular reports on the judgement in a recent case in the Divisional Court brought by the
 Chief Constable of South Yorkshire against a decision of the South Yorkshire police authority to
 refuse to provide financial assistance to two former police officers in legal proceedings. South
 Yorkshire police authority welcomed the challenge by the Chief Constable as a means of
 clarifying their legal powers. The case has implications for all police authorities.


 Background - Home Office Circular 4/1998

 The most recent guidance-from the Home Office on this subject was given in the Home Office
 Circular 4/1998- In essence, that guidance recognised that Section 88 of the Police Act 1996, in
 the context of liability in tort, gives discretionary powers to police authorities enabling them to
 provide financial assistance to officers involved in civil legal proceedings. In such cases, it is for
 the police authority to decide whether to make assistance available, taking account of the
 circumstances of the particular case.

 However, uniike the earlier 1987 Circular, the guidance did not offer clear advice for other
 types of legal proceedings, including criminal cases, suggesting instead that authorities should
 seek their own legal advice on a case by case basis.


 The South Yorkshire Case

 The most recent case in South Yorkshire stems from the continued litigation against tw o former
 police officers involved in the Hillsborough tragedy. In 1998 the police authority decided to
                                 toward the costs of legal representation in defending private             „&
 pyissetfiat«w^reeWfeeJ4itfei«idffiji5ion was challenged by the families of the victims, the authority * * *;
 Tel 0171 664 3168 Fax 0171 654 3191                                                                                  j r x - i r 'M '
 Executive D irector Catherine Cr$wford                     in partnership w ith the L o c a l G o v e r n m e n t A s s o c ia tio n
 sought its own legal advice in accordance with Home Office circular 4/1998. That advice
 concluded on balance that a police authority did not have any general legal power to provide
 financial assistance to police officers in legal proceedings arising from the execution of their
 duty given the specific provision in Section 88 of the Police Act 1996 (in relation to civil
 proceedings). The main argument in. support of this opinion was that if Parliament had
 intended there to be such a power, it would have said so expressly.

 Legal advice obtained by the Chief Constable reached a different conclusion. That advice
 argued that a police authority, in discharging its broad statutory duty to maintain an effective
 and efficient police force, does have the power to provide financial assistance to police officers
 in legal proceedings arising from the execution of their duty in appropriate circumstances,
 provided it is satisfied that the officer concerned acted in good faith. It was argued that the
 link to the broad statutory duty to 'maintain an effective and efficient police force' is established
 on the grounds that it is vital to the morale and good management of the police force that
 officers should know that if they act in good faith when performing their duties, the chief
 constable and the police authority will do whatever they can to support them.


The Judgement

Judgement was made on 31 March 1999 by Lord Justice Laws sitting with Mr Justice Creswell
and Mr Justice Latham. They concluded that the general powers in Section 111(1) of the
Local Government Act 1972 enable police authorities to provide financial assistance to
police officers in legal proceeding, including criminal cases


The judgement centred on the construction and application of Section 6(1) of the Police Act
1996 and Section 111(1) of the Local Government Act 1372:

         Section 6(1) of the Police Act 1996

         "Every police authority established under section 3 shall secure the maintenance of an
         efficient and effective police force in its area."

         Section 111(1) of the Local Government Act 1972

         "Without prejudice to any powers exercisable apart from this section but subject to the
         following provisions of this Act„ a local authority shall have power to do anything
         (whether or not involving expenditure, borrowing or lending money or the acquisition or
         disposal of any property or rights) which is calculated to facilitate, or is conducive or
         incidental to, the discharge of their functions."

The arguments examined whether Section 6(1) of the 1996 Act confers on a police authority
any powers in addition to the duty which it clearly imposes and whether, if no such powers are
conferred. Section 111(1) of the 1972 Act can be applied.

The Court concluded that whether or not Section 6(1) confers powers, the application of
Section 111(1) is to the whole function of the provision of policing whether or not within the
particular function of the police authority within the tripartite structure. This is based upon the
argument that in maintaining the police fund the authority holds the purse strings. The Court,
however, went further and observed that Section 6(1) does in fact confer powers on the police
authority to fulfil its duty under the Section, constrained so as not to trespass on the duties of
the Chief Constable and the Secretary of State.




FINANCE.02D (RW)
Two paragraphs from the judgement are particularly significant in terms of the weight it placed
on the respective roles o f the parties in the tripartite policing structure embodied in the 1996
Act. They are worth quoting at length:

          "    it is clear that the Chief Constable is in charge of day-to-day policing;...the police
         authority has a role in relation to policy, or strategy;    but this is subject to the overall
         direction of the Secretary of State         The police authority holds the purse      Those
         provisions specifically concerned with the police authority's role confer duties rather
         than powers, though in some cases there is clearly a discretion as to how the duty is to
         be performed         Other powers...are conferred on the police authority by the local
         government legislation, to the extent that measures there contained were applied to
         police authorities by s.146A{1) of the Act of 1972............."

         “ The critical point which in my judgement emerges from a consideration of the
        interlocking roles of Chief Constable, Secretary of State and police authority is that it
        cannot have been within the contemplation of Parliament in enacting the scheme, and
        in embracing within it s.111(1), that the police authority should only be empowered to
        incur expenditure in support of those duties, and ancillary powers, which are specifically
        conferred upon it. The police authority holds the funds from which expenses for its
        local police force will be supplied      It is inherent in the system.. .,that the Chief
        Constable will apply to the authority for authorisation to incur expenditure; it may be
        fo r the use of resources such as helicopters, or the installation of video surveillance
        systems in city streets, or a host of other things. No doubt the Chief Constable presents
        a general budget. We were not referred to any provision in statute which shows or
        suggests that a police authority's power to accede to such requests rests in anything
        other than the combination of s.6(1) and s.111(1). Given this, it seems to me plain that,
        in the particular context before us in this case, the legitimate scope of the ancillary
        power provided by s.111 (1) cannot be restricted so as to support only those powers and
        duties which are expressly conferred on the police authority. Those powers and duties
        are themselves ancillary; though they are very important, they take second place to the
        Chief Constable's tactical role, and second place also to the Secretary of State's strategic
        role. 5.111(1) must in context (whatever it does in other cases) allow the police
        authority to support what its express powers and duties also support; and this is no less
        than its general function conferred by s.6(1). If that is right, the authority may in
        principle decide to fund officers' legal representation in proceedings no less than they
        may fund any other activity which the Chief Constable might propose as being
        conducive to "the maintenance of an efficient and effective police force for its
        area"."


The Court were not required in this case to consider the circumstances under which it would be
appropriate to fund an officer's legal expenses in individual cases. Nevertheless, some guidance
was offered. Having stated that a police authority has the power, in principle, to fund an
officer's legal expenses, the judgement goes on:

        "The circumstances in which such funding might be provided in any particular case is
        another matter. The policy has in the past been to the effect that the authority must be
        satisfied that the officer has acted in good faith in the discharge of his duty; and I can
        see that, at least where a private prosecution is involved, there may be issues for the
        authority to consider which would involve their taking a view on the merits in advance
        of the trial....."




FINANCE.020 (RW)
Conclusions

The judgement has established that by Section 6 of the Police Act 1996 or Section 111(1) of the
Local Government Act 1972, or a combination of the two, police authorities can lawfully
provide financial assistance to police officers in legal proceedings, including private prosecutions
and judicial reviews.

Police authorities will still need to consider carefully whether it is reasonable to use these
powers on a case by case basis and authorities may need to seek legal advice on this issue in
individual cases. However, this judgement has suggested that the general principles to apply
should be:

    •   whether the officer acted in good faith in the intended execution of his/her duties which
        gave rise to the legal action; and

    •   at least in private prosecutions, an authority would be justified in taking a view on the
        merits of the action in advance of any trial before reaching a decision on whether to
        provide financial assistance.

The judgement also provides guidance of a more general application on the breadth of police
authority powers under Section 6(1) of the Police Act 1996 and the application of Section
111(1) of the Local Government Act 1972 to financing decisions.




Catherine Crawford
Executive Director
Assotiatfor' of Pclice Authorities




FINANCE.020 (RW1
