                  BRITISH RED CROSS SOCIETY

                       9 Grosvenor Crescent
                         London, SW1X 7EJ

                                                     49 /89
                                                   DHD/SD/KP
                                               18 April 1989


             SHEFFIELD FOOTBALL STADIUM DISASTER

Following the disaster at Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April
in which 94 people were killed and many injured, the
following provides Branches with brief information on Red
Cross involvement to date.

Both South Yorkshire and Merseyside Branches have been
working day and night providing first aid and comforting
services in support of police and social workers.

South Yorkshire Branch responded to an appeal on the local
radio and provided ambulances and 3 0 first aiders to the
football ground to assist the statutory services and
St. John's Ambulance Brigade, who were providing first aid
cover at the match.

Red Cross volunteers have subsequently worked closely with
hospital and social workers to assist and comfort relatives
at reception centres, the two hospitals and the mortuary.

Merseyside Branch has worked in close co-operation with the
local police and South Yorkshire Branch to provide 9 minibus
trips with Red Cross escorts to take bereaved relatives to
Sheffield and back.  The Branch also provided ambulances and
first aiders at the Memorial Church Service on Sunday night.
Some 100 members have been involved.

Several other Red Cross Branches have offered assistance
either directly or to NHQ.  This has not so far been needed
and the immediate phase of the operations is now scaling
down as nearly all the dead have been identified.  The two
Branches will continue with transport and escort, comforting
and other services as necessary.

NHQ has been in close contact with both Branches throughout
and has sent out several press statements on the Red Cross
role.  Both Branches have provided several local radio
interviews and John Berry (Assistant Branch
Director-Operations) of South Yorkshire appeared on BBC
Breakfast Time and regional television programmes on
Monday 17 April.

As with earlier disasters during the last twelve months
every effort will be made to draw lessons from these
operations to further improve our operational procedures.




                       J.C. Burke-Gaffney
                        Director General

To: Branch Directors
