 British RedCross                                                                                             UK Office
                                                                                                              44 Moorfields
                                                                                                              London EC2Y 9AL

                                                                                                              Tel 0844 871 1111
                                                                                                              Minicom 020 7562 2050
                                                                                                              Fax 020 7562 2000
                                                                                                              redcross.org.uk


Extract from British Red Cross, Merseyside Branch annual report for 1989




  Hillsborough M e m oria l Service 1989 a t Liverpool A nglian Cathedral. Red Cross Officer kneeling dow n
  is Mrs. Marjorie Hill o f West Wirral. (photo taken by Independent Newspaper)
                                                                                                              Protective emblems used by
                                                                                                              the Internationa! Red Cross
                                                                                                              and Red Crescent Movement

                                                                                                              The British Red Cross Society
                                                                                                              Incorporated by Royai Charter 1908
                                                                                                              Registered charity numbers:
                                                                                                              England and Wales: 220949
                                                                                                              Scotland: SC037738

                                                                                                              Patron: Her Majesty The Queen
                       BRANCH EMERGENCY PLANNING
                            OFFICERS REPORT
          1989 saw the appointment of the Branch's first Emergency Planning Officer
          with responsibility for the provision of an emergency plan and the training of
          personnel to fulfil the needs of th a t plan. In the event of a major emergency
          the B.E.P.O. would assist the Branch Director in providing Red Cross services.

          Any Emergency Planning Officer hopes th a t the emergency plan will not be
          used but six weeks after being appointed and while plans were being reviewed
          the Branch found itself with a major disaster in which it was to become
          involved. A major disaster had occurred at Sheffield involving Liverpool
          football fans.

          It was soon realised th a t relatives on Merseyside would have difficulty in
          travelling to Sheffield and the Branch made arrangements to provide
          transport. These arrangements were put into action some tw enty hours before
          the statutory services. During the next forty-eight hours forty seven relatives
          were escorted to Sheffield and back and during the return journey seven of the
          injured were brought home. During the escorts relatives were taken to the
          hospitals and helped at the mortuary.

          During the next tw o weeks a further eleven relatives were provided with
          urgent transport and arrangements were made with a neighbouring Branch to
          provide an escort for relatives from outside the county. Many requests for
          information were received during the initial forty-eight hours and the Branch
          was successful in providing answers in the majority of cases. Initial counselling
          was carried out by members in advance o f the setting up of the Advice Centre
          in Liverpool. The Branch in conjunction with the St John Ambulance Brigade
          provided help at both services at th e Cathedrals. The Branch was tested during
          this emergency and passed w ith flying colours.

          A tribute must be paid to the people of Merseyside who offered help with
          transport. The offers of help continued for over twelve hours. Many lessons
          were learnt and are being incorporated into the emergency plan.

          The Branch provided emergency cover in the event of a major incident
          involving the Conservative Party Conference at Blackpool. Five ambulances
          with crews were on standby for one week.

          As the year ended plans w ere drawn up to provide an emergency service to the
          people of Merseyside if th e dispute involving th e Ambulance Service escalated
          to the point th a t no service was available. This plan would only be used when
          all else failed and would be provided on purely humanitarian grounds.

          Efforts were made to resurrect the County Joint Emergency Executive
          Committee but at the tim e of writing this report those effects have proved
          unsuccessful.

          J. Crosby
          BRANCH EMERGENCY PLANNING OFFICER



                                                 39




Signed;                                                           BRITISH RED CROSS
                                                                    44 MOORFIELDS
                                                                    LONDON EC2Y 9AL
Printed: Jenny Shaw, collections officer (archivist)
Date: 21 February 2011
