                                                    A      ( X-O ^   )
                                                    4 cc 2-4 c
  T H E   B R I T I S H   R E D   C R O S S        S O C I E T Y

                     9 Grosvenor Crescent
                       London SW1X 7EJ



                                                           106       /8g
                                                        SD/DPI/SGA
                                               1st September, 1989




                HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER ENQUIRY

            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S INTERIM REPORT




As you will probably be aware, this report makes some
specific recommendations about the provision of first aid
personnel at football grounds but may have far-reaching
effects on the requirements at other large events.

In the report the relevant recommendations are numbered 39 to
43 as follows -

First Aid Medical Facilities and Ambulances

  (39) There should be at each stadium at each match at
  least one trained first aider per 1,000 spectators.   The
  club should have the responsibility for securing such
  attendance.

  (40) There should be at each stadium one or more first
  aid rooms.   The number of such rooms and the equipment
  to be maintained within them should be specified by the
  local authority after taking professional medical advice
  and should be made the requirement of any Safety
  Certificate.

  (41) The club should employ a medical practitioner to be
  present at each match and available to deal with any
  medical exigency at the ground.   He should be trained and
  competent in advanced first aid.   He should be present at
  the ground at least an hour before kick-off and should
  remain until half an hour after the end of the match.
  His whereabouts should be known to those in the police
  control room and he should be immediately contactable.

  (42) At least one fully equipped ambulance from the
  appropriate ambulance authority should be in attendance at
  all matches with an expected crowd of 5,000 or more.




                                      .. ./2
                              -   2   -

   (43)   The number of ambulances to be in attendance for
   matches where larger crowds are expected should be
   specified by the local authority after consultation with
   the ambulance service and should be made a requirement of
   the Safety Certificate.


Whilst these recommendations at present relate only to
football stadia, they will no doubt be noted by the
organisers of other events which attract large crowds,
especially where these are contained in confined space.

We might expect, therefore, an increased demand on our first-
aid personnel both in quantity and, possibly, in quality.

Branches who are already involved with the provision of
services to football may require to review their commitment
and their resources.   It may be necessary to seek assistance
from another 'first aid provider' and, in that event, an
approach to St John Ambulance Brigade may be most
appropriate.

Conversely Branches not at present involved with provision
for football matches should be aware that they may be
approached by St John to assist them to meet an increased
commitment.   It is to be hoped that Branches would respond
positively to such a request by offering to field complete
teams prepared to work under the direction of St John
officers.

You are requested to consider the implications of the Taylor
recommendations within your Branch and to keep the Head of
Training Department at National Headquarters informed,
through your Regional Officer, of developments in this area
and of any problems encountered.




                       J.C. BURKE-GAFFNEY
                        Director General




To: BRANCH DIRECTORS
