            ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                            1355

                                      Meeting held 10th April, 1992

Present— Councillors Mrs. Midgley (Chair), Ms. Bullement, Chaplin, Mrs. Fleming, George,
Hartley, Memmott, J. A. Moore, Ms. Robinson, Sangar, Mrs. Shepherd, Mrs. E. Smith,
Mrs. Walton and Webster.

1 Minutes
   It was reported that the City Council, at its meeting held on 1st April, 1992, had confirmed the
minutes of the meeting of this Committee held on 13th March, 1992, subject to the amendment of
Item 11 relating to Fluoridation of the Water Supply in Sheffield by the deletion of all the words in
paragraph (i) of the resolution passed by the Committee and the substitution of the following words
therefor—
    “ (i) the City Council, re-affirms its opposition to the fluoridation of the public water supply; and” .


2 Licensing Panel
r e s o l v e d : That, except so far as they relate to matters delegated to the Licensing Panel, the

following minutes be approved—
     Meeting of the Licensing Panel held 26th March, 1992. Present— Councillors Butler (Chair),
    Chaplin, Memmott, Mrs. Midgley, Mrs. Shepherd, Mrs. E. Smith, Mr. P. M. Smith and
    Webster.
    ( 1 ) EXCLUSION OF THE PUBLIC AND PRESS
      Resolved: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before discussion takes
    place on the following item of business relating to hackney carriage and private hire licensing on
    the grounds that, in view of the nature of the business to be transacted, if the public and press
    were present, there would be a disclosure to them of exempt information as described in
    paragraphs 7 and 12 of Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act 1972, as amended by the
    Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985 relating to the financial or business affairs
    of other persons and legal matters and advice, respectively.
★   (2) HACKNEY CARRIAGE AND PRIVATE HIRE LICENSING
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted details in respect of two cases
    relating to hackney carriage and private hire licensing. Both applicants attended the meeting to
    address the Panel and the applicant in Case 11/92 was accompanied by his Solicitor and his
    brother who also had the use of the vehicle.
      Resolved: That (a) in the exceptional circumstances of Case 11/92 the application for Hackney
    Carriage Vehicle Licence be treated as a renewal and not as a new application;
       (b) the applications now submitted be determined as follows—
    Case No.        Licence Type                                  Decision
    11/92           Hackney Carriage Vehicle Licence              Grant a licence to expire on 31st
                                                                  December, 1992 in the circumstances
                                                                  now reported.
    12/92           Private Hire and Hackney Carriage             Grant for six months by reason of
                    Drivers’ Licence                              previous fixed penalty offences.
    and (c) the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested to submit a report giving
    details of proposals for the treatment of late applications for the renewal of Hackney Carriage
    Vehicle Licences to a future meeting of this Panel.
      A t this point in the proceedings the meeting was reopened to the public and press.
★   (3) PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT LICENSING
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report outlining a current
    application for the renewal of a Public Entertainments Licence in respect of the Roxy, Arundel
    Gate. The Panel heard submissions from an Officer of the Department of Health and Consumer
    Services, giving details of a number of safety hazards which he had identified when the premises
    1356     ENVIRONMENTAL. HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

      were inspected on 19th and 24th February, 1992, respectively. The Panel then heard a response
      made by the Applicant, the Area Manager of the Roxy Nightclub, their Solicitor and a
      representative from the Noble Organisation.
        Resolved: That the public and press, the applicant, the Area Manager of the Roxy Nightclub,
      their Solicitor and the representative from the Noble Organisation and Officers of the City
      Council involved in the application relating to the Roxy be excluded from the meeting before a
      decision is made on the grounds that, in view of the nature of the business transacted, if the public
      and press were present there would be a disclosure to them of exempt information described in
      paragraphs 12 and 13 of the Local Government Act 1972, as amended by the Local Government
      (Access to Information Act 1985), relating to (a) legal matters and advice; and
           (b) proposed actions under any enactment by the Authority.
        The City Solicitor and Head of Administration reported orally giving legal advice on various
      aspects of the application relative to the Roxy.
           A t this point in the proceedings the meeting was reopened to the public and press.
         Resolved: That the application now submitted for the renewal of a public entertainment
      licence be determined as follows—
      Premises                              Decision
      The Roxy, Arundel Gate                Grant for a period of six months only by reason of the fact that
                                            works had been carried out at the premises without the prior
                                            consent of the Council, the state of the premises on inspection
                                            on the relevant dates, the lack of adequate explanation on
                                            these points and the concern of the Panel over how much
                                            control was exercised over the premises on a day to day basis,
                                            by the licensee.
      ( n o t e : A t the conclusion of the above item Councillors Mrs. E. Smith and Chaplin left the
      meeting.)
★    (4) AMUSEMENT ARCADE PERMIT
       The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on an application for an
     Amusement Arcade Permit in respect of premises at 962 City Road.
       Resolved: That the application now submitted in respect of premises at 962 City Road be
     granted for a period of three years.
      (n o t e :   At the conclusion of the above item Councillor Mrs. Midgley left the meeting).
★    (5) SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS—HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM—F.A. CUP SEMI-FINAL, 5TH APRIL, 1992
       The City Solicitor and Head of Administration reported verbally on the decision by the
     Football Association to stage an F.A. Cup Semi-Final at the Hillsborough Stadium on 5th April,
     1992. The Panel were briefed on the general preparations that were being undertaken by
     Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, the South Yorkshire Police and by Officers of the Council
     for this particular football match.
         The Panel noted the information now reported.
     ( n o t e : In accordance with the provisions of Section 100B(4)(b) of the Local Government Act
     1972, as amended by the Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985, the Chair
     (Councillor Butler) decided that the above item should be considered as a matter of urgency in
     view of the imminence of the FA Cup Semi-Final, although it had not been possible to give
     members three clear days notice that it was to be considered).

3 Environmental Services and Standards Sub-Committee
r e s o l v e d : That, except so far as they relate to matters delegated to the Environmental Services and

Standards Sub-Committee, the following minutes be approved—
       Meeting of the Environmental Services and Standards Sub-Committee held 25th March, 1992.
     Present— Councillors Mrs. Midgley (Chair), Butler, Mrs. Fleming, Hartley, Memmott, J. A.
     Moore, Mrs. E. Smith, Mrs. P . M . Smith and Ms. Whitty.
