                S H E F F I E L D   C I T Y      C O U N   C I L




                              POLICY COMMITTEE

                        Meeting held 23rd May, 1989


     PRESENT:   Councillors Betts (Chair), Mrs. Barton, Boyce, Chadwick,
                Ms. Fiore, Heath, Jones, H. Knight, Mrs. P. Midgley,
                Mrs. Nicholson, Price, Wigfield and Woodcock.
                Also in attendance - The Chair of the Women's Panel
                (Coun. Ms. R. Midgley) for item 10.




1.   MINUTES OF LAST MEETING
               It was reported that the City Council on 3rd May, 1989
     had confirmed the minutes of the meeting of this Committee held
     on 25th April, 1989 with the amendment of the resolution in Item
     7(4) relating to Departmental Progress Reports on Race Equality
     by -
     1.   the insertion of the words "of the Directors of Housing and
          Arts" immediately after the word "reports" in the first line
          of paragraph (a);
     2.   the addition of a new paragraph (b) as follows
               "(b) the report now submitted by the Director of Museums
          be not accepted and he be requested to present a further report,
          along the lines now suggested, to the June meeting of the
          Panel; and
     3.   the relettering of paragraph (b) as "(c)" and the deletion
          from that paragraph of the words "the Director of Museums"
          in the fourth line.

2.   URBAN STRATEGY PANEL
     RESOLVED: That the following minutes be approved
      (Copy minutes of the meeting of the Urban Strategy Panel held on
     2nd May, 1989.)

3.   POLICE AND COMMUNITY SAFETY PANEL
     RESOLVED: That the following minutes be approved
      (Copy minutes of the meeting of the Police and Community Safety
     Panel held on 8th May, 1989.)

4.   RACE EQUALITY PANEL
      RESOLVED: That the following minutes, which incorporate the alterations
      made at this meeting, be approved:-
      (Copy minutes of the meeting of the Race Equality Panel held on
      9th May, 1989.)
      (NOTE:  The following alterations were made to the minutes of the
              meeting of the Race Equality Panel
              1.     In item (4) relating to Performance I n d ic at or for
                      Race Equality, the words "performance review® were
                      substituted for the words "performance related pay"
                      in the third line of paragraph (ii) of the resolution;and
              2.     Paragraph (ii) of the resolution in item (6) relating
                      to Urban Development Corporations and the Black
                      Communities was amended to read as follows
                      "(ii) following further discussions with the director
Policy Committee   23.5.89                               Page 2


                       of Employment and Economic Development, the report
                       be referred for consideration by the Economic Regeneration
                       Team and that the Race Equality Unit Co-ordinator
                       be requested to submit to the July meeting of the
                       Panel a report containing the comments of that Team
                       on this matter and recommendations for future action
                       which could be taken in this connection.)

5.      PERSONNEL SERVICES SUB-COMMITTEE
        RESOLVED: That the following minutes, which incorporate the alterations
        made at this meeting, be approved except so far as they relate
        to matters delegated to the Personnel Services Sub-Committee:-
        (Copy minutes of the meeting of the Personnel Services Sub-Committee
        held on 9th May, 1989.)
        (NOTE: The resolution in item (4) of the.minutes of the meeting
                of the Personnel Services Sub-Committee relating to the
                monthly report of the Chief Personnel Officer was amended
                to provide that the small delegation to meet representatives
                of the Yorkshire and Humberside Provincial Council, referred
                to in paragraph (ii),'shall comprise Councillors Betts, M. D.
                Bower ancLH. Knight and the Chief Personnel Officer.)

6.     POLICY REVIEW SUB-COMMITTEE
        RESOLVED: That the following minutes be approved:-
        (Copy minutes of the meeting of the Policy Review Sub-Committee
        held on 9th May, 1989.)

7.     COUNCIL RESOLUTION - NATIONAL MEMBERSHIP SCHEME FOR FOOTBALL
        SUPPORTERS
                   Further to item (5) of the minutes of the meeting of
        the Policy Review Sub-Committee held on 9th May, 1989, concerning
        the Minister of Sport's response to the resolution passed by the
        City Council on 4th January, 1989 concerning the proposed national
        membership scheme for football supporters, the Committee received
        verbal reports by their Chair and Councillor Wigfield on the proceedings
        of the Conference arranged by the Hammersmith and Fulham Borough
        Council and held on 16th May, 1989 to discuss the proposals contained
        in the Football Supporters Bill which is now before Parliament
        and which provides the statutory framework for such a scheme.
        RESOLVED: That the Government be urged most strongly to (a) reconsider
        their proposals to introduce a national membership scheme for football
        supporters particularly in the light of the tragic events which
        took place at the F. A. Cup Semi-Final football match at Hillsborough
        on 15th April, 1989 and (b) not to allow the Football Supporters
        Bill to proceed any further through its parliamentary stages until
        the full report and recommendations of the inquiry being carried
        out by Lord Justice Taylor into the Hillsborough Disaster have
        been received and fully evaluated.

8.      TECHNICAL SERVICES PANEL
        RESOLVED: That the following minutes be approved:-
        (Copy minutes of the meeting of the Technical Services Panel held
        on 11th May, 1989.)
Policy Committee   23.5.89                               Page 3



9.      DISABILITY LIAISON PANEL
        RESOLVED: That the following minutes, which incorporate the alteration
        made at this meeting, be approved:-
        (Copy minutes of the meeting of the Disability Liaison Panel held
        on 11th May, 1989.)
        (NOTE: The resolution in item (4) of the minutes of the Disability
                 Liaison Panel relating to the Disabled Persons' Housing
                 Service was amended by the insertion of the following words
                 immediately after the words "the Chief Personnel Officer"
                 in paragraph (iii):-
                 ", the Director of Housing and the Director of Social Services")

10.    WOMEN'S PANEL
        RESOLVED: That the following minutes be approved:-
        (Copy minutes of the meeting of the Women's Panel held on 12th
        May, 1989.)

11.    FINANCE SUB-COMMITTEE
        RESOLVED: That the following minutes be approved:-
        (Copy minutes of the meeting of the Finance Sub-Committee held
        on 16th May, 1989.)

12.    CITY TREASURY - COMPUTER SERVICES - SERVICE
        DELIVERY REORGANISATION
                  Further to the approval given by the Finance Sub-Committee
        at its meeting on 16th May, 1989 to a revised staffing structure
        for the City Treasury Computer Services Division, the City Treasurer
        submitted a report (a) seeking the approval of this Committee to
        the proposals contained in the revised structure for the establishment
        of two new J.N.C. Scale 3 posts (70% Chief Officer's Scale) and
        (b) giving details of the duties and responsibilities of the two
        pests which are a Strategic Planning Manager and a Development
        Manager heading their respective Units and reporting directly to
        the City Treasurer.
        RESOLVED: That the proposals now submitted for the establishment
        of two additional J.N.C. Scale 3 posts (70% Chief Officer's Scale)
        in the Computer Services Division of the City Treasury be approved
        so far as this Committee is concerned and be referred for consideration
        by the Personnel Services Sub-Committee.

13.     SOUTH YORKSHIRE JOINT AUTHORITIES
                  The Committee received the minutes of a meeting of the
        South Yorkshire Pensions Authority held on 6th April, 1989 and
        meetings of the South Yorkshire Police Authority held on 7th and
        21st April, 1989 and arising therefrom
        RESOLVED: That (a) in connection with item 171 of the minutes of
        the meeting of the South Yorkshire Police Authority on 7th April,
        1989, the City Council's representatives who will be attending the
        meeting of the-A.M.A.' Policy Committee to be held on 25th May, 1989 be
        requested to inform that meeting that the Council does not support the
        granting of full A.M.A. membership to joint authorities, but those
        representatives be given discretion to support alternatives such as allowing
        joint authorities the right of attendance at Association meetings and the
        right to speak and vote on issues relating to joint authorities; and
                   (b)           the City Council fully supports the case being put
        forward by the South Yorkshire Police Authority to the Home Office
        that all the costs incurred by the West Midlands Police in conducting
        the police inquiry into the events at Hillsborough on 15th April, 1989
        should be borne by the Government.
Policy Committee   23.5.89                               Page 4



14.     HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY - THE CITY LIBRARIES' RESPONSE
                  The Director of Libraries and Information Services submitted
        a report on the arrangements which were made by her department
        immediately following the tragedy at Hillsborough Football Ground
        on 15th April, 1989 for the operation of a 'Hillsborough Helpline'
        service to cope with the many demands being placed on the Family
        and Community Services Department for information related to the
        tragedy.
        RESOLVED: That (a) the information contained in the report now
        submitted be noted;
                  (b) the Chief Executive be requested to arrange for a
        comprehensive report to be submitted to this Committee (i) detailing
        the operational action taken by the Council following the Hillsborough
        Disaster and the full financial implications thereof and (ii) on
        the potential for and costs of extending any existing services/
        facilities or developing new services and the need for a review
        of the Council1s peacetime emergencies plan in the light of the
        lessons learned and experiences gained from the disaster; and
                  (c) pending the submission of the above-mentioned report,
        the Chief Executive and the City Treasurer be authorised, in consultation
        with the Chair of the Finance Sub-Committee, to approve any items
        of expenditure as a result of the actions taken by the Council
        in connection with the disaster.

15.     EDUCATION PROGRAMME COMMITTEE - NORTON COLLEGE - CONTRACT 5B
                  The Chief Education Officer submitted a report and a
        Project Report Form CP3 giving details of the proposed rephasings
        of expenditure in respect of the scheme of the Education Programme
        Committee for the carrying out of repairs and remodelling of the
        former Rowlinson School to provide teaching and non-teaching
        accommodation for the new Norton Tertiary College (PPR Contract 5B).
        RESOLVED: That approval be given for the purposes of Financial
        Regulation 11 to the Project Report Form CP3 now submitted in respect
        of Contract 5B at Norton College at an estimated total capital
        cost of £1,700,000 (£111,193 in 1988/89; £1,235,000 in 1989/90;
        £335,000 in 1990/91 and £18,807 in 1991/92) to be financed from
        the Education Capital Programme.

16.      POLL TAX - PETITION
                   The Committee considered a petition containing 6,236
         signatures which had been referred from the City Council and
         which (a) expressed opposition to the introduction of the Poll
         Tax as it is considered to be an attack on the living standards
         of all ordinary people and will open the door to further drastic
         cuts in local authority jobs and services and (b) called on the
         City Council to show its opposition to the Poll Tax by halting
         the registration and collection process and by supporting any group
         of workers who take action to stop implementation.
         RESOLVED: That (a) the petitioners be informed that the City Council
         re-affirms its total opposition to the introduction of the Poll
         Tax as expressed in its previous resolutions and for reasons similar
         to those set out in part (a) of the petition, but that it has no
         option other than to proceed with the necessary arrangements for
         the implementation of the Poll Tax; and
                   (b) the City Treasurer be requested to report back in
      \ due course with information onthe experiences to date of Scottish
       \ local authorities in the operation of the Poll Tax.
Policy Committee   23.5.89                               Page 5



17.     APPOINTMENTS TO PROGRAMME COMMITTEES
        RESOLVED: That Councillors Mrs. Jackson and Pye be appointed to
        fill vacancies on the Education and Municipal Enterprise and General
        Services Programme Committees, respectively.

18.     DATE OF COUNCIL MEETING
        RESOLVED: That, in view of the incidence of the Christmas holiday
        period in 1989, the monthly meeting of the City Council, which
        would normally be held on Wednesday, 6th December, 1989, be held
        instead on Wednesday, 29th November, 1989.

19.     RECREATION DEPARTMENT - REVIEW OF SENIOR MANAGEMENT STRUCTURE
                  The Director of Recreation and Amenities submitted a
        report reviewing the senior management structure of his department
        and containing a proposal, which had been approved by the Leisure
        Services Programme Committee at its meeting on 17th March, 1989,
        for the establishment of a new post of Senior Assistant Director
        (Corporate Resources) on J.N.C. Scale 3 (70% Chief Officer's Scale).
        RESOLVED: That approval be given for the creation of a post of
        Senior Assistant Director (Corporate Resources) on J.N.C. Scale
        3 in the Recreation Department in accordance with the details contained
        in the report now submitted.

20.     EXCLUSION OF THE PUBLIC AND PRESS
        RESOLVED: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting
        before discussion takes place on the remaining item of business
        to be transacted on the grounds that, in view of the nature of
        the business if the public and press were present, there would
        be a disclosure to them of exempt information described in
        paragraphs 7 and 9 of Schedule 12A. to the Local Government Act
        1972 as amended by the Local Government (Access to Information)
        Act 1985 relating to the financial or business affairs of any particular
        person (other than the authority) and to terms proposed by the
        authority in the course of negotiations for a contract for the
        acquisition or disposal of property or the supply of goods or services.

21 .     SIBTEC LEASE
