SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
19 OCTOBER 1990

POLICE HEADQUARTERS SHEFFIELD


PRESENT:   Councillor Sir John Layden (Chairman)
           Councillors: D A Axe, C J C Betts, J M Cromar, R Fisher, D W George,
           R W Gillies, R P McCormick, C Swindell, R Whitfield

           Magistrates Members:    Mrs B R Bullivant, Hr K Goodall,
           Mr H D Hepvorth, Mr J Ludlam, Dr H H Smith, Mr D E Wilburn
65   URGENT ITEMS

     The Chairman announced that he had agreed to add to the Agenda an item
     dealing with representation at a seminar to launch an ACPO Strategic Policy
     document in view of the short notice of the event.

66   MINUTES

     Arising from Minute 48 it vas noted that the Home Secretary's response to
     the representations regarding the conditions for Strangeways prisoners held
     in police cells vas still awaited and would be circulated to members of the
     Authority when it vas received.

     RESOLVED - That the minutes of the meeting of the Authority held on
     14 September 1990 be signed by the Chairman as a correct record subject to
     the amendment of Part 7 of the Resolution to minute 63 to read as follows

     "7    That the local authority associations be urged to discuss with ACPO
           and the Football Association, a national approach to the policing and
           charging for football match duties. "

67   MINUTES OF COMMITTEES

     A     Accountability Complaints and Discipline Committee

           RESOLVED:-

           1   That the minutes of the meeting of the Accountability, Complaints
               and Discipline Committee held on 28 September 1990 (as set out as
               Appendix 1 to these minutes) be agreed and confirmed with the
               exception of the Resolution to minute 2 (D).

           2   That in lieu of that resolution the existing arrangements for   lay
               visiting be continued.

           3   That photographs of members of the Police Authority acting as   lay
               visitors be circulated to local police stations.
- 2 -


        B   Finance and General Purposes Committee

            RESOLYED- That the minutes of the Finance and General Purposes
            Committee helcLon 5 October 1990 (set out as Appendix 2 to these
            ninutes) be agreed and confirmed.


68   BUDGET 1991/92

     A joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable,
     including a draft of the Joint Consultative Committee minute of the Budget
     Guidelines 1991/92, referred to the requirement for the Police Authority to
     exemplify the implications of tvo Budget levels; the originally approved
     1990/91 Cash Spending * 7 t (including the rent allowance adjustment) and
     the 1991/92 Standard Spending Assessment + 10'/.. A preliminary assessment
     of the effect of the requirements vas outlined.

     A detailed budget vould be submitted to the December meeting of the
     Authority vith the precept not being finally determined until the nev year.
     A precept vould have to be notified to the Districts by 1 March 1990.

     The Guidelines also required the Authority to produce a forecast of
     reserves at 31 March 1991 and a 2-3 year assessment of potential
     commitments.

     RESOLYED - That a special meeting of the Police Authority be arranged vhen
     the Standard Spending Assessment for 1990/91 has been notified.


69   HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR 42/92

     The Authority considered Home Office Circular 42/1990 vhich vas the
     Government's response to a report of the House of Commons Home Affairs
     Committee on Racial Attacks and Harassment.  The Circular indicated the
     continuing emphasis being placed by the Government on all aspects of equal
     opportunities, both in employment in the Police service and in the quality
     of thes service provided by forces.

     A report by the Clerk and Financial Officer indicated the main points of
     the circular and commented on its contents.  The Government response
     stressed the links betveen equal opportunities, recruitment, the response
     to racial incidents, and quality of service.

     RESOLYED

     1       That the report and the implications of the circular and response be
            noted.

     2       That the circular be referred to the Equal Opportunities Working Party
            for more detailed consideration of the position in South Yorkshire and
            the implications of the circular for that position.

     3       That the Chairman of the Equal Opportunities Working Party discuss
            vith the Clerk and Financial Officer any problems arising from the
            workings of the Working Party in order to settle the future scope of
            the Working Party's role.
