H UjQotUJCrf-i            *Sn=H2> - fitiAjT&l
CotfjUZSfbrJasNQZ          2_

C   - p / 1 7 7 / %   6
                                                                           p



AHG/TPJ

AH/EB/JM

11th April,   1991



Mr. A. H. Gregory
Keeble Hawson -Solicitors
Old Cathedral Vicarage
St. J a m e s ’ Row
SHEFFIELD
SI 1XA.



Dear Tony

              Hillsborough - Vest Midlands Police Investigation

I refer to your letter dated 18th September,   1990 enclosing details of
your charges in relation to the above.

I apologise for the delay in replying to you, as you will see from the
date on the cheque this was simply due to an oversight.

I now enclose a cheque for £569.25 in respect of those charges.

Once again,   thank you for your assistance in this matter.

Yours sincerely




Assistant Head of Department




                               734019 Liz Bashforth
      R3719                                                                            Sch 9160
                                  CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM

From         The City Treasurer                       To   The City Solicitor and Head of
                                                           Administration

Date      12th February 1991
Ref.      FS/MEGS/I  Thew
Tel. Ext. 4348 -                                      Ref. FAO Mrs Bashforth




       HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - ADDITIONAL COSTS

       I refer to your memorandum of 1st February 1991 on the above matter.

       I can now confirm that the accounts may be settled and will be financed as
       follows:-

       (a)       £10,000 - MMI excess - to be met from the Insurance Fund.

       (b)       £569.25 -   Keeble Hawsons - to be met from the Policy Miscellaneous Revenue
                 Budget.




PP;    City Treasurer
             G>Gl\




C.OO+Y^^cn                      Q ^
                     'Cj
                           -   fru <s>o-.
                          CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM

From      Assistant Head (Legal)             To
                                                   Finance Officer

Date      4 February   1991
Ref       AH/EB/GJ
Tel Ext   4019 - Mrs   Bashforth             Ref




HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - ADDITIONAL COSTS

I enclose a copy of my memorandum to|                (regarding the additional
costs in relation to Hillsborough of £10,569.25.

As you will see, it is my view that the costs should be borne corporately
rather than divided out between various departments.  I believe that
                              hare this view, hence the note at the bottom of
            1anc*
the memorandum.

I believe             will deal with the cheque for MMI and I have
requisitioned a cheque for Keeble H a w so n’s costs, for which I hope to receive
a code from

If you require anything further, please let me know.
     The City Solicitor and                                The City Treasurer
     Head of Administration                                For the attention of

     1st Fdaruary, 1991
     AH/EB
     4019 - Mrs. Bashforth




Hi 11sharouqh Disaster - Additional finshg

I refer to our conversation on 1st February, 1991 regarding additional costs
incurred relating to the Hillsborough Disaster.

UMI are seeking a payment of £10,000 in respect of the excess applicable to
our policy as a contribution towards legal fees incurred, currently over
£200,000. Keeble Hawsons, who act for MMI, also assisted the Council when
various Officers were interviewed by West Midlands Police for witness
statements. I have received notification of a bill of £569.25 (including
VAT).

The MMI letter has been passed to me by             with regard to payment.
Usually, in such cases, an excess would be recovered frcm the Department
concerned. I have given seme considerable thought to this issue and would
suggest that in the particular and exceptional circumstances of the
Hillsborough disaster it would not be appropriate to try and allocate
responsibility and that given the corporate nature of the issue that these
sums should be met corporately. All the costs incurred have been to protect
the Council's interests and to present the Council's case in the best way
possible.

The Director of Public Prosecutions has decided not to issue proceedings
against the Council and in the civil proceedings, the Council was not joined
in the third party proceedings and was therefore not party to the contribution
arrangements to the Police for the compensation paid to the injured and
bereaved.

The Inquest is still ongoing and legal fees continue to be incurred by MMI for
representation, as appropriate, to protect the Council's interests. This
matter should therefore be resolved as soon as possible.

Although obviously I am aware of the vulnerable areas for the Council and the
Taylor Report is critical of the Council I do not think it is appropriate far
the Council to present other than a united front and in these circumstances I
should be grateful if you could confirm that I can settle these accounts frcm
corporate funds.




            to   Vo                -%a   - £ 1 0 ,0 0 0   Uo   lU j r s c .       rw e




            tit u     lo   i-eJc
                                                                               A*.
                                                                                                       etsiA vo       y e'^u av^Zx*#-
                                                                                                        -f-c> (~yit— u ^ t/>r           e
                                                                                     &Stvis* 4V^-J          vt/tv-vv; V w ^-vw~ v s




                            MUNICIPAL MUTUAL                                                                          f r?
                                                                                                            X £-«*-->-V' f-vWyJi/f-eV HCc

                                                                                                                          TV'CU'X'f
       The City Treasurer                                                                  Our Ref : 03 89 21 73181 KGH/EJE
       Sheffield City Council                                                              Your R e f :
                                                                                           Tel Ext : 42
                                                                                           Date       : 14 December 1990




       For the attention of Mr
                                                                                                                               t'Vi,

       Dear Sir

       Hillsborough - 15             April 1989

       In this case we have to date spent over £200,000 in legal fees for
       representation of the Council and various Hearings that have taken place
       and we are continuing to incur further payments during the Inquests which
       are currently taking place.

       As you are aware, there is a £10,000 excess applicable                                        to this policy and
       it is appropriate at this stage that we ask you to let                                        us have a cheque
       in that amount in payment of that e x c e s s .

       Yours faithfully




       K G HOLMES      \
       Regional! Claims'Manager




        M unicipal M utual In su ran ce Limited, Park H ouse, 57-59 W ell Street, Bradford BD1 5SN
                          T elephone: (0274) 729446 • Fax No: (0274) 306478
                                                  R egional M anager: R. E. Laughton, FCII
         R egistered office: 22 Old Q ueen Street, W estm inster, L ondon SWIH 9HW Registered n u m b e r 76678 England
                    An a p p o in te d rep resen tativ e o f The P ro sp e rity G roup (M em ber o f IMRO and LAUTRO)


246)
                                                   M em ber of       ABI
                                                                 H E tS iJ J
                                          KEEBLE HAWSON
                                                         SOLICITORS
                                          Incorporating Branson Bramley & Co.

A. H. GREGORY        N. T. HAWSON
C. J. PRYCE          G. CONNELL
                                                                                         OLD CATHEDRAL VICARAGE.
A. J. COOMBE         C. M. M. AYRE
H. J. MOORFIELD      J.M .K ILN E R                                                               ST.JAMES’ ROW.

                                                                                                           SHEFFIELD.
Consultant;
A. H. CONNELL
                                                                                                                   S1 1XA.

           Mr M Webster                                                                  TELEPHONE 0742 - 722061
           City of Sheffield
              Metropolitan District Council                                              MDX NO. 10527

           Administration & Legal Department                                             FAX NO. 0742 - 700813
           Town Hall                                                                     FAX NO. 0742 - 750243
           SHEFFIELD
           S1 2HH
                                                                                          18th September                  1990
OUR REF;                               YOUR REF:                                         W HEN YOU TELEPHONE OR CALL PLEASE ASK FOR:



           AHG/TPJ                      AH/DG                                             MR GREGORY



           Dear Mark


           Hillsborough - West Midlands Police Investigation

            I enclose a note of my charges in connection with the
            criminal investigation relating to Hillsborough.

            Yours sincerely




            A H GREGORY




                           THE FIRM IS REGULATED BY THE LAW SOCIETY IN THE CONDUCT OF INVESTMENT BUSINESS
                                                                      SOLICITORS
    Cit,y of Sheffield                                    Incorporating Branson Bram ley & Co.
    Administration & Legal
        Department                                                                                 OLD CATHEDRAL VICARAGE,
    Town Hall                                                                                           c_ IA.,CC,
    SHEFFIELD                                         18th September              1990                    '
    S1 2HH                                                                                             SHEFFIELD,
                                                                                                                              S1 1XA.
    (A LIST OF PARTNERS' NAMES IS OPEN TO INSPECTION AT THE ABOVE ADDRESS)                              VAT No. 172 8 0 1 6 7 0




                                                                                                                              V .A .T.
TO PROFESSIONAL CHARGES RELATING TO                                                            COSTS            DISBS.                           V.A .T.
                                                                                                                              RATE

    Hillsborough - West Midlands Police
    Investigation.

    To advising you in this matter including
    attendances, discussions on the telephone
    and general care and conduct.                                                            495   00                         15 ‘          74        25




         WITH COMPLIMENTS


                                   ...Partner




    Payment is requested within one calendar month.
    After this period, interest is chargeable under the
    Solicitors’ Remuneration Order 1972 Article 5,
    Paragraph 1.
    Paragraph 1 of Article 3 of the Solicitors’
    Remuneration Order 1972 entitles you within one
    month to require us to obtain a certificate from the
       v Society and there are provisions in the                                            495    30                         15i           74        25
      .licitors Act 1974 relating to taxation of costs.


    TOTAL COSTS. DISBURSEMENTS AND V.A.T.
                                                                                                                                  569            .25


    REFERENCE          AHG/TP J/3 4 17 7                      TAX POINT & DATE:             18th September             1990
                        3970/31
KEEBLE HAWSON                                                                                  COSTS                          V.A.T.
                                                                                                              DISBS.                             V.A.T.
                                                                                                                              RATE

V A T No. 172 8 0 1 6 7 0   Bill N o : 009154


To Professional Charges re     Hillsborough - West Midlands
                               Police Investigation.                                        495    00                         15%           74        25




    City of Sheffield Administration & Legal                                                495    00                         I 3 '4     71 4A
                                                                              A dd DISBS
    Department,             Town Hall,           Sheffield,                   A dd V.A.T.     74   25
E    EXEMPT
N    OUTSIDE SCOPE OF V.A.T.                   S1 2HH                                       569    25
Z    ZERO
  AHG /TP J/ 34 177                                                                     Bill No:            009154
  397 0/31



IN ACCOUNT W ITH                                          KEEBLE HAWSON
                                                                    SOLICITORS
  City of Sheffield                                      Incorporating Branson Bramley & Co.
  Administration & Legal
     Department                                                                                OLD CATHEDRAL VICARAGE,
  Town Hall
                                                                                                      ST. JAMES’ ROW.
  SHEFFIELD                                          18th September         1990
  S1 2HH                                                                                                        SHEFFIELD,

                                                                                                                         S1 1XA.
   (A LIST OF PARTNERS' NAMES IS OPEN TO INSPECTION AT THE ABOVE ADDRESS)                           VAT No. 172 8 0 1 6 70




TO PROFESSIONAL CHARGES RELATING TO                                                      COSTS                           V .A .T .
                                                                                                            DISBS.                    V.A.T.
                                                                                                                         RATE

  Hillsborough - West Midlands Police
  Investigation.

  T -' advising you in this matter including
  attendances, discussions on the telephone
  and general care and conduct.                                                      495       00                            5%      74     25




        WITH COMPLIMENTS


                                     ..Partner




   Payment is requested within one calendar month.
   After this period, interest is chargeable under the
   Solicitors’ Remuneration Order 1972 Article 5,
   Paragraph 1.
   Paragraph 1 of Article 3 of the Solicitors’
   Remuneration Order 1972 entitles you within one
   month to require us to obtain a certificate from the
   Law Society and there are provisions in the                                       495       DO                            5%      74     25
   Solicitors Act 1974 relating to taxation of costs.


  TOTAL COSTS. DISBURSEMENTS AND V.A.T.
                                                                                                                  £          569          .25
                                                    KEEBLE HAWSON
                                                               SOLICITORS
                                                    Incorporating Branson Bram ley & Co.

A. H. G R E G O R Y   N.   T. H AWSO N
C. J. P R YC E        G.   C O N N EL L
                                                                                            OLD CATHEDRAL VICARAGE.
A.J. C O O M B E      C.   M. M. AYRE
J. M. K IL N E R      H.   J. M O O R F IE L D
D. A. D E E N E Y
                                                                                                    ST.JAMES’ ROW.

Consultant:
                                                                                                             SHEFFIELD,
A. H. CONNELL
                                                                                                                      SI 1XA.
Mrs. E. Bashforth                                                                           TELEPHONE 0742 - 722061

                                                                                            MDX NO. 10527
                                                                                            FAX NO. 0742 - 700813
                                                                                            FAX NO. 0742 - 750243



                                                                                            13th March 1991

OUR REF:                                         YOUR REF:                                  WHEN YOU TELEPHONE OR CALL PLEASE ASK FOR:


AAW/MRK                                                                                     Mr




Dear Liz,

Re : Hillsborough Inquest

 I enclose a copy of our Legal Submission prepared by Mr. Maxwell.

 I confirm I will hand a copy to Mark Webster today for his comments.

 Please can you telephone me this afternoon with any comments you may have.

 Yours sincerely,_____




 Enc




                             THE FIRM IS REGULATED BY THE LAW SOCIETY IN TH E CONDUCT OF INVESTMENT BUSINESS
1      9            9          1




  INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS
OF THE VICTIMS OF THE
  HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL
  STADIUM DISASTER ON THE
      15th APRIL 1989




SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF
SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL




Ref: AAW/MRK

Messrs. Keeble H a w s o n ,
Solicitors,
Old Cathedral Vicarage,
St. James' Row,
Sheffield.
SI 1XA.
jd


           INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE VI C T IMS OF THE

                HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL STADIUM DISASTER

                        ON THE 15th APRIL 1989



           SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL



     INTRODUCTION



     1.     These submissions relate only to the possibility

     of the Jury being directed to consider a verdict of

     unlawful killing.     The submissions below are developed

     both generally in order to make relevant submissions of

     law and specifically with a view to showing that

     Sheffield City Council and the Council's employees

     could not possibly be regarded as persons who

     unlawfully killed any of the deceased.       Sheffield City

     Council do not presume to enter the debate that will no

     doubt arise as to whether any othe'r person m i g h t ,or

     might not .possibly be regarded as one who unlawfully

     killed the deceased,    and so far as that issue goes         <1

     Sheffield City Council take up a neutral position.



      POSSIBLE BASIS FOR VERDI' CT OF UNLAWFUL KILLING



      2.    For the purposes of these Inquests a verdict of

      unlawful killing would be justified if the Jury were

      satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that some person or

      persons    (whom the Jury must under no account name or

      identify)    had brought about the death of the deceased,

      or some or any of them,as a result of committing the



                                  -1-
offence of manslaughter.       It would be improper to

direct the Jury to consider the possibility of a

verdict of unlawful killing based upon the offence of

murder having been committed ,as there is no evidence at

.all to show that any person caused the death of the

deceased through some unlawful act or that any person

intended to kill or to cause grievous bodily harm.

Neither the actus reus nor the mens rea of murder is

established on the evidence before this Jury.



 3.   If the Jury are to be directed to consider a

verdict of unlawful killing on the basis that any or

 some or all of the deceased died as a consequence of

 manslaughter then the Jury must be warned in terms that

 they are being directed to consider whether a criminal

 offence'manslaughter had been committed.           They must be

 given the appropriate direction as to the standard of

 proof for manslaughter^ and the appropriate direction is

 the simple one that they should be satisfied beyond all

 reasonable doubt o r , as sometimes said, satisfied so

 that they are sure that all the necessary elements of

 the offence are proved;and that the verdict of unlawful

 killing must not be returned unless they are satisfied

 beyond all reasonable doubt that such elements are

 proved.   When directions are given as to any other

 verdict that may be brought in, e.g.

 accident/misadventure or open,        it should be stressed

 that a different standard of proof applies viz, proof

 on a balance of p ro ba b i l i t i e s fwith an appropriate

 explanation of what that means and how that differs
from the criminal standard of p r o o f .



4.     So far as the offence of manslaughter goes there

is no question of any of the deceased having been

killed as a result of an unlawful act.           For these

purposes an unlawful act is one which is unlawful for

some reason other than the negligent manner of its

peformance.    The Jury should not (t h e re for etbe directed

to consider the possibility of any person having killed

the deceased or any of them as a result of an unlawful

act.    Involuntary manslaughter of that form could not

possibly form the basis for a verdict of unlawful

killing.



5.     The question is whether the Jury should be

directed to consider a verdict of unlawful killing

based upon reckless m a n s l a u g h t e r ,that is to say to

consider whether the Jury are satisfied beyond a

reasonable doubt that some person or persons            (whom they

must under no account name)          has brought about the death

of any or some or all of the deceased as a result of

recklessness.     It is not n e c e s s a r y }and it will be

unhelpful and confusing,to direct the Jury to consider

 "gross negligence manslaughter".



FIRST ELEMENT OF RECKLESS MANSLAUGHTER - CAUSATIVE

CONDUCT



 6.    If the Jury are to consider whether some specific

 individual committed the offence of reckless


                               -3-
manslaughter then the Jury have to consider firstly

whether that person by his conduct,i.e.     some act or

omission to act    (where there was a duty to act), was a

substantial cause of the death of any or some or all of

the deceased.     In order to prove causation the

following matters must be established:



     (i)          that but for the conduct of the person

                  under consideration the death of the

                  deceased would not have occurred.



     (ii)         that although the conduct of the person

                  under consideration need not be the sole

                  or the main cause of death it must be a

                  substantial cause.



      (iii)       that where the conduct of the person

                  under consideration was performed prior

                  to the 15th April 1989 then a subsequent

                  and intervening act which causes death

                  breaks the chain of causation if that

                  intervening act is not foreseeable;     and

                  that this means that such prior conduct

                  is n o t ,in law,to be regarded as a

                  substantial cause of such subsequent

                  event.   This is consistent with the

                  Jury's function of establishing how the

                  deceased came by his death since the

                   Jury are there concerned to find out

                   what circumstances are directly


                               -4-
                   responsible for the death of the

                   deceased.     Such an intervening and

                   unforeseeable act prevents any prior

                   circumstances by way of earlier acts or

                   o m i s s i o n s (from being directly

                   responsible for subsequent death.



    (b)   It is submitted on behalf of Sheffield City

    Council that no reasonable Jury properly directed could

    possibly conclude:



          (i)      That but for the conduct of the

                   Sheffield City Council)or any of its

                   e m p l o y e e s ,the deaths would not have

                   occurred.



          (ii)     That any conduct of the Sheffield City
                                                                       be...     * 4 * ^
                   Council was a substantial cause of                    U      SCC. cr

                   death.                                             Cbv,j,A    ^

O
          (iii)    That the events occurring at the ground

                   on the 15th April 1989 from 2.30 p.m.

                   onwards were foreseeable. The events

                   referred to are the sudden introduction

                   of a large number of fans en masse into

                   an area of the terraces which was
                                                                  acoa^v<2_-er       ^
                   already crowded and full.          On the

                   contrary^ no reasonable Jury properly

                   directed could find that such events

                   were foreseeable by Sheffield City



                               -5-
               Council or that any chain of causation

               which might otherwise have been

               established by any prior conduct on the

               part of Sheffield City Council was other

                than broken.



(c)   Accordingly as a matter of law the Jury should not

be directed to consider the conduct of Sheffield City

Council or any of its employees in the context of any

verdict of unlawful killing based upon involuntary

reckless manslaughter.



(d)   If the submission at     (c) is re jec te d,then the Jury

must be properly directed to consider the issue of

causation in the specific context of the conduct of

Sheffield City Council and be given full instructions

to the relevant criteria to be applied i.e. as per         (b)

above rbut amplified as necessary.



SECOND ELEMENT OF RECKLESS MANSLAUGHTER - MENTAL

ELEMENT



7.    The second matter to be considered is the mental

element involved in reckless manslaughter.         So far as

this mental element is concerned the appropriate

direction is that known as the Lawrence Direction which

is to be found in the following passage of the speech

of Lord Diplock in Reg -v- Lawrence 1982 A .C. 510 at

 526 E to 527 B as follows:
"Recklessness on the part of the doer of an act

does presuppose that there is something' in the

circumstances that would have drawn the attention

of an ordinary prudent individual to the

possibility that his act was capable of causing

the kind of serious harmful consequences that the

section which creates the offence was intended to

p r e v e n t , and that the risk of those harmful

consequences occurring was not so slight that an

ordinary prudent individual would feel justified

in treating them as negligible.        It is only when

this is so that the doer of the act is acting

"recklessly"   if before doing the act, he either

fails to give any thought to the possibility of

there being any such risk or, having recognised

that there was such risk,      he nevertheless goes on

to do i t .



In my view,    an appropriate instruction to the jury

on what is meant by driving recklessly would be

 that they must be satisfied of two things:



 First, that the defendant was in fact driving the

 vehicle in such a manner as to create an obvious

 and serious risk of causing physical injury to

 some other person who might happen to be using the

 road or of doing substantial damage to property;

 and



 Second,   that in driving in that manner the


                        -7-
       defendant did so without having given any thought

       to the possibility of there being any such risk

       or, having recognised that there was some risk

       involved, had nonetheless gone on to take it.



        It is for the jury to decide whether the risk

       created by the manner in deciding t h i s , they may

        apply the standard of the ordinary prudent

       motorist as represented by themselves.



        If satisfied that an obvious and serious risk was

        created by the manner of the defendant's driving,

        the jury are entitled to infer that he was in one

        or other of the states of mind required to

        constitute the offence and will probably do so;

        but regard must be given to any explanation he

        gives as to his state of mind which may displace

        the inference."



        A practical application of the Lawrence direction

can be seen in action in Reg -v- Seymour 19 8 3 2 A.C.

493.     The importance of this decision is that Lord

Diplock was a member of the Court and he (and all of

their Lordships)    agreed with the speech of Lord

Roskill.     In the speech of Lord Roskill at page 504 C

to 504 G appears the following:-



    "   The learned judge rejected the submission and gave

        the "Lawrence direction"   subject only to the

        omission of any reference to the "obvious and
serious risk....of doing substantial damage to

property"     see Reg. v. Lawrence     (Stephen)   [1982]

A.C.   510,   526.   In my view, he was entirely right

not to refer to damage to property,          a reference to

which was irrelevant in this case and might well

have confused the jury.         His admirably clear

direction not only properly reflected the decision

of this House in Lawrence but also Lord Atkin's

speech in Andrews       [1937] A.C.   576.   I quote the

relevant passages:



       The second question you have to decide; was

       the driving that caused those injuries

       reckless?      If so, then it is manslaughter.

       If you are not satisfied that it was

       reckless,     then the verdict is not guilty.        To

       amount to reckless driving mere negligence is

       not enough.      His conduct must go beyond the

       question of compensation between citizens and

       amount to, in your view,       criminal conduct

       requiring punishment.       You have to be

       satisfied upon the question of recklessness

       that he drove in such a manner as to create

       an obvious and serious risk of causing

       physical harm to some other person who might

       happen to be using the road at the

       time....Once you are satisfied that the

       matter of his driving was such as to create

       an obvious and serious risk of causing

       physical harm to a person using the road at



                          -9-
            the time, you also have to be satisfied that

            driving in that manner he did so without

            having given any thought to the possibility

            of there being any such risk,        or

            alternatively,       having recognised that there

            was some risk involved,        nonetheless went on

            to take it; in other words, he was reckless.

            He reckoned not of the consequences.



            "In determining the quality of his driving,

            you apply the standards of the ordinary

            reasonable motorist.         You, of course, take

            into account all the evidence including his

            explan at ion         ""



     A suggested d i r e c t i o n :-



     The passage last quot'ed can be adapted as
                                                                 or-
appropriate to the context o f ’,any specific individual

whose conduct the Jury are directed to consider for the

purposes of deciding whether that person committed

reckless manslaughter.         The passage quoted from Lord

Roskill's speech presupposes that the Jury have

concluded that the issue of causation is proved.           The

adapfetion of this passage of the speech might be on the

following lines:



     "If you are satisfied so as to be sure that the

     first question is proved that is to say that the

     act of X was a substantial cause of the death of



                                -1 0 -
any of the deceased then the second question you

have to decide is was the act that caused those

deaths reckless?             If so then it is manslaughter.

If you are not satisfied that it was reckless then

a verdict of unlawful killing is not open to you.

To amount to a reckless act mere negligence is not

enough.       His conduct must go beyond the question

of compensation between citizens and amount to, in

your view,       criminal conduct requiring punishment.

You have to be satisfied upon the question of

recklessness that he acted in such a manner as to

create an obvious and serious risk of causing

physical harm to some other person who might

happen to be using the terraces at the time.              Once

you are satisfied that his act was such as to

create an obvious and serious risk of causing

physical harm to a person using the terraces at

 the time you also have to be satisfied that acting

 in that manner he did so without having given any

 thought to the possibility of there being any such

 risk, or alternatively having recognised that

 there was some risk involved nonetheless went on

 to take it; in other words he was reckless.             He

 reckoned not of the consequences.             In determining

 the quality of his act you apply the standards of

 the ordinary reasonable person who happened to be

 in the same circumstances as X.             You of course

 take into account all the evidence including his

 ex pl a n a t i o n . .."



                                -11-
    Lord Roskill added at 508C that it is appropriate

also to point out that in order to constitute the

offence of manslaughter iV>e. risk of death being caused

must be very highland such a remark should be made to

the Jury here.    Lord Roskill said:



     I would therefore answer the certified question as

     follows:    "Where manslaughter is charged and the

     circumstances are that the victim was killed as a

     result of the reckless driving of the defendant on

     a public highway,    the trial judge should give the

     jury the direction suggested in Reg v. Lawrence

     but it is appropriate also to point out that in

     order to constitute the offence of manslaughter

     the risk of death being caused by the manner of

     the defendant's driving must be very high."



     In deciding whether or not a risk was obvious the

Jury should have regard to whether the risk would have

been obvious to an ordinary prudent individual in the

relevant circumstances.     The Jury should be told that

they may take account of what any witness has told them

was obvious or not to that witness asa risk.       The

witnesses/ perception of the risk can provide an

indication of whether or not the risk was obvious to an

ordinary prudent p e r s o n }and especially so if the Jury

conclude that the witness in question was such an

ordinary prudent person.     For this purpose   'witness'

includes a person whose conduct has been called into

question at the Inquest and Lord Roskill made it clear



                            -12-
that a Jury can take into account an explanation given

by such a person.



      It is important to stress to the Jury that a

failure to appreciate that there was such a risk would

not by itself be sufficient to amount to recklessness -

see Reg -v- West London Coroner ex parte Gray 1988 1

Q.B. page 477 B per Watkins L.J.:-



      "He deliberately chose to run the risk by doing

      nothing about it. ' It should be emphasised,

      however,   that a failure to appreciate that there

      was such a risk would not by itself be sufficient

      to amount to recklessness.



FURTHER RELEVANT M A T T E R S :



(i) PRIMA FACIE CASE



8.    The Jury should only be directed to consider a

verdict of unlawful killing based upon reckless

manslaughter if the Coroner concludes as a matter of

law that there is a prima facie case,that is to say a

case fit to be left to the Jury where the Coroner

c o n c l u d e s (as a matter of law,that a reasonable Jury

properly directed might bring in such a verdict.           If

the Coroner concludes as a matter of law that there is

no such case fit to be left to the Jury then the

Coroner must direct the Jury not to consider that

verdict^that is he must withdraw the verdict from them.



                               -13-
(ii) INDIVIDUAL CONSIDERATION - THE DECEASED



9.   The death of each deceased must be considered

individually.   Before the Jury may be invited to

consider a verdict of unlawful killing in respect of

any of the deceased the Coroner must direct himself as

to whether or not there is a prima facie case so far as

that individual deceased is concerned.



     A verdict in the case of each deceased is required

and if unlawful killing is to be left to the Jury it

must be considered    by the Jury    in relation        to each of

the deceased.   The   Jury should     be directed       that if

having considered the circumstances of death affecting

each of the individual deceased /they are satisfied

beyond reasonable doubt that some or all of them may be

considered as a group of persons whose death was caused

as a result of reckless manslaughter committed by some

specific individual or individuals    (who must under no

account be named or identified); then similar verdicts

may be returned in    the case of each member of such

group.   There will   therefore be 95 verdicts but some or

all may be in similar terms.



     However,   the Jury must be directed that it is

improper to consider unlawful killing in relation to

the 95 deceased as a whole or to any group of the

deceased vyithout first considering the individual

circumstances of the death of each particular deceased.

The Jury must be warned that no short cut is available


                           -14-
to them permittidj them to consider the circumstances of

death of the 95 deceased as a whole,or        of any group of

the deceasediunless       some cause is shown why they should

                That would reverse the order in which

relevant consideration should be dealt with. They are

concerned with the Inquests relating to the deaths of

the victims of the Hillsborough Football Stadium

Disaster.   There is no presumption that a verdict in

common form is applicable to the 95 deceased persons.

Only after a careful consideration of each individual

case can the Jury establish what verdict is

ap propriate.



(i i i ) NO AGGREGATION



10.   The Jury must be directed that they can return a

verdict of unlawful killing only if they can attribute

the ingredients of the relevant offence,       reckless

manslaughter,    to some individual person or persons whom

they should on no account name or otherwise identify:

Reg -v- West London Coroner ex parte Gray 1988 1 Q.B.

at page 477 B .    In this context the Jury should

consider the position of each single person who may be

a candidate taking each such person in turn and coming

to a conclusion.



      In this context the Jury must be warned that

whatever person is being considered       (and be that person

a corporation or a natural human being) the ingredients

of manslaughter must be established by proving the



                              -15-
             (aa&kKxI         CcritoiA&J-
necessary mens rea^and actus reus^of manslaughter

against it or him by evidence properly to be relied on

against it or him and a case against any person cannot

be fortified by evidence against another person.           No

aggregation of criminal culpability is permitted.



(iv)   ORDER OF PRIORITY IN CONSIDERING VERDICT



11.    If unlawful killing is to be left to the Jury as a

possible verdict then the Coroner should indicate to

the Jury that they must deal with that issue first; and

that they should approach,      therefore,   initially the

question whether or not they are satisfied so that they

are sure beyond a reasonable doubt that the verdict of

unlawful killing may be returned in respect of any or

some or all of the deceased.        If they conclude that

unlawful killing is not an appropriate verdict, or are

not sure that it is an appropriate verdict,        in the case

of any or some or all of the deceased then        they should

go on to consider other possible verdicts,        i.e.

accident/misadventure or open verdict.         Support for

this is to be found in R. -v- Wolverhampton Coroner ex

parte McCurbin 1990 1 WLR 719 at 728 B - D :



       "It is true that,    in many cases where   it is open

       to a coroner's    jury to find a verdict of unlawful

       killing,    they may also have to consider the

       question of death by misadventure.       However,   in my

       view, this does not and should not give rise to

       problems.     The coroner should indicate to the jury



                             -16-
      that they should approach,     initially, the question

      as to whether or not they are satisfied so that

      they are sure that this is unlawful killing.        If

      they come to the conclusion that it is not

      unlawful killing,     they are not satisfied so that

      they are sure that that verdict is appropriate,

      then they will consider the question of

      misadventure and,     in so doing,   they do not need to

      bear in mind the heavy standard of proof which is

      required for unlawful killing.        They can approach

      the matter on the basis of the balance of

      probabilities.   The situation is that,      just as it

      is important that a jury should not bring in a

      verdict of suicide unless they are sure, likewise

      they should not bring in a verdict of unlawful

      killing unless they are sure."



SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL



12.   The Jury have heard a variety of criticisms of

different persons and such criticisms have been voiced

wholly or mainly in cross-examination.         Representation

of certain persons whose conduct was likely to be

called into question has been permitted.         One of those

persons,   legal persons,    is the Sheffield City Council.



      In the case of any such person whose conduct has

been called into question then^ unless a reasonable Jury

properly directed could conclude that such person

committed the offence of manslaughter against any or



                             -17-
all or some of the deceased ,•      the Jury must be

directed in terms either   (1) to exclude that person

from their consideration of the issue whether or not

they are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the

verdict of unlawful killing is appropriate or    (2) to

consider such a verdict only in the case of some other

person or persons   (who should be named in the direction

but not of course in the verdict)    and not to consider

such a verdict in the case of any other person.



     The reasons for discriminating in this way are:-



     (a)       For reasons of justice and humanity

               there should be no question of any risk

               arising that a verdict of unlawful

               killing, where the Jury are forbidden to

                name any culprit, might be understood in

                the context of the evidence to refer to

                one or more of those persons whose

                conduct was called into question at the

                Inquest,but in respect of whom no

                reasonable Jury properly directed could

                conclude that such person had committed

                the offence of manslaughter.     Such a

                risk does arise where there have been

                criticisms of and suggestions,    express

                or implied,   of negligence against a

                variety of persons*and all the more so

                where the verdict of unlawful killing

                involves a finding of recklessness which



                           -18-
                 the Jury and the public may be at risk

                 of confusing with negligence.        There

                 must be no risk fof ,’
                                      ithose who are

                 innocent        of criminal culpability being

                 caught up with any whom the Jury may

                 regard as criminally responsible.



      (b)        The converse to (a) is also true,namely

                 that in the case of a person whose

                 conduct the Jury are rightly

                 scrutinising to see whether they are

                 satisfied so as to be sure that such

                 conduct is criminal^ any allegations

                 against or criticism of any other person

                 might give rise to prejudice.        Such a

                 risk does arise where the Jury may be

                 tempted to aggregate fault.



      (c)        Without discrimination and exclusion of

                 persons who ought not to be regarded as

                 candidates in terms of criminal

                 culpability there is a risk that the

                 Jury may be confused by an unnecessarily

                 and erroneously wide choice of

                 c a n d id a te s .



13.   No reasonable Jury properly directed could find

that Sheffield    City Council or any employee or agent        of

Sheffield   City Council whether it be Mr. Butler or Mr.

Bownes or anyone else employed by Sheffield City



                                 -19-
    Council has or have committed any offence of
                   1

    manslaughter.       The Jury should be directed accordingly,

    with an instruction that as a matter of law there is no

    evidence on which the Jury could find that any of those

    persons committed any such offence.         The Jury should be

    told in terms that quite apart from the difficulties

    relating to the issue of causation         (as Paragraph 6

    a b o v e ):



             (i)        There is no evidence on which      _^Jury

                        could find that any of such persons

                        acted in a manner so as to create an

                        obvious and serious risk of causing

                        physical injury to any football fan or

                        fans.



             (ii)       There is no evidence on which any

                        reasonable Jury could find that any of

(                       such persons acted recklesslyJhaving

                        regard to the definition of such term as

                        above.



             (i i i )   Specifically in the case of Sheffield

                        City Council no verdict of corporate

                        manslaughter could possibly be

                        established here; and any verdict that

                        Sheffield City Council committed the

                        offence of manslaughter would be

                        unreasonable and improper.     No further

                        direction is needed,    but if it was



                                  -20-
                thought desirable to amplify such

                direction then the appropriate

                indication would be that for a

                corporation to be criminally liable for

                manslaughter then it is required that

                the mens rea (alternatively the mental

                element of recklessness)and the actus

                reus (alternatively the conduct

                complained of)comprised in the alleged

                offence of manslaughter should be

                established not against those who acted

                for or in the name of the corporation

                but against those who were to be

                identified as the embodiment of the

                corporation itself.    Neither Mr. Bownes

                nor Mr. Butler nor anyone else referred

                to at the Inquest could properly be

                regarded as the embodiment of the

                Council. No sustainable case in

                manslaughter arises here against

                Sheffield City Council.     See for example

                R. -v- H.M. Coroner for East Kent ex

                parte Spooner 1989 88 C r . A p p . R. page

                10 at page 16-17.




NOTE:(i)   Copies of cases referred to above are annexed

for ease of reference,   to the copy of these submissions



                           -21-
filed with the Coroner's Court.        The cases are



        Reg -v- Lawrence 1982 AC 510



        Reg -v- Seymour 1983 2 AC 493



        Reg -v- West London Coroner ex p. Gray 1988 1 Q-B.

        467



        Reg —v~ Wolverhampton Coroner ex p. McCurbin 19 9 0

        1 WLR 718



        Reg -v- H.M. Coroner for East Kent ex p.       Spooner

        (1989)   88 Cr. A p p . R.10



 (ii)   The evidence of Mr. Arthur Butler for Sheffield

City Council was given on Days 36 and 37 (23.1.91 and

24.1.91)



 ^      )Tins evidence of Mr. David Bownes for Sheffield

 City Council was given on Days 37 and 38 (24.1.91 and

 25.1.91)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           511
                                                                                                                                   [1982]                                      Reg- v- Lawrence (H.L.(E.))
                                                                                                                                                      apply the s       .rd of the ordinary prudent motorist repre­
                                                     [h o u se o f lo r d s ]                             'w      '                             A     sented by W n selv es; th at if satisfied that an obvious and
                                                                                                                                                      serious risk was created by the m anner of the defendant s
                                                                                                                                                      driving, the jury were entitled to infer that he was in one
R E G I N A ...................................................................................................... A p p e l l a n t                  or other of the states of mind required to constitute the
                                                                  and                                                                                 offence, but that regard had to be given to any explanation
                                                                                                                                                      he gave as to his state of mind which might displace the
L A W R E N C E ( S T E P H E N ) .................. R e s p o n d e n t                                                                              inference (post, pp. 5 1 6 f-g , 527a- b , h , 528a-c),
                                                                                                                                                          (3)     T hat since the direction given to the jury Stated the
1981       Feb. 5, 9;                                           Lord Hailsham of St. Marylebone L.C.,                                           ®     law too unfavourably to the defendant and was also some­
           M arch 19                                          Lord Diplock, Lord Fraser of Tullybelton,                                               what confused the appeal would be dismissed (post, pp. 516f - g ,
                                                              Lord Roskill and Lord Bridge of Harwich                                                 527g,   h,   528a, C).
                                                                                                                                                         Reg. v. Caldwell [1982] A.C. 341, H.L.(E.) and Allan v.
                    Road Traffic— Reckless driving— Ingredients of offence— Direction                                                                 Patterson [1980] R.T.R. 97 considered.
                       to jury— Road Traffic A c t 1972 (c. 20), s. 1 (as amended by                                                                     Reg. v. Murphy (William) [1980] Q.B. 434, C.A. overruled.
                       Criminal Law A c t 1977 (c. 45), s. 50 (1))                                                                                       Decision of the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) [1980]
                                                                                                                                                C     R.T.R. 443 affirmed.
                                Section 1 of the Road Traffic Act 1972 (as substituted by
                            section 50 (1) of the Criminal Law Act 1977) provides:                                                                    The following cases are referred to in their Lordships’ opinions:
                                  “ A person who causes the death of another person by
                                  driving a m otor vehicle on a road recklessly shall be                                                              Allan v. Patterson [1980] R.T.R . 97.
                                  guilty of an offence.”                                                                                              Reg. v. C a l d w e l l [1982] A.C. 341; [1981] 2 W.L.R. 509; [1981] 1 All
                                The defendant while driving a motor cycle along an urban                                                                  E.R. 961, H.L.(E.).
                            street after nightfall collided with and killed a pedestrian. He                                                          Reg. v. Evans [1963] 1 Q.B. 412; [1962] 3 W.L.R. 1457; [1962] 3 All
                            was tried upon indictment for the offence of causing her                                                        D             E.R. 1086, C.C.A.
                            death by driving a m otor vehicle on a road recklessly, contrary
                            to section 1 of the Road Traffic Act 1972, as amended. The                                                                Reg. v. M urphy (William) [1980] Q.B. 434; [1980] 2 W.L.R. 743; [1980]
                            jury were directed that a driver was guilty of driving reck­                                                                  2 All E.R. 325, C.A.
                            lessly if he deliberately disregarded the obligation to drive                                                             Reg. v. Sheppard [1981] A.C. 394; [1980] 3 W.L.R. 960; [1980] 3 All
                           with due care and attention or was indifferent whether or not                                                                  E.R. 899, H.L.(E.).
                            he_ did so and thereby created a risk of an accident which a                                                              Reg. v. Stephenson [1979] Q.B. 695; [1979] 3 W.L.R. 193; [1979] 2
                           driver driving with due care and attention would not create.
                           A fter retiring for more than three hours the jury requested                                                     B              All E.R. 1198, C.A.
                           further guidance on the definition of reckless driving. They
                           were further directed th at whether a driver achieved the                                                                   The following additional cases were cited in argument:
                            standard of driving which a prudent or careful driver would,                                                               Andrews v. Director of Public Prosecutions [1937] A.C. 576; [1937] 2
                           itself, was a question for the jury and they had to bear in
                                                                                                                                                           All E.R. 552, H.L.(E.).
                           mind all the circumstances, particularly the risk of accident,
                           the m anner in which the defendant’s vehicle was driven and                                                                 Dunn v. H.M. Advocate, 1960 J.C. 55.
                           the road conditions. The jury convicted the defendant by a                                                                  LedererV. Hitchins [1961] W.A.R. 99.
                           majority.                                                                                                        F          M.F.I. Warehouses Ltd. v. Nattrass [1973] 1 W .L.R. 307; [1973] 1 All
                                Op appeal by the defendant, the Court of Appeal (Criminal                                                                  E.R. 762, D.C.
                          Division) allowed the appeal and set aside the verdict on the                                                                Reg. v. Clancy [1979] R.T.R. 312, C.A.
                          ground that both directions to the jury left so much unclear                                                                 Reg. v. Davis (William) [1979] R.T.R. 316, C.A.
                          as to render the verdict unsafe and unsatisfactory.
                               On appeal by the Crown: —                                                                                               Reg. v. Faulkner (1877) 13 Cox C.C. 550.
                               Held, (1) th at an appropriate direction to a jury on what                                                              Reg. v. Grunwald [1963] 1 Q.B. 935; [1961] 2 W.L.R. 606; [1960] 3
                          was meant by driving recklessly was that they had to be                                                           ^              All E.R. 380.
                          satisfied (a) th at the defendant was in fact driving the vehicle                                                            Reg. v. M owatt [1968] 1 Q.B. 421; [1967] 3 W .L.R. 1192; [1967] 3
                          in such a m anner as to create an obvious and serious risk of                                                                     All E.R. 47, C.A.
                          causing physical injury to some other person who might                                                                       R ex v. Stringer [1933] 1 K.B. 704, C.A.
                          happen to be using the road or of doing substantial damage
                          to property;_ and (b) that in driving in that manner the                                                                     Troughton V. Manning (1905) 92 L.T. 855, D.C.
                          defendant did so without having given any thought to the
                         possibility of there being any such risk or, having recognised                                                                A ppea l fro m the C ourt of A ppeal (C rim inal Division).
                         that there was some risk involved, had nonetheless gone on to «                                                               This was an appeal by leave of the House of Lords of theappellant,
                         take it (post, pp. 5 1 6 f-g , 526h — 527a, h , 528a, c ).                                                                 the Chief Constable of Suffolk on behalf of the Crown, from a judg­
                            (2)      That it was for the jury to decide whether the risk
                         created by the m anner in which the vehicle was being driven                                                               ment dated May 20, 1980, of the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division)
                         was both obvious and serious and, in deciding that, they might                                                             (Watkins L.J., Boreham and Hodgson JJ.) allowing an appeal by the
512                                                                                                                                                                       513
                                                                                                A.C.                      Reg. v. Lawrence (H.L.(E.))
                            Reg. v. Lawrencc (H.L.(E.))              ...        [1982]
                                                                                                considerable dii, alties in relation to the question of foresight. The above
respondent, Stephen Richard Lawrence, against his conviction on March
                                                                                             A- isa proper direction on the facts of thepresent case.
 18, 1980, at Ipswich Crown Court (deputy circuit judge Malcolm Weisman) A
on an indictment charging him with causing death by reckless driving,                                 It is helpful to approach the issues historically. The first statutory
contrary to section 1 of the Road Traffic Act 1972 as substituted by                             provision is to be found in section 1 (1) of the Motor Car Act 1903, where
section 50 (1) of the Criminal Law Act 1977. The respondent was                                  so far as the gravity of the offence was concerned no distinction was drawn
                                                                                                 between driving “ recklessly,” or “ negligently ” or “ in a dangerous
sentenced to six months’ imprisonment and disqualified for three years.
                                                                                                 manner.” It appears that the only reported decision on this section is
    On Good Friday, April 13, 1979, the respondent whilst driving a                          B Troughton v. Matining (1905) 92 L.T. 855. The Road Traffic Act 1930
motor cycle along an urban street in Lowestoft after nightfall collided B                        repealed in toto the Act of 1903. Section 11 (1) of the Act of 1930 was in
with and killed a pedestrian: subsequently he was charged with causing                           similar terms to section 1 (1) of the earlier Act save that the later provision
death by reckless driving contrary to section 1 of the Road Traffic Act                          did not contain the word “ negligently.” In Rex v. Stringer [1933] 1 K.B.
1972, as amended. The deputy circuit judge in his summing up to the                              704 the Court of Criminal Appeal upheld a conviction for dangerous driv­
jury defined recklessness in the following terms: “. . . 4recklessness ’                         ing though on the same facts the accused had been acquitted by the same
requires foresight of the possible consequence coupled with an unreason­                         jury on a charge of manslaughter. That decision did not concern itselfwith
able willingness to risk them. If I can elaborate that slightly, a driver                     c the question in what respect the mens rea required to establish a charge of
is guilty of driving recklessly if he deliberately disregards an obligation to                   dangerous driving differs from that required in manslaughter. The effect of
drive with due care and attention or is indifferent as to whether or not                          the decision was modified by section 34 of the Road Traffic Act 1934 which
he does so and thereby creates a risk of an accident which a person                               provided that on an indictment formanslaughter a jury may find an accused
driving with care and attention would not create.” After retiring for                             guilty of dangerous driving. Andrews v. Director of Public Prosecutions
more than three hours the jury requested further guidance on the                                  [1937] A.C. 576, is an important case. It is authority for the following
definition of reckless driving. The deputy circuit judge repeated the                         D propositions: Proof of dangerous driving where death results is not of
direction he had previously given and added: “ Whether a driver achieves D                        itself sufficient to prove manslaughter. Death caused by reckless driving
this standard of driving which a prudent or careful driver would, itself,                         may well amount to manslaughter. Death caused by a person driving in a
is a question for you, and when you consider that, members of the jury,                           manner dangerous to the public may or may not amount to manslaughter.
you have to bear in mind all the circumstances, particularly the risk of                          The recklessness with which the court is concerned is as to consequences.
accident, the manner in which . . . the motor cycle was driven, and the                           Lederer v. Hitchins [1961] W.A.R. 99, shows the difficulty of any conse­
road conditions.” The respondent was convicted by a majority of 11 to 1.                          quence test.
    On appeal by the respondent, the Court of Appeal allowed the appeal E                     E        Section 8 of the Road Traffic Act 1956 created the offence of causing
                                                                                                  death by reckless or dangerous driving. The language used to describe the
on the ground that both directions left so much unclear as to render the
                                                                                                  manner of driving involved in this offence is that of section 11 (1) of the
jury’s verdict unsafe and unsatisfactory.
                                                                                                  Act of 1930. Section 8 was re-enacted in section 1 of the Act of 1972 which
    The court certified that the following points of law of general public
                                                                                                  in turn was replaced and its language modified by section 50 (1) of the
importance were involved in its decision, namely: “ 1. Is mens rea involved
                                                                                                  Criminal Law Act 1977 for the reference to driving at a speed or in a
in the offence of driving recklessly? 2. If yes, what is the mental element
                                                                                               F manner dangerous to the public was omitted. This new provision followed
required? 3. Is the following on a charge of driving recklessly a proper F
                                                                                                  on the publication of the Report of the Interdepartmental Committee on
direction? ‘A driver is guilty of driving recklessly if he deliberately dis­                     the Distribution of Criminal Business between the Crown Court and
regards the obligation to drive with due care and attention or is indifferent
                                                                                                 Magistrates’ Courts {the James Report) (1975) (Cmnd. 6323).
as to whether or not he does so and thereby creates a risk of an accident
                                                                                                   The approach taken by the Scottish courts in considering the above
which a driver driving with due care and attention would not create.’”
                                                                                                offences is significantly different. Scotland is one of the few jurisdictions
    The facts are set out in the opinions of the Lord Chancellor and Lord
                                                                                             G where the word “ reckless” has been defined purely objectively. No
Diplock.                                                                       G                reliance is placed on Allan v. Patterson [1980] R.T.R. 97 for it flies in
                                                                                                the face of the English authorities over many years. In Scots law there
   David Penry-Davey and Ian Croxford for the Crown. The answers to the
                                                                                                had always been the dividing line between culpable homicide on the one
questions certified by the Court of Appeal should be as follows: 1. Yes.                        hand and reckless and dangerous driving on the other: see, for example,
2. The required mental element is knowledge in the driver that he is not
                                                                                                Du nn v. H.M. Advocate, 1960 J.C. 55, which shows that itwas common in
driving with due care and attention or indifference as to whether he does                    pj Scotland to charge reckless and dangerous driving in the same count of the
so or riot. 3. The direction is correct save in so far as it requires a risk of jj
                                                                                                indictment. Accordingly, when one limb of the offence, namely, driving
accident. That isunnecessary. The direction is a proper direction in relation
                                                                                                in a manner dangerous to the public, disappeared under the Act of 1977,
to sections 1 and 2 of the Road Traffic Act 1972 (as amended). The
                                                                                                the Scots courts took the view that the two expressions must have had the
approach is a very simple approach of great u ^ _ J o J ^ r ig s _ jO T jt_ a y o id s _ _
                                                                                                                                                                  515
514                                                          —
                         Reg. v. Lawrence (H.L.(E.))                  [1982]           A.C.                      Reg. v. Lawrence (H.L.(E.))

same connotation. This it is suggested is the reason fc iie approach                    injury to persoi_6r the property of others, beyond the level normally
adopted by the Court of Justiciary in Allan v. Patterson. If a higher ^             A acceptable on the roads or was he heedless of that risk?
degree of risk has to be shown for driving recklessly than for driving in a                  In respect of xeckless driving one is already in a risk situation because
manner dangerous to the public it leads to questions of the degree of risk              a person by taking his car on the road is in a risk situation whilst in rela­
and the degree of the lack of appreciation of that risk.The Crown’stest that            tion to other property this situation does not exist ab initio. It is not dis­
a driver is guilty of driving recklessly if he deliberately disregards the              puted that there are dangers in giving an all-embracing definition. As to the
obligation to drive with due care and attention or is indifferent as to                 nature of a direction to the jury, see Reg. v. Mowatt [1968] 1 Q.B. 421,
whether or not he does so, obviates the above difficulties.                    B    B 426, 427, per Diplock L.J. There are two elements to be taken into con­
     In the criminal law there are three basic categories of recklessness:              sideration: the act and the state of mind of the defendant: Reg. v.
(a) Recklessness as to circumstance (“conduct crimes ”). (b) Recklessness               Faulkner (1877) 13 Cox.C.C. 550.
as to consequences (“ result crimes ”) and (c) Recklessness as defined by                     “ Recklessness ” has been given a subjective meaning by some judges
statute in relation to a particular situation. Under section 50 (1) of the               and an objective meaning by others. This shows that in some cases it is
Criminal Law Act 1977 it is the nature of the driving which isthe circum­                necessary to give the jury guidance as to the meaning of the word. As
stance, and not the consequence of the driving, to which recklessness                    Glanville Williams’ Textbook of Criminal L a w (1978), p. 70, states
relates. Reg. v. Grunwald [1963] 1 Q.B. 935 is an illustration of a case of              “ ‘Recklessness ’ is a more emphatic word of condemnation, and on the
recklessness as to circumstance. As to an example of category (b), see Reg.              subjective view it has kept its literal meaning, as the conscious (and
v. Stephenson [1979] Q.B. 695 for on the language of the statute in ques­                unreasonable) running of risk, whereas on the objective view it merely
tion in that case recklessness is confined to the consequence. Contrast the              means a heightened degree of negligence.”
language of section 1 of the Road Traffic Act 1972 with that of section                        As to the suggested direction put forward by the respondent, in seeking
1 (1) of the Criminal Damage Act 1971 which was the subject of Reg. v.                    to look at the actus reus itis necessary to define the potential adverse con-
Stephenson. That decision shows that there can be different definitions of D         ® sequences since (a) the recklessness has to lead to death or (b), injury or
“ recklessness ” according to the context in which the expression is to be                physical danger to other persons, or (c) damage to property excluding
found. As to category (c), M.F.l. Warehouses Ltd. v. Nattrass [1973] 1                    that which is de minimis. As to the act which leads or may lead to the
W.L.R. 307 is authority for the proposition that a statement made without                 potential adverse consequences, in the definition there is imported the
regard to its truth or falsity is made “ recklessly ” within the meaning of
section 14 (1) of the Trade Descriptions Act 1968.                                        concept of risk.                                                           .
                                                                                               The concept of recklessness has been developed and the word is a
     It is the Crown’s contention that the judgment of Eveleigh L.J. in Reg.
v. William Murphy [1980] Q.B. 434, 440, is correct. As to the direction              E legal term of art. Recklessness is not to be confused with negligence in
given by the deputy judge in the present case, if Murphy be correctly                     the civil law of tort. Lord Diplock’s statement in Reg. v. Sheppard [1981]
decided and the test for which the appellants contend be correct, then the                A.C. 394, 405, in relation to a case of wilful default can be applied
direction given here was too favourable to the respondent and the appeal                   to reckless driving. As to the situation that firemen, policemen and
should be allowed and the conviction restored. [Reference was also made                    ambulancemen may find themselves in in regard to a charge of this nature,
to Reg. v. Clancy [1979] R.T.R. 312 and Reg. v. Davis (William) [1979]                     it can be said (i) that they must be treated like any other citizen, or (ii)
                                                                                      F recklessness can be defined so that the situation in which they might find
R.T.R. 316.]                                                                   F
      Anthony Arlidge and Martin Hall-Smith for the respondent. The prin­
                                                                                          themselves is outside the definition, or (iii) there is a defence of necessity.
 ciple of Reg. v. William Murphy [1980] Q.B. 434 sets too low a standard                  The direction to a jury could be: “ It is alleged that the defendant drove
 because (i) it catches too many defendants, for example, the driver who                   in a totally unreasonable or unjustifiable manner. Such a direction would
 lifts his eyes off the road for five seconds to admire a Georgian house that             help the civilian services.
 he is passing; and (b) it might catch the driver who is going through the                     As to the third question certified, the Murphy direction sets too low a
 traffic lights as they are turning from amber to red. “ Without due care ” is G     G standard since (a) “ recklessness ” in its ordinary meaning connotes more
 the minimum acceptable level of driving on the road. “ Recklessness ” has                 than mere carelessness, (b) In both the English and Scottish cases it con­
 an entirely different connotation from carelessness. If the definition is                notes a high degree of negligence: see Andrews v. Director of Public Pro­
 made too wide and if the net is cast too wide it makes the task of the                    secutions [1937] A.C. 576 and Allan v. Patterson [1980] R.T.R. 97, 100h.
 sentencing judge more difficult because it makes it more difficult for him                    The Motor Car Act 1903 was the first statute to introduce the offence
  to know on what basis the jury have come to their conclusion.                            of reckless driving. When the offence of driving without due care and
      It is impossible to give a definition applicable to all cases; the judge jj     jt attention was introduced in i930 a conviction did not result in the offender
  will have to mould his direction to the facts of the particular case but the             having his licence endorsed. This emphasises the distinction between care­
  following test of what constitutes driving recklessly is put forward : Did                lessness and recklessness. When the 1977 amendments were made punish­
  the defendant know that his driving substantially increased the risk of                   ments for reckless driving remained the same but those for careless driving
                                                                                                                                                             517
516
                         Reg. v. Lawrence (H.L.(E.))        V        [1982]
                                                                                     A.C.             Q       R eg. v. Lawrcncc (H.L.(E.»
                                                                                      the South East wtl London. This backlog has been a source of particular
were increased. Driving recklessly would generally invbrve a positive
                                                                                  ^ anxiety to me in both my terms of office as I know it is currently to
piece of driving and therefore if it is defined as driving without due care   ^
                                                                                      the present Lord Chief Justice. The causes are complex,_ and the
that is defining a positive by means of a negative. Further, u deliberately
                                                                                      remedies are therefore not particularly simple. But, so long as itpersists,
disregards ” isagain a misuse of language.
                                                                                      the whole system of trial by jury, and the regard in which it is rightly
    In any event, if the House is against the respondent on the law, the
House should not disturb the finding of the Court of Appeal that the                  held, are adversely affected.
                                                                                           M y Lords, it is a truism to say that justice delayed is justice denied.
judge’s direction was so unclear as to render the jury’s verdict unsafe and       B But it isnot merely the anxiety and uncertainty in the life of the accused,
Unsatisfactory.                                                               g
                                                                                      whether on bail or remand, which are affected. Where there is delay the
    Penry-Davey in reply. The following is suggested as an appropriate                whole quality of justice deteriorates. Our system depends on the recollec­
direction on the question of driving recklessly: (i) That the defendant                tion of witnesses, conveyed to a jury by oral testimony. As the months
must have been driving in such a manner that itmay have possibly serious               pass, this recollection necessarily dims, and juries who are correctly
consequences, those consequences being the risk of physical injury to the              directed not to convict unless they are assured of the reliability of the
person or substantial damage to property, (ii) That so far as the state of             evidence for the prosecution, necessarily tend to acquit as this becomes
mind of the defendant is concerned, that the defendant gave thought to        _    ^ less precise, and sometimes less reliable. This may also affect defence
those possible consequences or some of them and disregarded them, or                   witnesses on the opposite side. In the instant case,^an accident took
(iii) that he showed no appreciation of the fact that there were such                   place unexpectedly in a matter of seconds. The evidence at the trial
possible consequences because, for example, he had had too much to drink,              included the testimony of witnesses, present on the occasion, none of
or, for example, he was too incompetent to drive.                                       whom could have been expecting a moment before it occurred that they
    If the House is to proceed on the basis that the direction in Reg. v.               were to be confronted with a desperate tragedy, to the sequence of events
William Murphy [1980] Q.B. 434 was wrong then the above guidance is                D in which in 11 months’ time they would be expected to testify on oath.
much more helpful in relation to reckless driving than the test propounded    D             Part of the delay in bringing cases to trial is due to the increase in
in Reg. v. Stephenson [1979] Q.B. 695. That case was right both in its                  the volume of indictable crime brought to the Crown Court. But part
reasoning and in its result but recklessness in the context of criminal                 also is due to the increasing prolixity in the conduct of cases when they
damage is different from that in relation to driving because in the latter              actually come to be heard. It cannot be too often stressed that verbose
circumstances there is a greater connection between the actus reus and                  justice is not necessarily good justice. There is virtue, both from the
the state of mind of the accused. The special case of firemens policemen                point of view of the prosecution and from the point of view of the
and ambulance drivers does not raise any problem. The above test can          p     ® defence, in incisiveness, decisiveness and conciseness, not only in address­
be applied taking into account all the circumstances of the case.                       ing juries but in the general conduct of a case, the examination and cross-
    In conclusion, the Murphy direction is a simple test and easy to apply.             examination of witnesses, the submission of legal argument, and in
Alternatively, the House is invited to adopt the above test. Any test                   summing up. A long trial is not necessarily a better one if a shorter
that has a subjective element is undesirable where the offence charged                  one would have sufficed. It is these considerations which lead me to
relates toreckless driving.                                                             analyse the course of events in the present appeal, and not any desire
                                                                                    F to expand upon, or to qualify the reasoning of my noble and learned
      Their Lordships took time for consideration.                            F         friend.                                                                    .
                                                                                            The course of events was as follows. On March 13, 1980,^ in
   March 19. L o r d H a i l s h a m o f St. M a r y l e b o n e L.C. My Lords,          Ipswich Crown Court the respondent (defendant) in these proceedings
the question in this appeal is whether the conviction on March 18, 1980,                was arraigned on an indictment of great simplicity. It read as follows.
of Stephen Richard Lawrence for causing death by reckless driving                             “ Stephen Richard Lawrence is charged as follows:
should be restored. In my opinion it should not, both on the grounds
                                                                                              “ Statement of offence:
on which itwas quashed by the Court of Appeal [1980] R.T.R. 443, and G                        “ Causing death by reckless driving, contrary to section 1 ot the
on the more general ground about to be formulated by my noble and                             Road Traffic Act 1972.
learned friend, Lord Diplock, with whose conclusions and reasoning I                          “ Particulars of offence:
wish to be wholly and unequivocally associated. If I proceed with a                           “ Stephen Richard Lawrence, on April 13, 1979, at Lowestoft in
few observations of my own about the course of the proceedings, it is                         the county of Suffolk, caused the death of Yvonne Letticia C ro w -
because I wish to draw some lessons from them regarding the general                           ther by driving a motor vehicle on a road, namely, Victoria Road
conduct of trials on indictment, and not because I wish to repeat in jj             H         recklessly.”
other words what my noble and learned friend is about to say.
                                                                                         I pause at this stage only to point out that, owing to the delays which
    My Lords, it is notorious that there has grown up a serious backlog                  have mounted up in the South East and London, this simple case has
of eases for trial in the Crown Court, and this is particularly the case in
 518                                                                                                                                                         519

 of0 St.HMabrJkbone        RcS- v- Lawrence (H.L.(E.))                 [1982]      A.C.               ,     Reg. v. Lawrcnce (H.L.(E.))         of s ^ y tb o u ”
 taken a whole year less one month to come on for trial*- That it took             destination at approximately 9.00 p.m. Their van was parked on the
 this length of delay to bring it on for trial is, of course, no criticism of   A opposite side of the road to the off-licence. Mr. Crowther stayed in
 the judge, counsel or solicitors in the present case. It is the cumulative        the van. Mrs. Crowther crossed the road and entered the off-licence.
 result of the length and number of other cases with which your Lordships          When she came out, she stopped at the kerb. Her husband saw her
 have not been concerned.                                                          blow him a kiss, and that was the last time he saw his wife alive. In
     The trial pursued its course during Thursday 13, Friday 14 and                crossing the road to return to the van there was a collision between
 Monday March 17, 1980. The judge commenced his summing up on                      herself and the second of two motor cyclists. The motor cycle involved
 Tuesday March 18. After this summing up and an interchange between             B in the collision was driven by the respondent. Mrs. Crowther was killed
 the two counsel and the judge the jury retired at 11.28 a.m. They                  instantaneously. Her body was carried 45 yards on the front of the
 returned at 2.15 p.m. after deliberating for 2 hours 47 minutes, when              motor cycle before the motor cycle stopped.
 they were given a majority verdict direction. At 2.32 p.m. the jury                     At the trial one solitary dispute of primary fact emerged. This was
 delivered a note to the judge requesting further directions on the meaning         the speed at which the motor cycle was travelling. The prosecution led
of “ driving recklessly.” There was a further interchange between judge             evidence intended to show that the motor cycle was travelling at a grossly
and counsel in the absence of the jury. At 3.15 p.m. the jury were                  excessive speed. Apart from the measurements on the road, there were
summoned back and given a further direction. At 3.43 p.m. the jury               ^ witnesses of the accident, forensic evidence that the speedometer was
convicted the respondent by a verdict of eleven to one, and after the                jammed at 77 m.p.h. and as to the implications of this, and police
usual procedure the judge sentenced the respondent to six months in                  evidence regarding the account of the accident by the accused.
prison and three years’ disqualification.                                                 By contrast, the accused gave evidence and called witnesses who
    On May 20, 1980, the whole trial aborted, because the Court of                   testified that the true speed only was 30 to 40 m.p.h., technically illegal,
Appeal quashed the conviction on the grounds that both directions left               since the area was built up, possibly careless, but most improbably
“ so much unclear as to render the jury’s verdict unsafe and unsatis­            D reckless.
factory ”: [1980] R.T.R. 443, 448 e. So other cases in Ipswich Crown                      Given the nature of the case, one would hardly think that the case
Court were delayed by the judge time consumed to no purpose during                   presented much difficulty for a jury to try or for the judge to sum up in
the better part of a week. But that has not been the end of the matter.               a manner calculated to lead them to a just and safe conclusion. If they
At the request of the prosecution the Court of Appeal certified the three             were satisfied with the prosecution evidence to the extent^ required by
following questions as of " general public importance                                 the burden of proof in criminal cases they could hardly fail to convict,
       “ 1. Is mens rea involved in the offence of driving recklessly? 2. If      p If they thought the defence evidence raised a reasonable doubt they could
       yes, what is the mental element required? 3. Is the following on a             hardly fail to acquit. In the event they convicted by a majority, and
       charge of driving recklessly a proper direction: ‘A driver is guilty           their verdict was set aside as unsafe and unsatisfactory on the ground
       of driving recklessly if he deliberately disregards the obligation to          that the two directions on recklessness were so unclear. Neither the
       drive with due care and attention or is indifferent as to whether or           result, nor the delay in bringing the matter to trial, nor the course of
       not he does so and thereby creates a risk of an accident which a               the proceedings ought to afford any of us who are concerned in the
       driver driving with due care and attention would not create.’? ”               administration of justice in any capacity much cause for satisfaction.
                                                                                  F        It has been said before, but obviously requires to be said again._ The
These three questions form the substance of the appeal. In certifying                 purpose of a direction to a jury is not best achieved by a disquisition
them the Court of Appeal refused leave to appeal. This was given                      on jurisprudence or philosophy or a universally applicable circularJour
subsequently by the Appeal Committee of your Lordships’House, possibly                round the area of law affected by the case. The search for universally
because the question of “ recklessness ” in criminal cases was already                 applicable definitions is often productive of more obscurity than light. A
before your Lordships in another context in Reg. v. Caldwell [1982] A.C.               direction is seldom improved and may be considerably damaged by
341 in which judgment has just been delivered.                                    G copious recitations from the total content of a judge’s note book. A
   I mention these facts because, altogether apart from the merits of                  direction to a jury should be custom built to make the jury understand
the appeal, with which my noble and learned friend, Lord Diplock, intends              their task in relation to a particular case. Of course it must include
to deal, I think there are lessons to be learned from these proceedings                references to the burden of proof and the respective roles of jury ^nd
which ought urgently to be studied since they are directly relevant to                 judge. But it should also include a succinct but accurate summary of
the serious delays to which I have now drawn attention.                                the issues of fact as to which a decision is required, a correct but
   The facts of the case can be stated in stark simplicity. On April              it concise summary of the evidence and arguments on both sides, and a
13, 1979, at approximately 8.30 p.m., a husband and wife, Mr. and Mrs.                 correct statement of the inferences which the jury are entitled to draw
Crowther, decided to drive their van to an off-licence in Lowestoft in                  from their particular conclusions about the primary facts. In the present
order to buy some soft drink for the children. They arrived at their                    instance there was only one issue of primary fact, the speed at which
 520
                                                                                                                                                              521
 Sf sl . 1   R       c       S- v- Lawrcnce (H.L.(E.))               )   [1982]      A.C.                    Reg.   V.   Lawrence (H.L.(E.))     Lord H aik h am of
                                                                                                       ,                                           St« Maryleborie
   the cycle was travelling, and I doubt whether a directs could have               noble and leariw1friend, Lord Diplock. It is, of course, true that in a
  been faulted if the jury had simply been told that if they were satisfied       A legal context, the state of mind described as “ reckless ” is discussed in
  that the prosecution had proved that the accused had been travelling              connection with conduct objectively blameworthy as well as dangerous,
  at agrossly excessive speed they were entitled to infer that he had been          while in common speech it is possible to conceive (for instance in the
  driving recklessly and as a result had caused Mrs. Crowther’s death, that if      context of the winner of a military decoration in circumstances in which
  so they should convict, and that if they were not so satisfied they should        he is reckless of his own safety) of the use of the word without a blame­
  acquit. As itis, I feel sure that the Court of Appeal were correct in their       worthy connotation. Now that my noble and learned friend has given
  belief that the jury may well have been bemused with the'-effect of the         B it a lucid legal interpretation I trust that it will cause no more trouble
  summing up that their verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory, and that, if         to the profession, academics or juries. I also associate myself with
  only for this reason, the appeal must fail. The verdict cannot be restored.       what he has said about the Scottish case of Allan v. Patterson [1980]
      There is, however, a second reason why, in my judgment, the appeal            R.T.R. 97. The case of Reg. v. Stephenson [1979] Q.B. 695 was dis­
 by the prosecution must fail. Of the three questions of law certified by           cussed before us, but in view of what has just been said before your
 the Court of Appeal, I have no doubt that all three must be answered in            Lordships in Reg. v. Caldwell [1982] A.C. 341 there is nothing I
 the sense proposed by my noble and learned friend, Lord Diplock. Since             can usefully add, except that I respectfully accept the view of the
 i follows from this that the third of these questions is answered in the         ^ majority in that case. Since the days of Noah, the effects of alcohol
 negative, the judge’s direction which broadly followed the formula con­            have been known to induce the state of mind described in English as
 tained in it was wrong in law. For this he can hardly be blame since               recklessness, and not to inhibit it, and for that matter to remove
 tbe formula broadly corresponds with that proposed by Eveleigh L.J. in             inhibitions in the field of intention, and not to destroy intention. But
    eg. v. William Murphy ([1980] Q.B. 434 (than just reported), which,             that is a different question.
 to the extent described in detail by my noble and learned friend, must be              In the result the appeal fails.
 considered overruled. I also associate myself with my noble and learned          D
mend s affirmative answer to the first question, and the formulation of                 L o r d D i p l o c k . My Lords, on Good Friday, April 13, 1979, after
his answer to the second, with the reasoning leading up to which I also             night had fallen, the respondent (“ the driver ”) was riding his motor
agree. Though it does not directly affect the three questions posed I               cycle along an urban street in Lowestoft. The street was subject to a
share^ the distaste for the obsessive use of the expressions “ objective ”          30 m.p.h. speed limit and there was a good deal of other traffic using
and subjective ” in crime. In all indictable crime it is a general rule             it at the time. The driver ran into and killed a pedestrian who was
that there are objective factors of conduct which constitute the so-called        £ crossing the road to return from an off-licence shop to her car which
   actus reus, and a further guilty state of mind which constitutes the             was parked on the opposite side of the street. The driver was in due
so-called mens rea.” The necessity for this guilty state of mind has                course tried upon indictment for the offence of causing her death by
 rioQifCreaSingly emPhasised of recent years (see Reg. v. Sheppard                  driving a motor vehicle on a road recklessly, contrary to section 1 of
 L1981j A.C. 394) and this I regard as a thoroughly praiseworthy                    the Road Traffic Act 1972.
development. It only surprises me that there should have been any
                                                                                        Apart from the very tragic consequences of this accident the case
question regarding the existence of mens rea in relation to the words               that the jury had to try was about as simple and straightforward as any
   reckless, ^recklessly ” or “ recklessness.” Unlike most English words            case can be in which the charge is one of driving recklessly. The only
reckless has been in the English language as a word in general use at               question of fact that was in issue was the speed at which the driver was
least since the 8th century a .d . almost always with the same meaning,             travelling immediately before the impact. The prosecution’s case was
applied to a person or conduct evincing a state of mind stopping short              that the motor cycle was being driven at between 60 and 80 m.p.h. and
of deliberate intention, and going beyond mere inadvertence, or in its              probably much nearer to the latter. The case for the defence was that
modern, though not its etymological and original sense, mere careless­              the speed of the motor cycle was no more than 30 or, at most, 40 m.p.h.
ness.^ The Oxford English Dictionary quotes several examples from Old             G and probably near to the former.
English, many from the Middle English period, and many more from                        All that the jury had to do was to make up their minds whether,
modern English. The word was familiar to the Venerable Bede, to                     upon that evidence, they were satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the
Langland, to Chaucer, to Sir Thomas More and to Shakespeare. In its                 driver was in fact driving along this urban street, on which it was not
alternative and possibly older pronunciation, and etymologically incorrect          disputed there was a good deal of other traffic, at a speed somewhere
spelling (wretchless, wretchlessly, wretchlessness) it was known to the             between 60 and 80 m.p.h. If they were so satisfied, even the defence
authors of the Articles of Religion printed in the Book of Common                 H did not suggest that any sensible jury could come to any other conclusion
Prayer. Though its pronunciation has varied, so far as I know its                   than that he was driving recklessly; whereas, if they thought that his
meaning has not. There isno separate legal meaning to the word. This                own estimate of his speed at 30 to 40 m.p.h. might be right, they ought
retains its dictionary sense, adequately, I believe, expounded by my                to have found him not guilty, for the prosecution had not relied upon
522                                                                                                                                                        523
Lord D iplock             Reg. v. Lawrence (H.L.(E.))       ,           [1982]        A.C.             j     Reg. v. Lawrence (H.L.(E.))          Lord Diplock

any other aspect of his driving as constituting recklessness, apart from            “ in a dangerous”*manner,” so far as the gravity of the offence was
excessive speed.                                                                    concerned. It was in the following terms:
    I find it difficult to conceive that so simple a case could have taken               “ 1 (1) If any person drives a motor car on a public highway reck­
more than a single day to try 20 years ago when, as a High Court judge,                  lessly or negligently, or at a speed or in a manner which isdangerous
I was trying cases of the then newly-created offence of causing death                    to the public, having regard to all the circumstances of the case,
by dangerous driving. I warmly endorse what Lord Hailsham of St.                         including the nature, condition and use of the highway, and to the
Marylebone L.C. has said about the tortoise pace at which cases in the                   amount of traffic which actually is at the time, or which might
Crown Court are nowadays so frequently allowed to amble on. It makes              ®     reasonably be expected to be, on the highway, that person shall be
the trial itself a less effective and reliable means of achieving a just result          guilty of an offence under this Act.”
and is one of the main causes of the long delays between committal and
trial which are nothing short of a disgrace to our legal system.                         This remained the law until it was repealed by the Road Traffic Act
    In the course of his summing up the deputy circuit judge gave to                  1930, which made separate offences of dangerous driving and careless
the jury a direction as to what amounted in law to “ driving recklessly.”           driving. The former was the more serious offence; it was triable upon
This direction the Court of Appeal described with justification, but also           indictment as well as summarily and the penalties that could be imposed
with the utmost sympathy, as confused. And so it was, because it                  ^ included imprisonment and were heavier than those for careless driving,
sought to combine the very recent definition of “ driving recklessly ” in           which was triable summarily only.
section 2 of the Road Traffic Act 1972 that had been given by Eveleigh                  The description of the offence of dangerous driving was:
L.J. in Reg. v. William Murphy [1980] Q.B. 434 (“ the Murphy defi­                       “ 11 (1) If any person drives a motor vehicle on a road recklessly,
nition ”) with the definition of “ reckless ” in section 1 (1) of the                     or at a speed or in a manner which isdangerous to the public, having
Criminal Damage Act 1971 that had been given by Geoffrey Lane L.J.                        regard to all the circumstances of the case, including the nature,
in Reg. v. Stephenson [1979] Q.B. 695. This latter definition has been            D      condition, and use of the road, and the amount of traffic which is
the subject of disapproval by this House in the immediately preceding                     actually at the time, or which might reasonably be expected to be,
appeal, Reg. V. Caldwell [1982] A.C. 341.                                                 on the road . ..
    The jury too must have found the direction confusing for, after 31-                   “ 12 (1) If any person drives a motor vehicle on a road without
hours’ retirement, they sought further elucidation from the judge. In                     due care and attention or without reasonable consideration for other
substance he repeated to them the Murphy direction and, after a further                   persons using the road . . .”
short retirement, the jury, by a majority of eleven to one, brought in a          F
                                                                                    To these were added by section 8 of the Road Traffic Act 1956 the new
verdict of guilty.                                                                  offence of causing death by reckless or dangerous driving; the manner
    The M u r p hy direction is in the following terms [1980] Q.B. 434,             of driving involved in this offence being the same as under section 11 (1)
440:                                                                                of the Road Traffic Act 1930.
     “ A driver is guilty of driving recklessly if he deliberately disregards           These descriptions of the offences were reproduced in sections 1 and
                                                                                    2, and section 3 respectively of the Road Traffic Act 1972. Dangerous
     the obligation to drive with due care and attention or is indifferent
                                                                                  F driving continued to be triable on indictment as well as summarily; careless
     as to whether or not he does so and thereby creates a risk of an
                                                                                    driving remained triable summarily only.
     accident which a driver driving with due care and attention would
                                                                                        Although the adverb “ recklessly ” as descriptive of a manner of
     not create.”
                                                                                    driving has been there ever since the single offence was split up into two of
    Whether the M u r p hy direction is correct or not is the subject of the        which one was treated as much graver than the other, the practice so
third question of law involved in the instant case that the Court of Appeal         far as living memory goes had been to charge defendants with driving
in giving leave to appeal, have certified as being of general public              G “ at a speed or in a manner which is dangerous to the public ” and not
importance. The other two are: “ 1. Is mens rea involved in the offence             with driving “ recklessly.” This is why the offence became popularly
of driving recklessly? ” and “ 2. If yes, what is the mental element                known as dangerous, not as reckless, driving; and juries, when the trial
required? ”                                                                          was on indictment, were instructed to consider whether in their judg­
    To answer these questions necessitates in the first instance a brief             ment the defendant was driving in a manner that was dangerous to the
reference to the legislative history of those road traffic offences that had         public. It was not thought necessary to confuse them by talking about
for so many years prior to 1977 been popularly known as “ careless                   “ subjective ” and “ objective ” tests, although before 1963 they might
driving ” and “ dangerous driving ” respectively.                                    have been told that to convict of dangerous driving they must be satis­
    The history starts with section 1 of the Motor Car Act 1903, which               fied that the way in which the defendant was driving was something
rlrp.w nn Histinr.tinn he.twee.n Hrivinir “ re.rkle.sslv” nr “ negligently ” or      worse than a mere failure to show proper consideration for other
524                                                                                                                                                           525
Lord Diplock             Reg. v. Lawrence (H.L.(E.))                  [1982]                                  'Reg. v. Lawrence (H.L.(E.))           Lord Diplock
people using the road or some minor misjudgment of'v„e situation or                   the lesser offenc&-£n section 3 that did not, which had resulted from the
momentary lack of attention. As a Queen’s Bench judge I used so to A               ^  decision in Reg. v. Evans [1963] 1 Q.B. 412. Section 3 creates an
direct juries myself, in trying cases of causing death by dangerous driving.          absolute offence in the sense in which that term is commonly used to
    By its decision in Reg. v. Evans [1963] 1 Q.B. 412, however, the                  denote an offence for which the only mens rea needed is simply that the
Court of Criminal Appeal for practical purposes abolished the difference              prohibited physical act (actus reus) done by the accused was directed by
between the standard of driving in careless driving and that involved in              a mind that was conscious of what his body was^ doing, it being un­
dangerous driving where danger to the public did in fact result. At                   necessary to showthat his mind was also conscious of the possible
the trialof Evans the judge had directed the jury:                            g    B consequences of his doing it. So section 3 takes care of the kind of
     “. . . in law it is now well settled that if the driving is in fact dan­         inattention or misjudgment to which the ordinarily careful motorist is
     gerous, and that dangerous driving is caused by some carelessness                occasionally subject without its necessarily involving any moral turpitude,
     on the part of the accused, then however slight the carelessness,                although it causes inconvenience and annoyance to other users of the
     that is dangerous driving.”                                                       road. So there is no reason why your Lordships should go out of your
                                                                                      way to give to the new section 2 a wide ambit that would recreate the
This summing up was approved upon appeal. The court said, atp. 418:                    former overlap with section 3.
    “ . . if a driver in fact adopts a manner of driving which the jury            C        My Lords, this House has very recently had occasion in Reg. v.
    think was dangerous to other road users in all the circumstances,                  Caldwell [1982] A.C. 341 to give close consideration to the concept
    then on the issue of guilt it matters not whether he was deliberately              of recklessness as constituting mens rea in criminal law. The conclusion
    reckless, careless, momentarily inattentive or even doing his incom­               reached by the majority was that the adjective “ reckless when used
    petent best.”                                                                      in a criminal statute, i.e. the Criminal Damage Act 1971, had not acquired
                                                                                        a special meaning as a term of legal art, but bore itspopular or dictionary
    This merging of the standards of defective driving that was to amount      d   D meaning of careless, regardless, or heedless of the possible harmful
to the offences of careless and dangerous driving respectively, leaving the             consequences of one’s acts. The same must be true of the adverbial
only difference between the two offences that in the latter danger to the               derivative “ recklessly.”
public had in fact been caused, led to an increase in the number of                         The context in which the word 44reckless ” appears m section 1 of the
cases in which the prosecution charged the defendant with dangerous                     Criminal Damage Act 1971 differs in two r e s p e c ts from the context in
driving and the defendant, with his driving licence at stake, almost                    which the word “ recklessly” appears m sections 1 and 2 of the Road
invariably elected to be tried by jury.                                                 Traffic Act 1972, as now amended. In the Criminal Damage Act 1971
    M y Lords, your Lordships may take judicial notice of the fact that the    ®        the actus reus, the physical act of destroying or damaging property
amendment of sections 1 and 2 of the Road Traffic Act 1972 by section                   belonging to another, is in itself a tort. It is not something that one
50 of the Criminal Law Act 1977, which followed upon the report of the                  does regularly as part of the ordinary routine of daily life, such as driving
interdepartmental committee on The Distribution of Criminal Business                     a car or a motor cycle. So there is something out of the ordinary to call
between the Crown Court and Magistrates’ Courts (1975) (Cmnd. 6323)                     the doer’s attention to what he is doing and its possible consequences,
[the James Report], was to restore the difference in culpability between                 which is absent in road traffic offences. The other difference in context
driving offences which attracted the severer penalties which could be          F    F is that in section 1 of the Criminal Damage Act 1971 the mens rea of
imposed for offences under section 2 of the Road Traffic Act 1972, and so                the offences is defined as being reckless as to whether particular hamful
justified the right of the accused to elect trial by jury, and the offences              consequences would occur, whereas m sections 1 and 2 of the Road
under section 3 which did not attract penalties severe enough tojustify any              Traffic Act 1972, as now amended, the possible harmful consequences of
such right of election, and by this means to reduce the load of business                 which the driver must be shown to have been heedless are left to be
in the Crown Courts.                                                                     implied from the use of the word “ recklessly” itself. In ordinary usage
    The amendment took the form of substituting for sections 1 and 2           G     G “ recklessly” as descriptive of a physical act such as driving a motor
of the Road Traffic Act 1972. the following new sections:                                 vehicle which can be performed in a variety of different ways, some of
                                                                                          them entailing danger and some of them not, refers not only to the state
     “ 1. A person who causes the death of another person by driving a                    of mind of the doer of the act when he decides to do it but also qualifies
     motor vehicle on a road recklessly shall be guilty of an offence.                    the manner in which the act itself is performed. One does not_speak
     “ 2. A person who drives a motor vehicle on a road recklessly shall                  of a person acting “ recklessly,” even though he has given no though
     be guilty of an offence.”
                                                                                     tt at all to the consequences of his act, unless the act is o n e that presents
          . . .
   The elimination of the reference to driving at a speed or in a manner
                                                                               H
                                                                                           a real risk of harmful consequences which anyone acting with reasonable
dangerous to the public was obviously intended to remove the overlap                       prudence would recognise and give heed to. So the ac us reus o            e
between the offence in section 2 which gave a right to trial by jury and                   offence under sections 1 and 2 is not simply driving a mo or ve ic e on
                                                                                                                                                                         527
  Lord Diplock             Reg. v. Lawrence (H.L.(E.))                  fl982J            A.C.                      Reg. v. Lawrence (H.L.(E.))                 Lord Diplock
  a road but driving it in a manner which in fact created real risk of                        Second, tha__>i driving in that manner the defendant did so without
                                                                                          having given any thought to the possibility of there being any such risk
  S H F *                                                                                 or, having recognised that there was some risk involved, had nonetheless
                                                                                          gone on to take it.
  sections l and 2 m ust be w orse than         if   £ 3
                                                       u an“i            i                    It is for the jury to decide whether the risk created by the manner
                                                                                          in which the vehicle was being driven was both obvious and serious and,
                                                                                          in deciding this, they may apply the standard of the ordinary prudent
                                                                                     B    motorist as represented by themselves.
                                                                                              If satisfied that an obvious and serious risk was created by the manner
                                                                                          of the defendant’s driving, the jury are entitled to infer that he was in
                                                                                          one or other of the states of mind required to constitute the offence and
                                                                                          will probably do so; but regard must be given to any explanation he gives
                                                                                          as to his state of mind which may displace the inference.
                                                                                     C        My Lords, in Allan v. Patterson [1980] R.T.R. 97, Lord Emslie in
                                                                                          the High Court of Justiciary did apply the label “ objective ” to the test
                                                                                          of whether a driver was driving recklessly within the meaning of section 3
                                                                                          of the Act. While for reasons set out in greater detail in my speech
                                                                                          in Reg. v. Caldwell [1982] A.C. 341, I think it is desirable in all cases
                                                                                          of criminal liability to avoid the use of this label, I do not think
                                                                i i l            ^   D    that, having regard to the likelihood that the jury will draw the inference
 cu ,on has no way of knowing at that stage when the choice of cWe'                       to which I have referred, the practical result of approaching the question
 has to be made, what was the state of mind of the driver when or                         of what constitutes driving recklessly in the way that was adopted by
 immediately before he did it. It can only infer this from what the driver                the Lord Justice-General in Allan v. Patterson is likely to be any
 was seen to do and any statement that he may have made                                   different from the result of instructing a jury in some such terms as I
 , 1 ? m .n° Z t0 the mens rea- My task is greatly simplified bv what                     have suggested above. The same Act applies to both countries; it would
                                                                                     £    be unfortunate ifthe interpretation put upon itby the Scots courts differed
 tw   tZ ^c2L*%£a7% 0wre“
 against adopting the simplistic approach of treMto? ^JJbfcnT'f
                                                                                 E        from that put upon it by the courts in England and Wales.
                                                                                              I would give the following answers to the questions certified by the
criminal liability as soluble by classifying the test of i;,K3 ,  T ■                     Court of Appeal:
either - subjective - or ~ object,.                 L t e £ 0 ,V S S
                                                                                               1. Mens rea is involved in the offence of driving recklessly.
of an act does presuppose that there is something in the d r m a n c e s                      2. The mental element required is that before adopting a manner of
, o \ r " ?hatWhisthe,att“ ti<>n u, “ °rdl'"a0’ pnuIenl individual F                 p     driving that in fact involves an obvious and serious risk of causing
       ?°SSlMlty that hls act was capable of causing the kind of serious                   physical injury to some other person who may happen to be using the
         <:0nse(luences      the section which creates the offence was                     road or of doing substantial damage to property, the driver has failed
intended to prevent, and that the risk of those harmful consequences                       to give any thought to the possibility of there being any such risk, or,
                                                                                           having recognised that there was some risk involved, has nonetheless
Wi K
S                - , mg them‘hat as “
                                    negl?rdiMry
                                        igible. It Pn,dent
                                                     is only when this is so               gone on to take it.
that the doer of the act is acting “ recklessly ” if before doing the act he         q         3. The Murphy direction is wrong in the respects referred to earlier.
either fails to give any thought to the possibility of there being any such                    Since the deputy circuit judge gave to the jury what was substantially
o f "doT      g reCOgniSe<I ‘ha' lhere was Such risk’ he nevertheless g o t                the Murphy direction itself and also a somewhat confused version of it
                                                                                           and both of these stated the law too unfavourably to the driver, this
   In my view an appropriate instruction to the jury on what is meant                      appeal must in my view be dismissed.
by dnvtng recklessly would be that they must be satMed of t w o ™
manner as to              ^     in faCt drivinS the vehicle in such a „              jj      L o r d F r a s e r o f T u l l y b e l t o n . My Lords, I have had the advantage
manner as to create an obvious and serious risk of causing Dhvsical                       of reading in draft the speeches of my noble and learned friends, Lord
mju^ to some other person who might happen to be usta tL road                             Hailsham of St. Marylebone L.C. and Lord Diplock, and I agree with
or of doing substantial damage to property; and                                           them. I would dismiss this appeal.
528
                              Reg. v. Lawrence (H.L.(E.))                 [1982]
                                                                                                                                                                                                  529
                                                                                           A.C.
    L o rd R o s k ill. My Lords, I have had the advantage of reading
in draft the speeches of my noble and learned friends, Lord Hailsham A
                                                                                       A                                           [h o use o f lo rd s]
of St. Marylebone L.C. and Lord Diplock. I agree that this appeal
fails for the reasons given by my noble and learned friend, Lord Diplock,
in his speech. Upon the wider issues with which my noble and learned                       H U N T E R ................................ A p p e l l a n t
friends, the Lord Chancellor and Lord Diplock, deal, I wish to express                                                                         and

my respectful concurrence with what they have said. I would only add                       CHIEF CONSTABLE OF THE WEST MIDLANDS
that but for the tragedy involved in this case, the charge would have ]j               g      POLICE a n d O t h e r s .......................................................... R e s p o n d e n t s
been one of reckless driving which could and very probably would have
been heard in a magistrates’ court. It is difficult to believe that any                    [On appeal from M c I lk e n n y          v.   C h i e f C o n s t a b le o f t h e W e s t M id la n d s ]
magistrates’court would not have dealt with this case ifnot in a morning
at least within one full day and reached the correct answer, whatever it                   1981     Oct. 19, 20, 21;                            Lord Diplock, Lord Russell of Killowen,
might be.                                                                                           Nov. 19                                         Lord Keith of Kinkel, Lord Roskill
                                                                                                                                                       and Lord Brandon of Oakbrook
                                                                                   c   C
                               My Lords, I have had the advantage of
   L o r d B rid g e o f H a rw ic h .
                                                                                           Practice—Pleadings— Striking out—Judge’s decision on voir dire
reading in draft the speeches of my noble and learned friends, Lord                            that no assaults by police prior to confessions— Actions for
Hailsham of St. Marylebone L.C. and Lord Diplock. I fully agree with                           same alleged assaults against police after murder convictions
them both. Accordingly I too would dismiss this appeal.                                        — W hether abuse of process o f court— W hether fresh evidence
                                                                                               admissible—R.S.C., Ord. 18, r. 19 (1)
                                                            Appeal dismissed.                          A fter bomb explosions in two Birmingham public houses
                                                                                   D              on November 21, 1974, had killed 21 people and injured 161
                                                                                                  others, the appellant and four others, Irish Republican sup­
   Solicitors: Sharpe, Pritchard & Co. for M. F. C. Harvey, Ipswich;                              porters, were arrested by the Lancashire police and taken to
Goldkorn, Davies & Co. for Norton, Peskett & Forward, Lowestoft.                                   Morecambe Police Station. On November 22, members of the
                                                                                                   Birmingham police interviewed the five men, and one of them
                                                                                                  made a signed statement. They were then taken to a Birming­
                                                                   J. A. G.                        ham police station, where a sixth man was also taken after his
                                                                                                   arrest at 10.30 p.m. that night. On November 23, at the
                                                                                       g          Birmingham police station, three m ore of the men made signed
                                                                                                   statements and the two others made oral confessions regarding
                                                                                                   their parts in planting the bombs that had caused the explosions.
                                                                                                   On November 24, all six men were photographed, and the
                                                                                                   photograph of one man showed a mark that might have been
                                                                                                   a bruise under the right eye. On Monday, November 25, the
                                                                                                  six men appeared before a magistrates’ court, and, although
                                                                                                   three of them complained to the solicitors assigned to them of
                                                                                       p          assaults by the police, no marks were noticed on their faces
                                                                                                   save in the case of the man with the black eye, which he said
                                                                                                  had been caused by a fall. A fter formal evidence, the six men
                                                                                                   were remanded in custody and taken to Winson Green Prison.
                                                                                                  When, three days later, on November 28, they again appeared
                                                                                                  at the magistrates’ court, their faces showed injuries that
                                                                                                  indicated they had been seriously assaulted. They were again
                                                                                                  remanded in custody, and first the prison governor and then
                                                                                       G          the Home Office held an inquiry as to how their injuries
                                                                                                   had been sustained. A t the trial of the six men on 21 charges
                                                                                                   of murder, their counsel objected to the admission in evidence
                                                                                                   of their statements, which were an essential part of the prose­
                                                                                                   cution case, on the ground that they had been induced by
                                                                                                   violence and threats by the police. After an eight day “ trial
                                                                                                  within a trial ” (voir dire) in the absence of the jury, during
                                                                                                   which the police officers and the six men gave evidence,
                                                                                   H   H          Bridge J. held that the prosecution had discharged the burden
                                                                                                   of proving beyond reasonable doubt that the men had not been
                                                                                                   assaulted by the police and that the statements had been
                                                                                                   voluntary and should be admitted in evidence. The trial then
                                                                                                                                                       495
                    Reg. v. Seymour (H.L.(E.))              v          [1983]
                                                                                 2 A.C.       \   J      Reg. v. Seymour (H .L.(E.))
          defendant was indicted and convicted of manslaughter, and was              Reg. v. Church [1966] 1 Q.B. 59; [1965] 2 W.L.R. 1220; [1965] 2 All
          sentenced, inter alia, to five years’ imprisonment. The defendant
          was prepared to plead guilty to the offence of causing death                   E.R. 72, C.C.A.
          by reckless driving contrary to section 1 of the Act of 1972               Reg. v. Governor of Holloway Prison, Ex parte Jennings [1982] 1 W.L.R.
          but the prosecution declined to accept the plea they preferring                949; [1982] 3 All E.R. 104, D.C.; [1983] 1 A.C. 624; [1982] 3
          to receive a jury’s verdict upon the only count charged in the                 W.L.R. 450; [1982] 3 All E.R. 104, H.L.(E.).
          indictment, that of manslaughter. The defendant appealed on                Reg. v. Lawrence (Stephen) [1982] A.C. 510; [1981] 2 W.L.R. 524;
          the ground that the trial judge had misdirected the jury in                     [1981] 1 All E.R. 974, H.L.(E.).
          that where manslaughter was charged and the charge arose                   Reg. v. Lowe [1973] Q.B. 702; [1973] 2 W.L.R. 481; [1973] 1 All E.R.
          out of the reckless driving of the defendant on the highway,                   805, C.A.
          the direction propounded in Reg. v. Lawrence was inadequate                Reg. v. Pigg [1982] 1 W.L.R. 762; [1982] 2 All E.R. 591, C.A.
          and that in such circumstances the jury should be directed
          that the prosecution must further prove that the defendant
          recognised that some risk was involved and had nevertheless                The following additional cases were cited in argument:
          proceeded to take that risk. The Court of Appeal (Criminal                 Connelly v. Director o f Public Prosecutions [1964] A.C. 1254; [1964]
          Division) dismissed the appeal.                                                 2 W.L.R. 1145; [1964] 2 All E.R. 401, H.L.(E.).
              On appeal by the defendant: —                                          Director of Public Prosecutions v. Newbury [1977] A.C. 500; [1976] 2
              Held, dismissing the appeal, that where manslaughter was                    W.L.R. 918; [1976] 2 All E.R. 365, H.L.(E.).
          charged and the circumstances were that the victim was killed
          as a result of the reckless driving of the defendant on a public           Reg. v. Stone [1977] Q.B. 354; [1977] 2 W.L.R. 169; [1977] 2 All
          highway, the trial judge should give the jury the direction                     E.R. 341, C A .
          suggested in Reg. v. Lawrence but that it was appropriate                  R ex v. Bateman (1925) 19 Cr.App.R. 8, C.C.A.
          also to point out that in order to constitute the offence of               R ex v. Larkin [1943] K.B. 174; [1943] 1 All E.R. 217, C.C.A.
          manslaughter the risk of death being caused by the manner
          of the defendant’s driving must be very high (post, pp. 499b-C,
          501D-E, 5O8C-0, D-E).                                                      A p p e a l from the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division).
              Reg. v. Lawrence (Stephen) [1982] A.C. 510, H.L.(E.)                   This was an appeal by leave of the House of Lords by the appellant,
          and Reg. v. Governor o f Holloway Prison, Ex parte Jennings            Edward John Seymour, from a judgment dated January 12, 1983, of the
          [1983] 1 A.C. 624, H.L.(E.) applied.                                   Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) (Watkins L.J., Lawson and Stephen
              Dunn v. H.M. Advocate, 1960 J.C. 55 considered.
                                                                                 Brown JJ.) against his conviction at Northampton Crown Court (Bush J.)
              Per curiam. In England and Wales it is for the prose­
          cution and not for the court to decide what charge or charges          on January 15, 1982, on an indictment containing the one count of man­
          should be made against a particular defendant. In the present          slaughter in unlawfully killing Iris Ada Burrows by his reckless driving of
          case the prosecution properly charged manslaughter alone. The          a lorry. The appellant was sentenced to five years’ imprisonment, dis­
          fact that had the defendant been acquitted he would have               qualified for six years and a suspended sentence of nine months’imprison­
          gone unpunished even though the jury might have convicted
          him of the statutory offence, if charged, could not justify the
                                                                                 ment imposed on November 13, 1980, for wounding and criminal damage
          joinder of both charges in a single indictment. In future if in        to property was activated to take effect concurrently with the sentence of
          any case in England and Wales any such joinder should occur            five years.
          it will be incumbent upon the trial judge to require the prose­            The facts are stated in the opinion of Lord Roskill.
          cution to elect upon which of the two counts they wished to
          proceed (post, pp. 499&-C, e - f , 507g— 508b, d - e ).
              Per Lord Fraser of Tullybelton. In Scotland the practice               Michael Connell Q.C. and John Cartwright for the appellant. This
          is to prosecute the driver on one charge of culpable homicide,         appeal raises the issue: given that the victim has been killed as a result
          or alternatively of the statutory offence, leaving the jury (if it     of the reckless driving of the accused on a public highway, and that
          decides to convict) to decide whether to do so on the first or         accordingly the statutory offence of causing death by reckless driving con­
          second alternative, and there are good reasons why the Scottish
          practice should continue as it is in Scotland (post, p. 499 d , f ).   trary to section 1 of the Road Traffic Act 1972 (as amended by section
              Decision of the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) [1983]         50 (1) of the Criminal Law Act 1977) is made out, must the accused at the
          R.T.R. 202 affirmed.                                                   same time be guilty of the common law offence of manslaughter or is there
                                                                                 a material difference between the two offences? In the appellant’s sub­
The following cases are referred to in their Lordships’ opinions:                mission there isa material difference. The statutory offence was introduced
Advocate, H.M. v. Earnshaw (unreported), May 22, 1981; (Note), 1982              in 1956 by section 8 of the Road Traffic Act 1956 because of the reluctance
    S.L.T. 179.                                                                  of juries to convict of manslaughter where death resulted from the accused’s
Andrews v. Director o f Public Prosecutions [1937] A.C. 576; [1937] 2            driving of a motor vehicle on the public highway. The very introduction
    All E.R. 552, H.L.(E.).                                                      of this offence for this reason suggests a material difference between the
Dunn v, H.M. Advocate, 1960 J.C. 55.                                             two offences, that one is more serious, one less serious. This is borne out
R*o V CnMwell ri9R?.l A.C. 341: 119811 2 W.L.R. 509: [19811 1 All                bv the fact that one carries a maximum penalty of life imprisonment; the
                                                                                                                                                                      497

                           Reg. v. Seymour (H.L.(E.))                        [1983]          2 A.C.                   Reg. v. Seymour (H .L.(E.))

     In Reg. v. Governor of Holloway Prison, Ex parte Jennings [1983] 1                      as a result oflhat damage some person by chance was killed, that could
A.C. 624 it was held that the offence of causing death by reckless driving                   not sustain a charge of manslaughter for manslaughter entails a knowledge
is still manslaughter and that the ingredients of the common law offence                     of risk to life to another; see Rex v. Bateman (1925) 19 Cr.App.R. 8. It
and of the statutory offence are co-extensive. On a practical level this                     is emphasised that for manslaughter the possibility of injury to another
raises problems for if there is no material difference between the two                       person must be foreseen; Director of Public Prosecutions v. Newbury
offences: (i) who decides which offence is to be charged?; (ii) how is the                    [1977] A.C. 500, 506, where there is a reference to Rex v. Larkin (1942)
accused to be advised as to the plea?; (iii) when should a plea to the                        29 Cr.App.R. 18, on which reliance is placed.
statutory offence be accepted? Further, suppose that the indictment in the                         A person can be convicted of causing death by reckless driving within
present case had contained two counts: (a) manslaughter and (b) causing                       Reg. v. Lawrence [1982] A.C. 510, who was not actually aware of the
death by reckless driving. In those circumstances is the judge bound to                       risk of harm and who had given no thought to the possibility of a risk of
say to the jury, “ If you convict the defendant on count two he must also                     harm. But such a person is not guilty of manslaughter; see Andrews v.
be guilty on count one ”? That part of the decision in Jennings [1983] 1                      Director of Public Prosecutions [1937] A.C. 576.
 A.C. 624 which states the above conclusion was obiter because the main                            On the basis of the decision in Reg. v. Lawrence [1982] A.C. 510,
 issue there was whether the offence with which the accused was charged                       three possible situations can arise: (i) The defendant knows of the risk of
 in California was properly described as manslaughter (a) so as to come                       physical harm to another person and goes on to take that risk. It is con­
 within Schedule 1 to the Extradition Act 1870, and not whether the two                       ceded that this is manslaughter, (ii) The accused takes no thought of the
 offences are co-extensive. (b) The main submission on behalf of the accused                  risk of physical harm to a person and would not have altered his conduct
 was that the unlawful killing of another by reckless driving was no longer                   if he had taken thought of it. He does not care whether there is harm
 manslaughter since manslaughter of that category had been impliedly                          because he is indifferent to the risk of harm— the “ I could not care less
 repealed in 1956 or 1972. (c) The appellant in the present case concedes                     person. It is conceded that this person is also guilty of manslaughter, (iii)
 the continued existence of manslaughter via such a killing; but contends                D The accused takes no thought to the possibility of a risk and would not
 for a material difference between the two offences, (d) There was no sub­                     have altered his conduct ifhe had taken thought because the circumstances
 mission in that case that manslaughter was only established where the                         as he believes them to be do not give rise to the risk— “ it never crossed
 recklessness proved against the accused involved recognition of the risks                     my mind.” Each of these three categories of accused is guilty of the
 taken by the accused. It is not disputed that on the facts of Jennings                        statutory offence but the accused in category (iii) is not guilty of the gross
 they could amount to manslaughter and that once the four conditions laid                      negligence envisaged in Andrews v. Director of Public Prosecutions [1937]
 down by Lord Roskill in that case were satisfied then the application by                      A.C. 576, 581 et seq., which is necessary to constitute manslaughter. On
 the United States government for the extradition of the accused was made                E the authority of that decision it is submitted that the trial judge should
 out. It is emphasised that in that case there was abundant evidence to                        impress upon a jury that a case of manslaughter is more serious than a
 justify a charge of manslaughter. Lord Roskill’s statement [1983] A.C.                        case of committing the statutory offence of causing death by reckless
 624, 644, that “ the offence of causing death by reckless driving of a motor                  driving.
                                                                                                    Graeme Hamilton Q.C. and Conrad Seagroatt Q.C. for the Crown. The
 vehicle on a road is still manslaughter by the law of England ” is obiter.
 The appellant would not dispute itifit had read: “ .... isstillcapable of                     Crown wishes to reserve its position in relation to the case postulated by
 being manslaughter.”                                                                     p the appellant where the victim has been killed as the result of the reckless
      It was established in Andrews v. Director of Public Prosecutions [1937]                   driver having done substantial damage to property.
  A.C. 576, that the criminal law recognised degrees of negligence, and that                        Once it is established that the offence of manslaughter and causing
  a very high degree of negligence has to be proved before manslaughter is                      death by reckless driving are co-existent (the Jennings case [1983] 1 A.C.
  established. In Reg. v. Lawrence {Stephen) [1982] A.C. 510, this House                        624) itonly remains to consider whether “ reckless ” has a different mean­
  specified the appropriate instruction to a jury in a case where the statutory                 ing in the two offences. Lord Atkin would have said that it did not: see
                                                                                                Andrews v. Director of Public Prosecutions [19371 A.C. 567, 583. The
  offence was charged. In the present case the trial judge directed the jury
  that if the driving which caused the death of the victim was reckless, then             G word “ reckless ” ought to have the same meaning where itis a constituent
  the offence was manslaughter. He then instructed the jury in accordance                       of different offences unless Parliament states to the contrary. Any other
  with the “ Lawrence direction.” This direction was suitable for the statutory                 course would lead to difficulties for juries.
  offence, but not for manslaughter. Manslaughter based on reckless driving                         The Crown rely on the following statement of Lord Atkin in Andrews
  requires an extra ingredient, for example, use of a vehicle as a weapon,                       [1937] A.C. 576, 584, “ Section 11 of the Road Traffic Act 1930 imposes
  which was never alleged here, or a definition of reckless which involves                      a penalty for driving recklessly or at a speed or in a manner which is
  recognition by the accused of the risk to his victim.                                   j^[ dangerous to the public. There can be no doubt that this section covers
                                                                                                 driving with such a high degree of negligence as that if death were caused
       Suppose that the recklessness alleged against the accused driver is reck-
  i     i..;..!—           n nn/>m U n f     \ t T n\i>r*>nrp in th a t th ftre was an           the offender would have committed manslaughter. But the converse is not
498                                                                                                                                                                                     499
                                      Reg. v. Seymour (H.L.(E.)>            ^             [1983]       2 A.C.                      Reg. v. Seymour (HX>.(E.))

 a manner dangerous to the public and cause death and yet'‘not be guilty                               59; Stone [1W] Q.B. 354 and Pigg [1982] 1 W.L.R. 762. The category
 of manslaughter.” The two approaches there set out are exemplified and                                (iii) accused in the appellant’s examples is not within the cases cited by
were approved in Rex v. Bateman , 19 Cr.App.R. 8, 13; Reg. v. Church                                   the Crown for there is not that gross degree of negligence present that is
 [1966] 1 Q.B. 59. 6 8 b - c ; Reg. v. Lowe [1973] Q.B. 7 0 2 , 7 0 8 d -e ; Reg.                      necessary to constitute the offence of manslaughter.
v. Stone [1977] Q.B. 354, 362, 363; Reg. v. Caldwell [1982] A.C. 341,
351, 353. The Crown rely especially on Reg. v. Lawrence [1982] A.C.                                        Their Lordships took time for consideration.
510 and Reg. v. Pigg [1982] 1 W.L.R. 762.
    To accede to the appellant’s submission in spite of the view expressed b                       B      July 21. L o r d D i p l o c k . My Lords, I have had the advantage of
in the above cases would entail holding that “ reckless ” has a different                              reading in draft the speech of my noble and learned friend. Lord Roskill.
meaning in manslaughter than in the statutory offence of causing death by                              I agree with it, and for the reasons he gives I would dismiss this appeal.
reckless driving. Since the decisions of the House in Caldwell [1982]
A.C. 341 and Lawrence [1 9 8 2 ] A.C. 51 0 , the definitions of reckless given                              L o r d F r a s e r o f T u l l y b e l t o n . My Lords, I have had the advantage
in those cases has been applied to other statutory offences. The obser­                                of reading in draft the speech of my noble and learned friend, Lord
vations of Lord Roskill in Jennings [1 9 8 3 ] 1 A.C. 624, 639e>-f, were not                           Roskill. I agree that, for the reasons stated by him, the appeal should
obiter. The four conditions there set out have to be satisfied before the ^                            be refused.
offence of manslaughter is proved. In that case the House was not con­                                      But I wish to refer to the difference which the appeal has brought to
cerned with the evidence but whether in view of the concession made on                                 light between the practice in the courts of England and Wales and that
behalf of the accused the terms of the extradition treaty were satisfied.                              in the courts of Scotland with regard to prosecutions for causing death
All the cases support the Crown’s submission and the Crown’s case is                                   by reckless driving of motor vehicles, in cases which are regarded as
completely covered by that of Jennings.                                                                particularly bad. In England and Wales the practice is to prosecute the
    [ L o r d F r a s e r o f T u l l y b e l t o n . Suppose an indictment contains both  j)      D   driver on a charge of manslaughter, but not to charge the statutory offence
a count of manslaughter and one of causing death by reckless driving. How                              of causing death by reckless driving, contrary to the Road Traffic Act
does the judge sum up to the jury on the question of recklessness?]                                     1972, section 1, as amended by the Criminal Law Act 1977, section 50. In
    The judge states that the ingredients of the offence are the same in                               Scotland the practice is to prosecute on one charge of culpable homicide,
both cases.                                                                                            or alternatively of the statutory offence, leaving the jury (if it decides to
    [L o rd F ra s e r o f T u lly b e lto n .         This is contrary to the practice in             convict) to decide whether to do so on the first or second alternative.
Scotland:see Dunn v. H.M. Advocate, 1960 J.C. 55.]                                                     The fact that there is such a difference between the procedure in the two
    The Crown’s contention is reinforced by considering the question of ^                              jurisdictions isperhaps surprising, as there is no relevant difference between
autrefois acquit. In relation to the present offences if an accused was                                 the crimes of manslaughter and culpable homicide, and the statutory offence
charged and acquitted of one of them he could not have then been charged                                is laid down by the same Act in both countries.
with the other: see Connelly v. Director of Public Prosecutions [1964]                                      Lord Roskill has explained the logical reasons why the English practice,
A.C. 1254, and Archbold Pleading, Evidence & Practice in Criminal Cases                                 at least since the passing of the Criminal Law Act 1977, has been to
41st ed., 1982, paragraph 4-68.                                                                         prosecute only for one or other of the common law or the statutory
    As to Dunn v. H.M. Advocate, 1960 J.C. 55, 59, the reason for that p                           F   offences. I have no intention of criticising the English practice, as it is
decision isbecause the court was there concerned with reckless or dangerous                            applied in England, but there are in my opinion good reasons why the
driving under section 8 (1) of the Road Traffic Act 1956. The word “ or ”                               Scottish practice should continue as it is in Scotland.
is stressed for the jury had to consider reckless or dangerous driving.                                     The Scottish practice was settled in Dunn v. H.M. Advocate, 1960 J.C.
Applying Andrews [1937] A.C. 576, the jury were left with the possibility                               55 where the accused had been tried on an indictment which charged
that this was dangerous driving on the part of the accused which isdriving,                             culpable homicide and the statutory offence as alternatives, and had been
carelessly or incompetently. That plainly is less than the degree of reck­                              convicted of culpable homicide. At that time, the statutory offence was
lessness necessary for culpable homicide. The definitive pronouncement ®                                that created by the Road Traffic Act 1956, section 8 (1) (driving “ reck­
of the law on this question is to be found in the decision of this House                                lessly or at a speed or in a manner which is dangerous to the public ”).
in Jennings [1983] 1 A.C. 624, which is right.                                                          As the degree of negligence which constitutes dangerous driving is less
    Connell Q.C. in reply. The burden of the Crown’s argument has
                                                                                                        than that which constitutes reckless driving, the statutory offence in that
been the meaning given to the word “ reckless ” in the various statutory                                form was clearly less serious than the common law crime of culpable
provisions with which the cases cited have referred. But in relation to                                 homicide, which requires recklessness. But it is plain that neither the trial
manslaughter, recklessness is not a necessary ingredient of the offence. In h                      H    judge (Lord Guest) nor the Lord Justice-Clerk (Lord Thomson), who
manslaughter the court is concerned with whether there is the degree of                                 delivered the only reasoned opinion in the High Court of Judiciary, based
negligence necessary to sustain the grave charge of manslaughter. That                                  the distinction on the use of the word “ dangerous.” Accordingly the
Jr       tliA   o n n A lto n f   rliftinntiicliA c   onrar   n i^>U   nr   f 1   1   1      13         amendment made by the Act of 1977, which deleted dangerous driving
500                                                                                                                                                                                                    501
oMTuUybckon             Re8- v- S*ymour (H.L.(E.))                                                      [1983]           2 A.C.                   Reg.   V.   Seymour (HX.(E.))             L o r d F ra s e r
                                                                                                                                                                J             '           of TuUybelton
from the statutory offence leaving it consisting only of driv.^ recklessly,                                              occurring beir^iitroduced into Scottish procedure where at present itdoes
has not affected the practice, which continues to be that in cases which A                                          A    not arise. If it became necessary for the judge, in answer to questions
appear to the prosecutor to be particularly bad, culpable homicide and                                                   from the jury, to refer to the question of sentence, I think that a jury is
the statutory offence are charged alternatively. At least one case has                                                   well able to understand the difference between selecting the actual sentence
been prosecuted in that way since 1977: see H.M. Advocate v. Earnshaw,                                                   (which is the duty of the judge) and selecting the offence which carries a
tried at Ayr on May 22, 1981 (reported only on another point on appeal                                                   m a x im u m sentence at least adequate to cover what is required in the
in 1982 S.L.T. 179).                                                                                                     circumstances of the case (which is the effect of the jury’s decision between
    The Scottish practice can, in my view, be justified on the ground that, B                                       B    culpable homicide and the statutory offence). If the choice is between
when Parliament created the statutory offence of reckless driving, itleft the                                            leaving the jury with a poor impression of the trial process, on the one
common law crimes of culpable homicide, and manslaughter, in existence.                                                  hand, and risking allowing a guilty motorist to escape wholly unpunished
This House decided in Reg. v. Governor of Holloway Prison, Ex parte                                                      because of some supposed technical difficulty in bringing alternative charges
Jennings [1983] 1 A.C. 624 that the crime of manslaughter had not been                                                   against him, on the other hand, I would have no hesitation in preferring
impliedly repealed and the decision is in principle applicable to culpable                                               the former.
homicide in Scotland. But in Jennings [1983] 1 A.C. 624, 644, 645, Lord                                                       I would only add that the number of cases in which, either in Scotland
Roskill said that “ the ingredients of the statutory offence are co-extensive                                            or in England, it will be appropriate to prosecute a motorist on a charge
with the ingredients of the ...common law offence of manslaughter,” and                                                  of culpable homicide or manslaughter must be very small, as itisextremely
itis suggested that the effect of that statement isthat any attempt to distin­                                           rare for conviction on such a charge to result in a sentence in excess of five
guish between the two offences according to their respective degrees of                                                  years’ imprisonment. In the instant appeal, and also in the case of
gravity, or indeed on any other ground, is illogical and wrong. It is said                                               Earnshaw, where the accused was convicted of culpable homicide, sentences
that they are not two offences but only one offence with two names. I do                                                 of five years’imprisonment were imposed.
not accept that argument. Although the ingredients of the two offences are D                                        X)        With regard to the certified question in this appeal, Mr. Connell’s sub­
the same, the degree of recklessness required for conviction of the statutory                                            mission that the direction suggested in Reg. v. Lawrence (Stephen) [1982]
offence is less than that required for conviction of the common law crime.                                               A.C. 510, should not be given in its entirety where the charge is one of
That is why the maximum sentence for the statutory offence (five years’                                                  manslaughter, is not, in my opinion, well founded. If any modification
imprisonment) is less than the maximum sentence for culpable homicide or                                                 of the “ Lawrence direction ” is appropriate in a case where manslaughter
manslaughter (imprisonment for life). That is also why, in cases such as                                                 alone is charged, it would be to add a warning to the jury that before
that which is the subject of the instant appeal, which the prosecutor con-                                               convicting of manslaughter they must be satisfied that the risk of death
siders to be very grave, it is thought appropriate to prosecute for the                                             E    being caused by the manner of the accused’s driving was very high. Such
                                                                                                                         a direction will, of course, always be necessary where the common law
com m on law crime.
                                                                                                                         crime and the statutory offence are charged alternatively, but where, as
    But then it is said to be wrong for the jury to be concerned with
                                                                                                                         in this case, the common law crime is charged alone, itmay be unnecessary
assessing the different degrees of turpitude between one case and another.                                               and inappropriate. In the present case I think itwas unnecessary.
It is of course the law in Scotland, as in England, that the decision on                                                      I would dismiss the appeal.
sentence is for the judge alone, but the jury’s decision to convict of culp­
able homicide rather than of the statutory offence does not oblige the judge ^                                      F
                                                                                                                           L o rd R o s k ill. My Lords, this appeal arises from the dismissal on
to impose a sentence of more than five years’ imprisonment. It merely                                                  January 12, 1983, by the Court of Appeal Criminal Division (Watkins L.J.
makes itpossible for him to do so, by increasing the range of punishments                                              and Lawson and Brown JJ.), of the appellant’s appeal against his con­
within which he can select that which he considers appropriate Since                                                   viction on January 15, 1982, for manslaughter after a trial at Northampton
the common law crime and the statutory offence continue to exist together,                                             Crown Court before Bush J. and a jury. The Court of Appeal (Criminal
and since (as is agreed) the distinction between the two depends on the                                                Division) granted the appellant a certificate to the terms of which I will
degree of wickedness exhibited by the accused, itseems to me to be perfectly G                                      ® later refer. Leave to appeal was refused by that court but was later given
proper (to put it no higher) that the duty of assessing the degree of                                                  by your Lordships’House.
wickedness should be performed by the jury in order to decide which                                                        The Crown’s case which was accepted by the jury was that the appellant
offence (if any) he has committed. That view has the overwhelming                                                       had killed Mrs. Ada Burrows by his reckless driving on a public highway
advantage in practice that it avoids the risk, which existed in the instant                                             of an 11 ton lorry. The allegation was that on April 30, 1981, following
appeal, that a person who is accused only of manslaughter or culpable                                                   a quarrel between the appellant and Mrs. Burrows with whom the appellant
homicide may be acquitted of that charge and may then go unpunished, jj                                             fj had been living, the appellant met Mrs. Burrows driving a Vauxhall car in
although he would have been convicted of the statutory offence if it had                                                the opposite direction from that in which he was driving the lorry. There
been charged as an alternative. Such a result would not, in my view, be                                                 was a slight collision. Mrs. Burrows got out of the Vauxhall car and
'• »            o f        n n <4   T   n r/M il J   U a   <i <->   r   4a   m   n   tU n   *4 r l r   r tf   !tn       approached the lorrv. He. allegedly intending onlv to push her car out
502                                                                                                                                                                                              503
Lord Roskill                     Reg. v. Seymour (H.L.(E.)>                                      ,19831               2 A.C.                    Reg. v. Seymour (H.L.(E.))              Lord Roskill
of the way, drove his lorry up againstthe car. He did soso^ Jently that                                               and in Reg. Vr-Lawrence (Stephen) [1982] A.C. 510, to which I have
the car was moved some ten to twentyfeet and one of itstyres was forced                                   A           already referred. The former case arose out of the Criminal Damage Act
off. In the course of so doing Mrs. Burrows was crushed between the two                                               1971. The latter was a tragic case arising under section 1 of the Road
vehicles. Her injuries were such that in the words of an ambulance driver                                             Traffic Act 1972, as amended in 1977, of causing death by reckless driving.
who gave evidence as quoted by the learned judge in his summing up,                                                       The decisions in this House in the former case by a majority, and in
“ had the ambulance driver picked her up in the normal way as ambulance                                               the latter, unanimously, made it plain what the words “ reckless ” or
drivers do, she would have broken in two.” She died about a week later                                                “ recklessly ” meant in these statutes, and in the latter case what the proper
on May 6, 1981.                                                                                           B           direction to the jury was in a case of causing death by the reckless driving
    The jury accepted those facts as established without hesitation for they                                          of a motor vehicle. My noble and learned friend, Lord Diplock, in a
unanimously convicted the appellant in just over three-quarters of an hour.                                           speech with which all my noble and learned friends then sittingagreed, said
It was an extremely grave case of “motor-manslaughter” to use the popular                                              [1982] A.C. 510, 526-527:
phrase, a view which the learned trial judge clearly took since he passed
a sentence of five years’imprisonment upon the appellant and your Lord­                                                    “ In my view, an appropriate instruction to the jury on what is
ships were told that there was no appeal to the Court of Appeal (Criminal                                                  meant by driving recklessly would be that they must be satisfied of
Division) against that sentence.                                                                          ^   q            two things:
    My Lords in recent years and indeed since the enactment of section 8                                                        “ First, that the defendant was in fact driving the vehicle in such a
of the Road Traffic Act 1956 when the statutory offence of causing death                                                   manner as to create an obvious and serious risk of causing physical
by reckless or dangerous driving was first created, charges of “ motor                                                     injury to some other person who might happen to be using the road
manslaughter ” have been comparatively rare. It is common knowledge                                                         or of doing substantial damage to property; and
that the statutory offence was created carrying a maximum penalty of five                                                       “ Second, that in driving in that manner the defendant did so with­
years’ imprisonment because of the extreme reluctance of juries to convict                                                  out having given any thought to the possibility of there being any
motorists of manslaughter. After 1956 when the statutory offence was                                          D             such risk or, having recognised that there was some risk involved, had
created, the practice in England and Wales was to charge the offence of                                                     nonetheless gone on to take it.
causing death by dangerous driving only and not by reckless driving.                                                            “ Itisfor the jury to decide whether the risk created by the manner
                                                                                                                            in which the vehicle was being driven was both obvious and serious
    The subsequent legislative history of this offence has recently been twice
                                                                                                                            and; in deciding this, they may apply the standard of the ordinary
discussed in your Lordships’ House, first in the speech of my noble and
learned friend Lord Diplock in Reg. v. Lawrence (Stephen) [1982] A.C.                                                       prudent motorist as represented by themselves.
                                                                                                              £                 “ If satisfied that an obvious and serious risk was created by the
510 and secondly in my speech in Reg. v. Governor of Holloway Prison,                                     ^
                                                                                                                            manner of the defendant’s driving, the jury are entitled to infer that
E x parte Jennings [1983] 1 A.C. 624 and requires no further repetition.
                                                                                                                            he was in one or other of the states of mind required to constitute
Suffice it to say that by reason of the enactment of section 50 of the
                                                                                                                            the offence and will probably do so; but regard must be given to
Criminal Law Act 1977, the former provisions of section 8 of the Act of
                                                                                                                            any explanation he gives as to his state of mind which may displace
1956, which by 1977 had become section 1 (1) of the Road Traffic Act
1972, were replaced by a new section 1 which provided that “ a person                                                       the inference.”
who causes the death of another person by driving a motor vehicle on                                      p   p             As to the second question, there had been, as Watkins L.J. said in
a road recklessly shall be guilty of an offence.”                                                                      giving the judgment of the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) in the
    This enactment in due course gave riseto two questions. First, what was                                            present case, a body of opinion which thought that the common law offence
the meaning of the word “ reckless ” in this new section? Or, to put the                                               of manslaughter by the reckless driving of a motor vehicle must be taken
same point in other words, what was the proper direction for the trialjudge                                             to have been impliedly repealed by section 50 of the Act of 1977, or
to give to a jury as to the test to be applied in determining whether or                                                possibly earlier. That view was taken by the Divisional Court in Jennings
not a person charged under this section was guilty of the offence charged?                                              [1982] 1 W.L.R. 949. But your Lordships’House in that case unanimously
Secondly, and in particular having regard to the speech of Lord Atkin in                                          ®    held otherwise. The argument founded on implied repeal was rejected for
Andrews v. Director of Public Prosecutions [1937] A.C. 576, 584, did                                                    the reasons given in my speech [1983] 1 A.C. 624, 639—644 which I will not
the common law offence of manslaughter by reckless driving of a motor                                                   repeat. But I added at p. 644, “ No doubt the prosecuting authorities
vehicle survive the enactment of section 50 of the Act of 1977, for ifitdid                                             today would only prosecute for manslaughter in the case of death caused
so survive there would be two offences, one at common law and the other                                                 by the reckless driving of a motor vehicle on a road in a very grave case.”
by statute which, since the ingredients of each were indistinguishable, would                                               My Lords, Jennings was decided on July 29, 1982, over a year after
be co-extensive, though one carried the maximum penalty of imprisonment                                   H       H    Mrs. Burrows’s death and some six months after the appellant’s trial at
for life, and the other of five years’imprisonment only.                                                                Northampton Crown Court. This trial also preceded the hearing of
    The meaning of the words “ reckless ” and “ recklessly ” came before                                                Jennings in the Divisional Court. As already stated, the appellant was
i - r tn v T   Kir1   U n n ra   In     r^hcck c O />rt   \t   f " 1s   i   l   f 1089 ]   A P    ^4-1.                  -i    1 — i     :*u                  rl/inhf h<v''iiic/» nf thp viV.w which the
                                                                                                                                                                  305
504                                                                                    2 A.C.                    Reg. v. Seymour (H .L.(E.))              Lord Roskill
Lord Roskill               Reg. v. Seymour (H X .(E .))                     983J
                                                                                       was appropria yh^., the statutory offence was charged, must be equally
prosecuting authorities took of the gravity of the case. Yoiit-j^ordships              appropriate wfiSfi the common law offence of manslaughter was charged.
were told that a plea of guilty to the statutory offence, had that also been           The Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) granted the appellant a certificate
charged, was proffered but was rejected by learned counsel for the Crown.              in the following terms:
I agree with the view of the Court of Appeal that this was an entirely                      “ Where manslaughter is charged and the circumstances of the offence
proper course for counsel for the Crown to have adopted. The jury was,                      are that the victim was killed as a result of the reckless driving of the
of course, unaware of this fact.
                                                                                            defendant on a public highway; should the trial judge give the jury
    After the close of the evidence, Mr. Michael Connell Q.C., for the appel­               the direction suggested in R. v. Lawrence in its entirety; or should
lant, invited the learned judge not to give thejury what Iwill call forbrevity     B        the direction be that only a recognition by the defendant that some
the “ Lawrence direction ” simpliciter, arguing that that direction was
                                                                                            risk was involved and he had nonetheless gone on to take it would
applicable only where the statutory offence was charged. He submitted                       be sufficient to establish the commission of the offence? ”
that where the common law offence of manslaughter was charged, thejury
should be directed that the Crown must further prove that the appellant                    In his able submissions on behalf of the appellant, Mr. Connell
recognised that some risk was involved and had nonetheless proceeded to                accepted, as he was indeed bound to accept, that the common law and
take that risk.                                                                        statutory offences co-existed but he challenged that it necessarily followed
    The learned judge rejected the submission and gave the “ Lawrence              ^   that the same direction was appropriate in both cases. He founded upon
direction ” subject only to the omission of any reference to the “ obvious             the phrase “ aggravating circumstances ”— a phrase used by Mr. Littman,
and serious risk ... of doing substantial damage to property ” : see Reg.              Q.C., counsel for the respondent in Jennings [ 1 9 8 3 ] 1 A.C. 6 2 4 and adopted
v. Lawrence {Stephen) [1982] A.C. 510, 526. In my view, he was entirely                in the last paragraph but two of my speech. Mr. Connell urged that the
right not to refer to damage to property, a reference to which was irrelevant          reference to “ aggravating circumstances ” showed that there might be
in this case and might well have confused the jury. His admirably clear                different degrees of recklessness in the different cases. He also urged that
direction not only properly reflected the decision of this House in Lawrence       D   what I had said regarding the ingredients of the two offences being identical
but also Lord Atkin’s speech in Andrews [1937] A.C. 576. Iquote the                    was obiter and should not be followed, especially as there had been no
relevant passages:                                                                     argument that knowledge of the risk involved was a prerequisite to con­
     “ The second question you have to decide; was the driving that caused             viction for manslaughter though not for the statutory offence. He also
     those injuries reckless? If so, then itis manslaughter. If you are not            challenged as obiter the sentence on p. 644 of the report that “ the offence
     satisfied that it was reckless, then the verdict is not guilty. To                of causing death by reckless driving of a motor vehicle on a road is still
     amount to reckless driving mere negligence is not enough. His con-            g   manslaughter by the law of England ...,” saying that the sentence should
     duct must go beyond the question of compensation between citizens                 have read only “ isstillcapable ofbeing manslaughter....”
     and amount to, in your view, criminal conduct requiring punishment.                   My Lords, I have carefully considered these criticisms but I am unable
     You have to be satisfied upon the question of recklessness that he                to accept any of them as valid. On p. 6 3 9 of the report I had listed the
     drove in such a manner as to create an obvious and serious risk of                four prerequisites to a successful application for the extradition of the
     causing physical harm to some other person who might happen to be                 respondent of which the first was that the crime charged in California was
     using the road at the time. ... Once you are satisfied that die matter            properly described in England as manslaughter. The argument was that
     of his driving was such as to create an obvious and serious risk of           F   it was not properly so described because of the suggested implied repeal
     causing physical harm to a person using the road at the time, you                 of the relevant part of the law of manslaughter. That argument was
     also have to be satisfied that driving in that manner he did so without           rejected for the reasons given at some length on pp. 6 3 9 -6 4 4 . The criti­
     having given any thought to the possibility of therebeing any such risk,          cised sentence on p. 64 4 was the last sentence of that part of my speech
     or alternatively, having recognised that there was some risk involved,            setting out those reasons. Itstates the conclusion to which the reasoning
     nonetheless went on to take it; in other words, he was reckless. He               had led and isnot obiter.
     reckoned not of theconsequences.                                              q
                                                                                           As to the passage in the last paragraph but two of my speech on
         “ In determining the quality,of his driving, you apply the standards          p. 6 45, this was directed to the fourth prerequisite stated at p. 639. Since
     of the ordinary reasonable motorist. You, of course, take into                    for the reasons given the two offences co-existed and the ingredients were
     account allthe evidence including his explanation....”                            thus the same, there was no room for Mr. Littman’s argument on
                                                                                       “ aggravating circumstances.” This passage was also not obiter but was
    As already stated, the appellant was convicted. He appealed and his                essential to the reasoning leading to the rejection of Mr. Littman’sargument
appeal to the Court of Appeal was dismissed. By the date of the appeal,                in connection with the fourth prerequisite.
Jennings [1983] 1 A.C 624 had been decided in your Lordships’ House,                        Mr. Connell also submitted that if the “ Lawrence direction ” were
The reasons given for the dismissal of his appeal were in substance, that              given in manslaughter cases and a conviction followed, the trial judge when
since your Lordships’House had held that the ingredients of the common                  considering sentence would not know whether the jury took the view that
law an d sta tu to ry offences were id en tical, th e T/zwrence direction, which
506                                                                                                                                                     '           30/
Lord Roskill             Reg. v. Seymour (H.L.(E.))                   [1983]             2 A.C.                   Reg. v. Seymour (H.L.(E.))                Lord Roskill
the defendant had deliberately taken a risk of which he was r re >jr not.                charge “ motoi mslaughter ” : that is where, as in the instant case, the
My Lords, juries do not and should not be asked to explain tt*=ir verdicts.     A        risk of death frSm a defendant’s driving was very high.
It is by no means unusual for a guilty verdict to be properly founded for a                   My noble and learned friend, Lord Fraser of Tullybelton, drew Mr.
number of reasons and it is for the judge, who is the person best placed                 Hamilton’s attention to the decision of the High Court of justiciary in
to assess the degree of turpitude involved in the light of the evidence and              D un n v. H.M. Advocate, 1960 J.C. 155, a case decided before the change
the jury’s verdict, to pass such sentence as he thinks right in all the                  in the law in 1977. It is clear from that decision and from other cases
circumstances. That sentence is of course always open to review if                       decided in Scotland since 1977 that the practice in Scotland has been to
necessary.                                                                      g        charge both culpable homicide, an offence identical with manslaughter in
    My Lords, I would accept the submission of Mr. Hamilton for the                      English law, and the statutory offence and to leave both charges with the
Crown that once it is shown that the two offences co-exist it would be                   jury for their determination according to their view of the gravity of the
quite wrong to give the adjective “ reckless ” or the adverb “ recklessly ” a            offence proved. I have had the advantage of reading the speech of my
different meaning according to whether the statutory or the common law                   noble and learned friend upon the practice which has prevailed in Scotland.
offence is charged. “ Reckless ” should today be given the same meaning                       My Lords, there was some debate before your Lordships whether in
in relation to all offences which involve “ recklessness ” as one of the                 England and Wales it should, since the decision in Jennings [1983] 1 A.C.
elements unless Parliament has otherwise ordained. That this has been so        c        624, be permissible to join in the same indictment one count alleging man­
in the past is shown by the respective decisions of the Court of Criminal                slaughter and another alleging the statutory offence, it now being clear that
Appeal and the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) in Reg. v. Church                      these offences co-existed and their ingredients were identical in point of law.
 [1968] 1 Q.B. 59, 68, and Reg. v. Lowe [1973] Q.B. 702, 708, to neither                      I know of nothing in the Indictments Act 1915 or the Indictments Rules
of which was the attention of this House drawn in either Reg. v. Caldwell                 1971 to preclude such joinder but in my view there are considerable prac­
 [1982] A.C. 341 or Lawrence. This was also clearly the view taken by                     tical difficulties in permitting it arising from the fact that, as I have just
the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) in Reg. v. Pigg [1982] 1 W.L.R.         D         endeavoured to explain, though the legal ingredients of the two offences
762: see especially the judgment of Lord Lane C.J. at pp. 770-772, with                   are the same, the degrees of turpitude may vary greatly between one case
all the reasoning in which I respectfully agree.                                          and another. Under the practice in England and Wales the assessment of
    In truth, Mr. Connell’s argument isan attempt to overcome an anomaly                  differing degrees of turpitude between one case and another is not a matter
resulting from the amendment of the law in 1977, an amendment made not                    relevant to the determination by jury of a defendant’s guilt or innocence
for the purpose of effecting a reform of substantive law but, as my noble                 of the particular offence charged. It is a matter relevant to the determina­
and learned friend, Lord Diplock pointed out in his speech in Lawrence                    tion by the judge of the appropriate penalty to be inflicted upon a defendant
 [1982] A.C. 510, 524, in connection with the re-distribution of criminal       E         found guilty of the offence with which he has been charged. Yet a jury
business between the Crown Courts and magistrates’ courts. The very                       if required to make a choice between convicting a defendant of motor
difficulty which Mr. Connell encountered in trying to distinguish between                 manslaughter at common law and convicting him of the less grave statutory
a defendant who gave no thought to a risk to which he was indifferent and                 offence, would have to be told what criteria they should apply in deter­
who even if he had thought of that risk would have acted in precisely the                  mining on which side of the boundary line between the two offences the
same way and a defendant who gave no thought to a risk because itnever                     case against the defendant falls. The only criterion that Parliament has
                                                                                    p      laid down is that the statutory offence does not merit a punishment ex­
crossed his mind that the risk existed, is eloquent of the need to prescribe
                                                                                           ceeding five years’ imprisonment while the common law offence of motor
a simple and single meaning of the adjective “ reckless” and the adverb                    manslaughter may. To tell the jury this, whether they be told it in the
“ recklessly” throughout the criminal law unless Parliament has otherwise                  speech of counsel for the defence or in answer to a question that a justifi­
ordained in a particular case. That simple and single meaning should be                    ably puzzled jury might well put to the judge, would make it difficult to
the ordinary meaning of those words as stated in this House in Caldwell                    avoid leaving them with the impression that only ifthey think that what the
 [1982] A.C. 341 and in Lawrence [1982] A.C. 510.                                          defendant did deserved to be punished by more than five years’imprison-
     Parliament must however be taken to have intended that “ motor man­            G      ment should they find him guilty of motor manslaughter. If the judge were
slaughter” should be a more grave offence than the statutory offence.                      then to sentence him to five years (as in the present case) or less, as well
While the former still carries a maximum penalty of imprisonment for life,                 he might, the jury would be left with a very poor impression of the trial
 Parliament has thought fit to limit the maximum penalty for the statutory                 process.
 offence to five years’ imprisonment, the sentence in fact passed by the                       In England and Wales itis for the prosecution and not for the court to
 learned trial judge upon the appellant upon his conviction for man­                        decide what charge or charges should be made against a particular de­
 slaughter. This difference recognises that there are degrees of turpitude          ll     fendant. The prosecution is entitled to consider all the circumstances of
 which will vary according to the gravity of the risk created by the manner                 the case before so deciding. In the instant case the prosecution properly
 of a defendant’s driving. In these circumstances your Lordships may think                  charged manslaughter and manslaughter alone. In doing so the prosecution
 that in future it will only be very rarely that it will be appropriate to                  took the risk that a jury might have refused to convict the appellant of that
                           Reg. v. Seymour (H.L.(E.))                     I1983J           2 A.C.

crime though on the evidence it is difficult to see how any reason; 2 jury
could have acquitted him of that offence. But had he bea ;quitted he               A                                        [h o u s e o f l o r d s ]
would have gone unpunished even though the jury might have convicted
him of the statutory offence had that been charged.                                        TATE & LYLE INDUSTRIES LTD.
    In my opinion that consideration cannot justify the joinder of both                       (formerly TATE & LYLE F O O D A N D
charges in a single indictment. In future if in any case in England and                       DISTRIBUTION LTD.) a n d A n o t h e r .                   .   .      A p p e lla n ts
Wales any such joinder should occur I think itmust behove the trialjudge                                                              and
to require the prosecution to elect upon which of the two counts in the            3   B
indictment they wish to proceed and not to allow the trial to proceed                      GREATER L O N D O N COUNCIL                  and A n o th e r .   .   R e sp o n d e n ts
upon both counts. This may result in a different practice prevailing in
England and Wales from that which has prevailed in Scotland, a part of                     1983     Jan. 24, 25, 26, 27, 31;             Lord Diplock, Lord Keith of Kinkel,
the United Kingdom over which no criminal jurisdiction is exercised by                              Feb. 1, 2, 3;                       Lord Roskill, Lord Bridge of Harwich
                                                                                                    M arch 24                                           and Lord Templeman
this House. But since it is clear that the substantive law is the same in
both countries, differences in practice may be thought to be not of great
importance.                                                                        ^   C   River— Riparian owner—Navigation— Port o f London— Riparian
                                                                                               owner constructing jetties in bed o f river under licence— Ferry
    I would therefore answer the certified question as follows: “Where                         terminals erected downstream causing siltation in vicinity of
manslaughter is charged and the circumstances are that the victim was                          jetties necessitating dredging— W hether riparian owner entitled
killed as a result of the reckless driving of the defendant on a public                        to damages for negligence or nuisance— W hether having right
                                                                                               to maintenance of particular depth of water— London County
highway, the trial judge should give the jury the direction suggested in                       Council (Improvements) A c t 1962 (10 <6 11 Eliz. 2, c. xlix),
Reg. v. Lawrence but it is appropriate also to point out that in order to                      ss. 17, 50 (3) (a )1— Port of London A ct 1968 (c. xxxii), s. 66
constitute the offence of manslaughter the risk of death being caused by           D   D          (1)(b)2
the manner of the defendant’s driving must be very high.”                                            The first plaintiffs had for many years operated a sugar
   I would dismiss this appeal.                                                                  refinery on the north bank of the Thames in the Woolwich
                                                                                                Reach upstream of the Woolwich Ferry. In 1922, under licence
                                                                                                under the Port of London (Consolidation) Act 1920 from the
    L o r d B r id g e o f H a r w ic h . My Lords, for the reasons given in the
                                                                                                second defendants, the port authority, in whom the river bed
speech of my noble and learned friend, Lord Roskill, with which I agree,                        was vested, they had constructed a jetty (“ the refined sugar
I would dismiss the appeal.                                                        ^   £       jetty ”) in the river bed adjacent to their refinery. In 1965,
                                                                                                they had obtained a licence from the second defendants under
                                                                                                the Act of 1920 for the construction of a second jetty (“ the
    L o r d T em p lem an . My Lords, I have had the advantage of reading in                    raw sugar jetty ”) in the river bed and for the dredging in
draft the speech of my noble and learned friend, Lord Roskill. I agree                          the river bed of a channel giving access to it for large vessels
with it,and for the reasons he gives I would dismiss this appeal.                               carrying raw sugar and of a berth at its head six feet below
                                                                                                main channel depth. Between 1964 and 1966, the predecessors
                                                                                                of the first defendants, in the exercise of powers conferred on
                                                        Appeal dismissed.              p       them by the London County Council (Improvements) A ct 1962
                                                                                   F            and with the approval required thereunder of the second
   Solicitors: Sharpe, Pritchard & Co., for Keith Turner &             Galpin,                  defendants, constructed two new terminals in the Thames for
Northampton; Director of Public Prosecutions.                                                   the Woolwich Ferry. The effect of the terminals was to cause
                                                                                                siltation of the channel and berth dredged by the first plaintiffs
                                                                                                for the purposes of the raw sugar jetty and of the bed of the
                                                                  J. A. G.                      river between the refined sugar jetty and the main shipping
                                                                                                channel of the river. As a result, to enable the jetties to be
                                                                                       Q       operated, the first plaintiffs, with the consent of the second
                                                                                                defendants, incurred additional dredging costs between 1967
                                                                                                and 1974 totalling £540,000. Thereafter, major alterations to
                                                                                                the shipping channel made by the second defendants ended the
                                                                                                siltation. The plaintiffs brought an action against the defend­
                                                                                                ants for, inter alia, damages for negligence and nuisance.
                                                                                                Forbes J. held that the civil engineers who had designed the
                                                                                                terminals for the first defendants should have realised that they
                                                                                                might cause substantial siltation and should have taken expert
                                                                                   H
                                                                                               1 London County Council (Improvements) Act 1962, ss. 17, 50 (3) (a): see post,
                                                                                           pp. 538f—539a, e ).
                                                                                              2 Port of London Act 1968, s. 66 (1) (b): see post, p. 535f.
                            Reg. v. Pinfold (C.A.)                   [1988]      1 Q.B.                            Reg. v. Pinfold (C.A.)

     “Parliament must be presumed to be mindful of the e^ t'o make a                For thosr tasuns, despite the able arguments of Mr. Mansfield, we
     an end to proceedings and prima facie an appeal meL« one appeal             have come tirthe conclusion that we have no jurisdiction to entertain
     and ‘an application’ means one application. Although section 11(2)          this application and accordingly the application must be refused.
     contains some safeguard against frivolous applications, we do not
     think that repeated applications are contemplated merely because                                                                               Application refused.
     they are made at the applicant’s own risk.”
                                                                                    Solicitors: Bindman & Partners.
Then he goes on to consider the question of the Secretary of State’s B
powers under, so far as we are concerned, section 17 of the Criminal                                                                                              L. N. W.
Appeal Act 1968. He said, at p. 580:
     “If section 8 [of the Courts-Martial (Appeals) Act 1968] envisages
     more than one appeal arising out of the same conviction, the
     purpose of the Secretary of State’s powers .. . becomes obscure,
     because it would follow that the applicant could always approach C
     the court directly without the intervention of the Secretary of
     State.”

    As to that, Mr. Mansfield puts forward this proposition. He submits
that it is not the applicant’s fault that the evidence which is sought to be
adduced has come to light late in the day. He did not know that it
existed. He suggests that to cast the applicant upon the mercy of the D
Secretary of State would be an injustice. It is imposing between the                                           [q u e e n ’s b e n c h d iv is io n ]
applicant and the court a further discretion, that of the Secretary of
State, which may not be exercised in his favour and that, he submits,                               REGINA v. W E S T L O N D O N CORONER,
would be unfair.                                                                                         Ex parte G R A Y a n d O t h e r s
    But the final and most important part of the judgment so far as the                             REGINA v. W E S T L O N D O N CORONER,
application with regard to section 23 is concerned is to be found in E                                  Ex parte D U N C A N a n d O t h e r s
almost the last paragraph of the judgment. Widgery L.J. said, at p. 580:
                                                                                  1986 Dec. 15, 16; 19                                                  Watkins L.J. and Roch J.
     “Mr. Eastham, however, takes one further point. He refers us to
     section 28(1) of the Act, under which this court can receive fresh           Coroner—Inquest—Verdict—Death following detention in P°Jice
     evidence and points out that under section 28(2) it is provided that             custody—Jury returning verdict o f unlawful killing Standard o f
     where such evidence is tendered the court shall receive it if the                proof—Jury foreman adding rider—Whether to be included m
     conditions of the subsection are satisfied. Accordingly, he contends p           verdict—Jury supplied with coroner’s notes—Rule against jury
     that where an application for leave is based on fresh evidence of an             determining civil liability—Whether rule ultra vires Insufficiency
                                                                                      o f evidence—Jurisdiction o f High Court to quash verdict—
     acceptable kind the court must have jurisdiction to hear the                      Coroners Act 1887 (50 & 51 Viet. c. 71), ss. 4(3), 6-Coroners
     application, since it cannot otherwise comply with the mandatory                  Rules 1984 (S.I. 1984 No. 552), r. 42
     terms of section 28(2). In our judgment, however, section 28                 Judicial Review—Coroner’s inquest—Application to quash verdict—
     presupposes the existence of a competent appeal or application, and              Jurisdiction o f High Court to quash verdict on ground o f
     is concerned only with the procedure thereon.”                                    insufficiency o f evidence
                                                                             G                A coroner’s inquest was convened to inquire into the cause
    In other words what Widgery L.J. is saying is that before section                     of death of the deceased who, shortly after his arrest and
28— which in our case is section 23— can come into operation at all, the                  detention in a police station, was taken to hospital, where he
applicant must bring himself within section 1 of the Criminal Appeal Act                  died. After the coroner had summed up to the jury and they
1968 in our case.                                                                         had retired, the coroner, in the absence of counsel and at the
   That judgment in Reg. v. Grantham [1969] 2 Q.B. 574, although itis                     request of the jury, handed to the jury the notes he had used to
based upon the Courts-Martial (Appeals) Act 1968 and not upon the                         direct them on the law relating to unlawful killing which
                                                                                          included directions on the offence of manslaughter by neglect.
Criminal Appeal Act 1968, is in our judgment in effect binding upon us. ^                 The jury returned a verdict of unlawful killingbut in announcing
Even if it were not strictly binding upon us, it would be of such great                   the verdict the jury foreman added the words “as a result of the
force as to compel us to follow it. In any event, in the judgment of this                 degree of care given to him after he was overpowered. The
court itis correct.                                                                        additional words were not recorded on the face ofthe inquisition.
468                                                                                                                                                                             469
                    Reg. v. West London Coroner, Ex p. Gray (D.C.)           [1988]           j q .b .                     v. West London Coroner, Ex p. Gray (D.C.)

                The applicants, who were police officers responsible for the              a         Reg. v. Surrey Coroner, Ex parte Campbell [1982] Q.B. 661; [1982] 2
                 deceased’s welfare during the period of his arrest and detention,                      W .L.R. 626; [1982] 2 All E.R. 545, D.C.
                 sought to challenge the verdict and the inquisition on the
                grounds that the coroner’s direction to the jury on the law of                      The following additional cases were cited in argument:
                 manslaughter was wrong; that the jury’s verdict contravened                        Andrews v. Director o f Public Prosecutions [1937] A.C. 576; [1937] 2 All
                 rule 42 of the Coroners Rules 19841 in that it appeared to
                determine a question of civil liability; that rule 42 itself was                        E.R. 552, H.L.(E.)
                 ultra vires and inconsistent with section 4(3) of the Coroners                     Calvi, deed., In re, The Times, 2 April 1983, D.C.
                 Act 18872; that the coroner’s act in passing his notes to the jury   B             Davis, deed., In re [1968] 1 Q.B. 72; [1967] 2 W.L.R. 1089; [1967] 1 All
                after they had retired was a material irregularity affecting the                         E.R. 688, C.A.
                course of the inquest, and that the verdict was against the                         Dellow’s Will Trusts, In re [1964] 1 W .L.R. 451; [1964] 1 All E.R. 771
                weight of the evidence.                                                             Hornal v. Neuberger Products Ltd. [1957] 1 Q.B. 247; [1956] 3 W .L.R.
                     On the applicants’ application for judicial review and an                           1034; [1956] 3 All E.R. 970, C.A.
                order of certiorari to quash the verdict and inquisition;—                          Rapier, deed., In re [1986] 3 W .L.R. 830; [1986] 3 All E R. 726 D.C.
                     Held, allowing the application and quashing the verdict and                    Reg. v. Cardiff City Coroner, Ex parte Thomas [1970] 1 W .L.R. 1475,
                inquisition, (1) that the coroner had misdirected the jury in that    r                  [1970] 3 All E.R. 469, D.C.                                      _
                he had failed to direct that in order to find a verdict of unlawful                 Reg. y. Directors o f the Great Western Railway Co. (1888) 20 Q .B .D . 410,
                killing they had to be satisfied that the act or omission of a                           D.C.
                single police officer with responsibility for the welfare of the                     Reg. v. Hampshire County Council, Ex parte Ellerton [1985] 1 W .L.R. 749,
                deceased amounted to unlawful conduct which was a substantial                            [1985] 1 All E.R . 599, C.A.
                cause of death, that such conduct was reckless and that mere                         Reg. v. H.M. Coroner fo r the County o f Central Cleveland, Ex parte Dent
                neglect would not suffice; that the coroner had failed to direct                          (1986) 150 J.P.R . 251
                the jury as to the correct standard of proof which, in relation to                   Reg. v. H.M. Coroner fo r the County o f Devon, Ex parte Glover (1985) 149
                a verdict of unlawful killing, as in any case where death was         D
                alleged to have resulted from the commission of a criminal                               J P R 208
                                                                                                     Reg. v. Lawrence (Stephen) [1982] A.C. 510; [1981] 2 W .L.R. 524, [1981] 1
                offence, was that of proof beyond reasonable doubt; and that
                the coroner’s act in handing his notes to the jury was, in the                            All E.R . 974, H .L .(E .)                                               .
                                                                                                     Res v Secretary o f State fo r the Home Department, Ex parte Khawaja
                circumstances, a material irregularity affecting the inquisition
                                                                                                          [ 19841 A C 74; [1983] 2 W .L.R. 321; [1983] 1 All E.R. 765, H .L .(E .)
                (post, pp. 476 f—477 b, g - h , 478c- d , 480 c- d).
                     (2) That the words “as a result of the degree of care given                     Reg v. Seymour (Edward) [1983] 2 A.C. 493; [1983] 3 W.L.R. 349; [1983]
                to" the deceased “after he was overpowered” added by the jury         „
                foreman in announcing the verdict of unlawful killing showed                             R eg^v^Stont^l 1977] Q^B . 354; [1977] 2 W .L.R. 169; [1977] 2 All E .R . 341,
                that the jury were attributing the deceased’s death to neglect                               C.A.
                after his arrest and as such formed an essential part of their                           Reg. v. Walthamstow Coroner, Ex parte Rubenstein [1982] Crim.L.R. 509
                verdict and ought to have been recorded on the face of the                               Reg. v. West Yorkshire Coroner. Ex parte Smith [1983] Q.B. 335; [1982] 3
                inquisition; but that since neither the veidict as framed nor as                             W .L.R. 920; [1982] 3 All E.R. 1098, C.A.
                recorded gave the appearance of identifying by name or                                   Rex v. Bateman (1925) 19 Cr.A pp.R. 8, C.A.
                otherwise a person as blameworthy for the cause of death, there                          Southall v. Cheshire County News Co. Ltd. (1912) 5 B.W.C.C. 251, C.A .
                had been no breach of rule 42 of the Coroners Rules 1984              F
                (post, pp. 478h— 479d).
                    Per curiam, (i) Instances may arise where observing the
                                                                                                                     for judicial review.
                                                                                                     A p p lic a tio n s
                statutory duty may carry the risk of a clash between section 4 of
                                                                                                    The applicants in the first application, Glyn Roger Gray, Dean
                the Coroners Act 1887 and rule 42 of the Coroners Rules 1984.                   Morris Thompson and Michael Bernard Howard, all police officers m
                But careful framing of the verdict consistent with the jury’s                   the Metropolitan Police, and the applicants in the second application,
                conclusion should avoid that. Rule 22 was intra vires (post,                    Thomas Duncan, Charles Morris, Roger Kent, Raymond Catling and
                p. 479g ).                                                                      John Kynaston, likewise police officers in the Metropolitan Police,
                    (ii) The development of judicial review cannot possibly allow     ^         applied for judicial review and sought an order of certiorari to bring up
                verdicts by juries at inquests to stand which are based on no or                and quash the verdict and inquisition returned at the West London
                wholly insufficient evidence (post, pp. 479h— 480a ).
                                                                                                Coroner’s Court by John David Keith Burton, Her Majesty’s Coroner
  The following cases are referred to in the judgment of Watkins L.J.:                          for the Western District of Greater London, and a jury on 27 March
      Reg. v. City o f London Coroner, Ex parte Barber [1975] 1 W.L.R. 1310;
                                                                                                1986, in respect of the death of John William Mikkelsen. The grounds
          [1975] 3 All E.R. 538, D.C.                                                           for the applications, which were heard together, were that the verdict of
      Reg. v. South London Coroner, Ex parte Thompson. The Times, 9 July              “         the jury was framed in such a way as to appear to determine a question
          1982, D.C.                                                                             of civil liability in contravention of rule 42 of the Coroners Rules 1984,
                                                                                                 that the coroner’s direction to the jury on the meaning of “unlawful
 | Coroners Rules 1984, r. 42: see p ost, p. 475 d .                                             ifiilmo”       wrnnp in law. inadequate and confusing; that the direction
470                                                                                                                                                                                    471
                 Reg. v. West London Coroner, Ex p. Gray (D.C.) ..        [1988]           j q .B.          >g. v. West London Coroner, Ex p. Gray (D.C.)                Watkins L.J.

as to thestandard of proof necessary to return a verdict of unlawful a                 A   their car. The constables’suspicions were in fact unfounded but genuinely
killing was wrong in law; that the finding of the jury was against the                     held at the time. The two cars stopped in the nearby Bedfont Close
weight of the evidence; and that the act of the coroner in supplying to                    where the parents of Krafft lived. Krafft was arrested. An attempt was
the jury at their request after their retirement and in the absence of                     made to take him to the police car. It was resisted and a very violent
counsel his typed notes headed “Conclusions as to type of death” which                     scene ensued, in the course of which Police Constable Peacock drew his
had formed the basis of his direction to them on the law relating to                       truncheon and struck both Mikkelsen and Krafft once on the head
manslaughter was a material irregularity in the course of the inquisition.
    The facts are stated in the judgment of Watkins L.J.                   B           B        Reinforcements were called for. They arrived. Mikkelsen was
                                                                                           overpowered. He became unconscious or lapsed into a drunken stupor.
   R. Alun Jones for the applicants in the first application.                              A police district support unit came to the scene containing a number of
   E d m u n d Lawson for the applicants in the second application.                        other officers. Mikkelsen and others, including Krafft’s father, were put
   Kieran Coonan for the coroner.                                                          in this and taken to Hounslow Police Station. The van arrived there at
   Michael Beloff Q.C. and Oscar del Fabbro for the next of kin of the                     12         10 a m. Mikkelsen was put upon the floor of the charge room where
deceased.                                                                          q   r   he remained until taken to hospital. A pool of clear vomit was seen near
                                                                                           his mouth on the floor at one stage. At 12.19 a doctor was called for
                                                             Cur. adv. vult.               and 10 minutes later an ambulance. At 12.37 the ambulance arrived.
                                                                                           The ambulance attendant found Mikkelsen to have a good pulse and to
    19 December. W a tk in s L.J. read the following judgment. On                          be breathing. His pulse had previously been checked in the charge room
                                                                                            by one or more police officers. The comparatively short journey to the
16 July 1985 at the West Middlesex Hospital John William Mikkelsen
died. He was 34 years of age. He was a large coloured man known to                 ^        hospital from the police station was not regarded as an emergency, so
                                                                                       D    the blue light was not used. On arrival at the hospital a nurse felt
use six other names at different times. He was a dispatch rider by
                                                                                            Mikkelsen’s pulse. It was present although weak, and he was thought to
occupation. Immediately before his death he was a resident of West                          appear quite normal. However, when a short time later he was rolled on
London and a member of the so-called Hell’s Angels. His death was                           to a hospital trolley bed it was seen that he was not breathing. He had
given wide publicity in the press, by broadcast and by television.
                                                                                            no pulse. Resuscitation of him was immediately attempted. It was
Allegations began to be made of a most serious nature against a large
                                                                                            unsuccessful and at 1.20 a.m. he was pronounced dead.
number of police officers of the use of violence against Mikkelsen, of                  _        Examination of him later on revealed, among many other things,
mishandling him, of failing to bring medical attention to him and of               E        that at the time of the fight in Bedfont Close he had a blood alcohol
neglecting in proper time to obtain an ambulance so that he could be                         reading of 190 to 195 milligrammes of alcohol per 100 millilitres of
taken to hospital and there receive suitable medical attention and                           blood calculated from a reading taken upon examination of 172
treatment.
                                                                                             milligrammes. His blood also contained traces of cannabis and
    On the night of Mikkelsen’s death a formal police investigation into                     amphetamines. This recital of events is deliberately brief and shorn of
the circumstances of it began. A number of police officers were served                       much detail and of allegation and counter-allegation. Subsequently,
with a notice under regulation 7 of the Police Discipline Regulations              p     F various persons were charged with offences against the arresting police
1985. Disciplinary procedures are still in contemplation by the                              constable. They appeared at a magistrates’ court where the charges
Commissioner of the Metropolitan Police. Accordingly, although the
Director of Public Prosecutions has now indicated that no police officer                     against them were dismissed.
                                                                                                  Meanwhile, an inquest opened by Dr. Burton, the coroner for the
will be prosecuted for a criminal offence, a substantial number of police
                                                                                             Western District of Greater London on 23 July 1985, lay adjourned. It
officers, from the rank of chief inspector downwards, have been and
remain suspended from duty since the inquest to which I shall soon be                         was resumed with a jury on 17 March 1986 and concluded, after a mne-
referring. Whether suspension of anyone, which as seems inevitable will            G     r day hearing, on 27 March 1986. According to the inquisition, the came
go on for a considerable time yet, was ever justified, only time will tell.                   of death was cerebral anoxia due to inhalation of stomach contents. The
    The events which brought these officers to their unhappy situation                        time place and circumstances at or in which the injury was sustained are
and Mikkelsen to his death began in the late evening of 15 July 1985.                         stated to be that Mikkelsen was arrested on 15 July 1985 and taken to
Constables Peacock and Renton were on duty near a public house                                Hounslow Police Station. He was transferred to the West Middlesex
in Bedfont, Middlesex, when they saw Mikkelsen and two other                                  Hospital and there certified dead. The conclusion of the jury as to death
members of the Hell’s Angels, named Alan Krafft and Griffen, behaving              „          is stated to be that he 'was unlawfully killed. Those words did not
in a rather unruly manner. All three of them got into a motor car. The                   H represent everything the foreman of the jury said when announcing the
officers suspected that itbelonged to none of them and decided to arrest                       verdict. That is common ground between counsel who have appeared
the driver and his nassensers for unlawfully takins or beine carried in                        before us for friends of Mikkelsen, some of the police officers and the
                                                                                                                                             •              .x . . . I l . i   «   4     ■ f f a f*
All                                                                                                                                                      473
Watkins L.J.    Reg. v. West London Coroner, Ex p. Gray (D.C.)     [1988]      j Q.B.           R(   i. West London Coroner, Ex p. Gray (D.C.)   Watkins L.J.

slightly, the words “unlawfully killed attributed to th&>_egree of care a      and confusing,"-nfct he failed to leave to them at least one other verdict
after he was overpowered,” represent what the foreman was heard to             which was open to them upon the evidence, and that there was a
say by all present, as near as may be.                                         material irregularity introduced after the jury’s retirement, in that in the
    The coroner’s version of it, as appears from his first affidavit, is:      absence of counsel for the interested parties the coroner supplied to the
     “The transcript when available will no doubt demonstrate the point        jury at their request a copy of his typed notes entitled “Conclusions as
                                                                               to the type of death” which had formed the basis of his directions as to
     with greater clarity but the verdict which was recorded by me in
     writing was quite simply ‘unlawfully killed.’ The foreman after g         the law. In any event, it is said that such notes were apt to confuse.
     delivering these two words then spontaneously appeared to add                 We heard first the submissions of Mr. Alun Jones. They were
     (and I paraphrase) that this verdict was intended (by the jury) to        interrupted early on by Mr. Beloff, counsel for the friends of Mikkelsen,
     cover the circumstances of manslaughter by neglect from the time          who told us that he would not be seeking to oppose the applications to
                                                                                quash the verdict and inquisition and for a fresh inquest. This, he said,
     the deceased was overpowered. This may have been added by the
                                                                                was because he regards the coroner’s directions upon the law of
     jury in order to dispel any suggestion that the verdict of ‘unlawful
                                                                                manslaughter as critically defective. Mr. Coonan, counsel for the
     killing’ could reflect an acceptance by them that the deceased had
     been murdered. ...”                                                  C     coroner, who has adopted a wholly proper, neutral and helpful role m
                                                                                this hearing, does not dissent from that view.
He went on to add:                                                                  I think it right to preface consideration of the excellent submissions
                                                                                which we have listened to by reciting the words used by Lord Lane C.J.
    “I for my part did not understand the jury foreman’s entire words           in Reg. v. South London Coroner, Ex parte Thompson, The Times, 9
    to constitute the formal verdict but such words are impossible to           July 1982 in giving the judgment of the court of which I was a member
    ignore when faced with what otherwise might have appeared to
    have been a non-specific verdict which without more might have q            on 8 July 1982. He said:
    been damaging to the applicants by its very ambiguity.”                           “The coroner’s task in a case such as this is a formidable one, and
                                                                                      no one would dispute that; that is quite apart from the difficulties
    To these observations of the coroner I shall be returning in due                  which inevitably arise when feelings are running high and the
course.                                                                               spectators are emotionally involved and vocal. Once again it should
    Constables Gray, Thompson and Howard have leave to move for                       not be forgotten that an inquest is a fact finding exercise and not a
judicial review of the coroner’s inquest. They are represented by Mr.                 method of apportioning guilt. The procedure and rules of evidence
Alun Jones. They seek orders of certiorari to quash the verdict and E                 which are suitable for one are unsuitable for the other. In an
inquisition, mandamus ordering a new inquest and a declaration as to                  inquest it should never be forgotten that there are no parties, there
the standard of proof required for the return of a verdict of unlawful                is no indictment, there is no prosecution, there is no defence, there
killing. These officers were involved in the detention and the removal to              is no trial, simply an attempt to establish facts. It is an inquisitorial
custody of Mikkelsen after his arrest. They were recognised by the                     process, a process of investigation quite unlike a criminal trial
coroner as interested persons. They all gave evidence at the inquest, as               where the prosecutor accuses and the accused defends, the judge
did the arresting officers.                                                -           holding the balance or the ring, whichever metaphor one chooses to
    The grounds on which they rely for the relief they seek are: (1) the               use.”
verdict of the jury was framed in such a way as to appear to determine a
question of civil liability in contravention of rule 42 of the Coroners              There is no suggestion that at this inquest the spectators were vocal.
Rules 1984 (S.I. 1984 No. 552); (2) the coroner’s directions to the jury         That apart, everything there said is applicable to it. I would add that it
on the meaning of “unlawful killing” were wrong in law, inadequate and           is the coroner who calls the witnesses and questions them. The role of a
confusing; (3) the directions on the standard of proof necessary to return       witness’s representative is confined to asking questions after the coroner
a verdict of unlawful killing were wrong; and (4) the finding of unlawful G      has finished with the witness. He is not allowed to address the jury as to
killing was not supported by the evidence.                                       the evidence. Advocacy has therefore almost no influence, no part m the
    Chief Inspector Duncan, Inspector Morris, Sergeant Kent, Inspector           proceedings. This is in marked contrast to the criminal trial. The
Catling and Sergeant Kynaston also have leave to move for judicial               ordinary rules of evidence do not apply. This enlarges the scope of the
review of the coroner’s inquest. The relief they seek is similar to that          inquiry but may well, among the other matters I have referred to,
sought by the officers already mentioned. They were concerned in one              detract from the value of the verdict which cannot be regarded as
way or another and at various times with events after arrest and up to            conclusive, at any rate if it is to the effect that a crime has been
the removal of Mikkelsen to hospital. They are represented by Mr.                 committed. The coroner has the central and dominant role. He has
Lawson. The grounds which they seek to rely upon are, broadly                     powers at common law and he is bound by statutes and rules, t e
speaking, similar to those already mentioned. They also contend that the          provisions of which he must observe scrupulously in conducting the
directions eiven to the iurv bv the coroner as to the law were defective          hearing.
                                                                                1 Q.B.          Reg. v. West London Coroner, Ex p. Gray (D.C.)   Watkins L.J.
Watkins L.J.     Reg. v. West London Coroner, Ex p. Gray (D.C.)       [1988]
                                                                                    Power was " ;en by Parliament for the making of rules. The relevant
   The main provisions which it is necessary here to reft :o are the            rules are callfcu the Coroners Rules 1984. Rule 22(1) provides: “No *
following. I turn first to the governing Act, the Coroners Act 1887. By         witness at an inquest shall be obliged to answer any question tending to
section 4, so far as is material, itisprovided:                                 incriminate himself.” Rule 36, dealing with matters to be ascertained at
     “(1) The coroner and jury shall, at the first sitting of the inquest       an inquest, provides:
     . .. examine on oath touching the death all persons who tender                  “(1) The proceedings and evidence at an inquest shall be directed
     their evidence respecting the facts and all persons having knowledge            solely to ascertaining the following matters, namely-(a) who the
     of the facts whom he thinks it expedient to examine. .. (3) After               deceased was; (b) how, when and where the deceased came by his
     . .. hearing the evidence the jury shall give their verdict, and                death ... (2) Neither the coroner nor the jury shall express any
     certify it by an inquisition in writing, setting forth, so far as such          opinion on any other matters.”
     particulars have been proved to them, who the deceased was, and
     how, when, and where the deceased came by his death ...”                   Out of the window went the rider. Rule 40 provides: “No person shall
                                                                                be allowed to address the coroner or the jury as to the facts.” Rule 41
    By section 6(1) itis provided:                                              provides:
     “Where Her Majesty’s High Court .. . upon application made                      “Where the coroner sits with a jury, he shall sum up the evidence
     by or under the authority of the Attorney-General, is satisfied . . .           to the jury and direct them as to the law .. .and shall draw their
     (b) where an inquest has been held by a coroner that by reason of               attention to .. .rule 42.”
     fraud, rejection of evidence, irregularity of proceedings, insufficiency
     of inquiry, or otherwise, it is necessary or desirable, in the interests   Rule 42 is important. Its provisions are these:
     of justice, that another inquest should be held . .. [he] may quash            “No verdict shall be framed in such a way as to appear to determine
     the inquisition on that inquest.”                                              any question of— (a) criminal liability on the part of a named
                                                                                    person, or (b) civil liability.”
   Section 13 of the Coroners (Amendment) Act 1926, as amended by
section 62 of the Administration of Justice Act 1982, provides:                     Attached to these rules is a precedent for an inquisition. There are
     “(1) Subject to the provisions of this section, a coroner within           notes to the precedent. In those notes one finds a recital of the kinds of
     whose jurisdiction the dead body of a person is lying, may, in lieu        verdict which a coroner’s jury is entitled to return. They include
     of summoning a jury in the manner required by section 3 of the             death from natural causes, suicide, self-induced abortion, accident,
     Coroners Act 1887 for the purpose of inquiring into the death of           misadventure, unlawful killing, murder, infanticide and an open verdict.
     that person, hold an inquest .. .without a jury. (2) If itappears to           With that synopsis of the coroner’s powers in mind, I turn to
     the coroner either before he proceeds to hold an inquest or in the         examine the issues raised, the main of which must cause us, it is argued,
     course of an inquest begun without a jury, that there is reason to         to quash the verdict and inquisition— our power to do that is beyond
     suspect ...(f) that the death occurred while the deceased was in           doubt— and to order, as we may, a fresh inquisition before another
     police custody, or resulted from an injury caused by a police officer      coroner and before another jury.
     in the purported execution of his duty; he shall proceed to summon             I choose as the first issue to comment upon the coroner’s directions
     a jury in the manner required by the Coroners Act 1887 .. .”               upon the law of unlawful killing. I begin with three short extracts from
                                                                                the eight or nine pages of notes the coroner made to assist him in
   This provision is obviously mandatory, dependent for effect upon             summing up. The first extract reads:
injury causing death. Whether the cause of death in the present case                 “Unlawfully killed. Covers both murder and manslaughter. Murder
comes within the definition of injury, however loosely regarded, depends             requires a deliberate attempt to kill or cause grievous bodily harm.
partly upon definition and partly upon the evidence.                                 Many technicalities, but not relevant when the same verdict covers
    Section 56(1) of the Criminal Law Act 1977 provides:                             manslaughter as well. Manslaughter comprises two types of homicide
     “At a coroner’s inquest touching the death of a person who came                 in this case. Firstly, the force used in arresting Mikkelsen at Bedfont
     by his death by murder, manslaughter or infanticide, the purpose of             Close— if that was the cause of his death. Secondly, the degree of
     the proceedings shall not include the finding of any person guilty of           care given to him after he was overpowered.”
     the murder, manslaughter or infanticide; and accordingly a coroner’s
     inquisition shall in no case charge a person with any of those              The second passage appears from page 3 of the notes:
     offences.”                                                                      “After Mikkelsen was cuffed and had stopped struggling, could
                                                                                     there be manslaughter by neglect? The negligence must go beyond
Prior to this enactment a coroner’s jury could, and sometimes did,                   the mere matter of compensation between subjects and must show
charge and commit a person for trial on charges so serious as murder                 such disregard for the life and safety of others as to amount to a
and manslaughter.
474                                                               ~               1 Q.B.          Reg. v. West London Coroner, Ex p. Gray (D.C.)   Watkins L.J.
Watkins L .J.    Reg. v. West London Coroner, Ex p. Gray (D.C.)       [1988]
                                                                                      Power wa' 'ven by Parliament for the making of rules. The relevant
   The main provisions which it is necessary here to rei to are the a             rules are calku the Coroners Rules 1984. Rule 22(1) provides: “No
following. I turn first to the governing Act, the Coroners Act 1887. By           witness at an inquest shall be obliged to answer any question tending to
section 4, so far as is material, itis provided:                                  incriminate himself.” Rule 36, dealing with matters to be ascertained at
     “(1) The coroner and jury shall, at the first sitting of the inquest         an inquest, provides:
     . .. examine on oath touching the death all persons who tender                    “(1) The proceedings and evidence at an inquest shall be directed
     their evidence respecting the facts and all persons having knowledge              solely to ascertaining the following matters, namely-(a) who the
     of the facts whom he thinks it expedient to examine. . . (3) After g              deceased was; (b) how, when and where the deceased came by his
     . .. hearing the evidence the jury shall give their verdict, and                  death ... (2) Neither the coroner nor the jury shall express any
     certify it by an inquisition in writing, setting forth, so far as such            opinion on any other matters.”
     particulars have been proved to them, who the deceased was, and
     how, when, and where the deceased came by his death . ..”                    Out of the window went the rider. Rule 40 provides: “No person shall
                                                                                  be allowed to address the coroner or the jury as to the facts.” Rule 41
    By section 6(1) itis provided:                                                provides:
     “Where Her Majesty’s High Court . .. upon application made C                      “Where the coroner sits with a jury, he shall sum up the evidence
     by or under the authority of the Attorney-General, is satisfied .. .              to the jury and direct them as to the law .. . and shall draw their
     (b) where an inquest has been held by a coroner that by reason of                 attention to . . .rule 42.”
     fraud, rejection of evidence, irregularity of proceedings, insufficiency
     of inquiry, or otherwise, it is necessary or desirable, in the interests     Rule 42 is important. Its provisions are these:
     of justice, that another inquest should be held ... [he] may quash               “No verdict shall be framed in such a way as to appear to determine
     the inquisition on that inquest.”                                        ^       any question of— (a) criminal liability on the part of a named
                                                                                      person, or (b) civil liability.”
    Section 13 of the Coroners (Amendment) Act 1926, as amended by
section 62 of the Administration of Justice Act 1982, provides:                       Attached to these rules is a precedent for an inquisition. There are
     “(1) Subject to the provisions of this section, a coroner within             notes to the precedent. In those notes one finds a recital of the kinds of
     whose jurisdiction the dead body of a person is lying, may, in lieu          verdict which a coroner’s jury is entitled to return. They include
     of summoning a jury in the manner required by section 3 of the               death from natural causes, suicide, self-induced abortion, accident,
     Coroners Act 1887 for the purpose of inquiring into the death of E           misadventure, unlawful killing, murder, infanticide and an open verdict.
     that person, hold an inquest . . .without a jury. (2) If it appears to           With that synopsis of the coroner’s powers in mind, I turn to
     the coroner either before he proceeds to hold an inquest or in the           examine the issues raised, the main of which must cause us, it is argued,
     course of an inquest begun without a jury, that there is reason to           to quash the verdict and inquisition— our power to do that is beyond
     suspect ... if) that the death occurred while the deceased was in            doubt— and to order, as we may, a fresh inquisition before another
     police custody, or resulted from an injury caused by a police officer        coroner and before another jury.
     in the purported execution of his duty; he shall proceed to summon p             I choose as the first issue to comment upon the coroner’s directions
     a jury in the manner required by the Coroners Act 1887 ...”                  upon the law of unlawful killing. I begin with three short extracts from
                                                                                  the eight or nine pages of notes the coroner made to assist him in
   This provision is obviously mandatory, dependent for effect upon               summing up. The first extract reads:
injury causing death. Whether the cause of death in the present case                   “Unlawfully killed. Covers both murder and manslaughter. Murder
comes within the definition of injury, however loosely regarded, depends               requires a deliberate attempt to kill or cause grievous bodily harm.
partly upon definition and partly upon the evidence.                                   Many technicalities, but not relevant when the same verdict covers
    Section 56(1) of the Criminal Law Act 1977 provides:                   G           manslaughter as well. Manslaughter comprises two types of homicide
     “At a coroner’s inquest touching the death of a person who came                   in this case. Firstly, the force used in arresting Mikkelsen at Bedfont
     by his death by murder, manslaughter or infanticide, the purpose of               Close— if that was the cause of his death. Secondly, the degree of
     the proceedings shall not include the finding of any person guilty of             care given to him after he was overpowered.”
     the murder, manslaughter or infanticide; and accordingly a coroner’s
     inquisition shall in no case charge a person with any of those                The second passage appears from page 3 of the notes:
     offences.”                                                            j_
                                                                            j          “After Mikkelsen was cuffed and had stopped struggling, could
                                                                                       there be manslaughter by neglect? The negligence must go beyond
 Prior to this enactment a coroner’s jury could, and sometimes did,                    the mere matter of compensation between subjects and must show
 charge and commit a person for trial on charges so serious as murder                  such disregard for the life and safety of others as to amount to a
_and_manslauf»hte.r.                      _______ _______ _          ___
476                                                                                                                                                       477
Watkins L.J.     Reg. v. West London Coroner, Ex p. Gray (D.C.)     [1988J      1 Q.B.           Reg. v. West London Coroner, Ex p. Gray (D.C.)   Watkins L.J.
      crime against the state and conduct deserving pui       ment. This a .    Mikkelsen’s ath. (4) That in failing to act for the benefit of Mikkelsen’s
      verdict does have to use the word ‘crime’— because that is what           health and welfare he acted recklessly. It should be explained that to act
      makes it unlawful killing. Anything less than that is a matter of         recklessly means that there was an obvious and serious risk to the health
      damages and isnot a coroner’s verdict.”                                   and welfare of Mikkelsen to which that police officer, having regard to
Finally, on the last page of the notes, the coroner turned to the types of      his duty, was indifferent or, recognising that risk to be present, he
verdict. He said:                                                               deliberately chose to run the risk by doing nothing about it. It should be
                                                                                emphasised, however, that a failure to appreciate that there was such a
     “Open verdict. Misadventure (with recommendations). Lack of care B         risk would not by itself be sufficient to amount to recklessness.
     aggravated by lack of care— problems— ask. Abuse of drugs—                     Further, the jury should have been directed that they could return a
     alcohol— not supported by doctors. Homicide by an unlawful act or          verdict of unlawful killing only if they could attribute those ingredients
     by neglect. Needs heavy burden of proof and you have to be certain         to a single police officer, whom they should on no account name or
     that there could not have been self-defence and you have to                otherwise identify. In this context, the jury should consider the position
     remember the right to use reasonable force in making a lawful
                                                                                of each officer in turn, following Mikkelsen’s arrest, as to his duty, if
     arrest.”                                                              ^    any, to care for Mikkelsen’s health and welfare and the opportunity
    The interesting feature of the first extract is that the jury, in what      given to him, having regard to the length of time he was with Mikkelsen
counsel for the police officers say was part of its verdict, followed words     and other relevant circumstances, to discharge it.
which appear in this part of the coroner’s notes. They were enabled to              I turn now to the standard of proof. We heard much argument about
do that because at their request the coroner sent the notes into the jury       this. There is a lack of direct authority on the point. We were referred
after they had retired. That is a matter which I will deal with later on.       to cases on suicide going back into the last century, all of which
What is of more significance is that nowhere in the summing up is there ^       emphasise the presumption against suicide, and the requirement of
to be found the definition of manslaughter; unlawful killing, that is. At       rebutting that presumption. Suicide was then a crime. It no longer is.
no point did the coroner direct the jury that to find a verdict of              But it is still a drastic action which often leaves in its wake serious
manslaughter they had to be satisfied that the act or omission of a single      social, economic and other consequences.
person must amount to unlawful conduct which was a substantial cause                Lord Widgery C.J. in Reg. v. City of London Coroner, Ex parte
of death. The jury were left with the impression that they might be             Barber [1975] 1 W.L.R. 1310, 1313, said:
satisfied that there was material unlawful conduct, act or neglect, by               “If that is a fair statement of the coroner’s approach, and I sincerely
aggregating the conduct of two or more of the officers. One cannot E                 hope it is because I have no desire to be unfair to him, it seems to
avoid the feeling, I think, that this is probably what has happened.                 me to fail to recognise what is perhaps one of the most important
Thus, said Mr. Alun Jones, with justification in my view, the verdict has            rules that coroners should bear in mind in cases of this class,
had a blunderbuss effect, meaning that shot went off in all directions,              namely, that suicide must never be presumed. If a person dies a
striking police officers involved indiscriminately.                                  violent death, the possibility of suicide may be there for all to see,
    I have much sympathy with the coroner, for he was dealing with a                 but it must not be presumed merely because itseems on the face of
kind of manslaughter, namely unlawful killing by neglect, which is „                 it to be a likely explanation. Suicide must be proved by evidence,
seldom met with. Moreover, save in the hands of an experienced judge,                and if it is not proved by evidence, it is the duty of the coroner not
it is not a simple matter to direct a jury upon. It is not surprising                to find suicide, but to find an open verdict. I approach this case,
therefore to find that the coroner is criticised also for his less than              applying a stringent test, and asking myself whether on the evidence
correct and helpful references at various times to neglect, giving the               which was given in this case any reasonable coroner could have
impression here and there that just plain neglect would do.                          reached the conclusion that the proper answer was suicide.”
    Other criticisms have also been voiced as to this all important
direction but I have, I think, said enough to indicate that the jury were G         It will be noted that Lord Widgery C.J. alluded to the stringent test,
gravely misdirected and cannot have been otherwise than confused by             but without reference to what may be called the conventional standards
what they were told about this branch of the law and, of course, by             of proof. I cannot believe, however, that he was regarding proof of
what they had read from the notes which were handed in to them. This            suicide as other than beyond a reasonable doubt. I so hold that that was
by itself must, it seems to me, inevitably cause the jury’s verdict to be       and remains the standard. It is unthinkable, in my estimation, that
quashed. What the jury should have been told was that when considering          anything less will do. So it is in respect of a criminal offence. I regard as
manslaughter by neglect, they would have to be satisfied upon the               equally unthinkable, if not more so, that a jury should find the
evidence of these four ingredients of the offence: (1) a police officer had H   commission, although not identifying the offender, of a criminal offence
the duty of regarding the health and welfare of Mikkelsen. (2) He failed        without being satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt.
to do what in the circumstances he ought to have done for the health                As for the other verdicts open to a jury, the balance of probabilities
and welfare of Mikkelsen. (3) That his failure was a substantial cause of       test is surely appropriate save in respect, of course, of the open verdict.
4 /8                                                                                                                                                             4 /y
Watkins L.J.    Reg. v. West London Coroner, Ex p. Gray (D.C.) "     [1988]        1 Q.B.                 Reg. v. West London Coroner, Ex p. Gray (D.C.) Watkins L.J.
This standard should be left to the jury without any r *he refined             a   from all of t; ithat the jury found neglect at no time before Mikkelsen,
qualifications placed upon it by some judges who have spoken to some               was overpowered. By that time, the fight involving the use of the
such effect as, the more serious the allegation the higher the degree of           truncheon during arrest was over and the arrest effective. It is equally
probability required. These refinements would only serve to confuse                clear that the jury were attributing unlawful killing to no other cause
juries and, in the context of a jury’s role are, I say with great respect to       than neglect. It is the jury’s function to find the cause of death whilst
those who have given expression to them, I think, meaningless. Such                avoiding placing criminal responsibility or civil liability upon anyone.
matter as that led the coroner astray in this case, by providing the jury          Here, the cause found, as I have previously indicated, included the
with no plain standard of proof to be guided by. He cannot be blamed           "   additional words spoken by the foreman, which were, in my opinion, an
for that, but it is another factor which must cause this verdict to be             essential part of a clearly expressed verdict and ought to have been
quashed.                                                                           recorded on the inquisition. The implication placed upon them by the
     I said that I would deal with the complaint, for that is what it              coroner, as expressed in his affidavit is, I think, misguided.
amounts to, that the coroner’s notes, his aide memoire, were handed to                 Mr. Alun Jones submitted strenuously that the verdict as recorded
the jury. This took place during the absence of counsel who were out               offended against rule 42 for it was framed, he says, so as to place civil
of the building where the inquest was held at lunch. When counsel              £   liability upon the Commissioner of the Metropolitan Police, or to give
returned the coroner told them what he had done. No one suggests he                the appearance of doing so. I disagree. Neither the verdict as recorded,
acceded to the jury’s request with any motive save a desire to be as               or as should have been recorded on the inquisition, is, in my view, so
helpful as he could to them, but I am driven by the considerable bulk of           framed. Interested parties may look at the circumstances of the case and
the notes, the lack of clarity in many places, the misdirections at others         seek to draw from them and the verdict an inference or inferences as to
and the general layout, intelligible no doubt to the coroner but not, I            blameworthiness on someone’s part for causing death. That is almost
imagine, to the jury, to say that to put to them a document amounting              inevitable. It can neither be avoided nor legislated against. So long as on
to eight or nine pages of closely typed directions upon many matters was       D   the face of the inquisition the verdict does not give the appearance of
 an error. The effect of it cannot have provided the jury with clear               identifying by name or otherwise anyone as blameworthy for the cause
 guidance upon a number of essential matters, which was accurate in law.           of death, rule 42 is complied with. It was complied with by this coroner.
 That, for reasons I have explained, it could not have done. On the                It would have been complied with had he recorded the verdict as, in my
 contrary, I think ittended to heap confusion upon confusion.                      view, he should have done.
     If there was some direction or other which was not clear to the jury,             It was also submitted that section 4 and rule 42 cannot co-exist. The
 the coroner should, in the presence of counsel, have asked them, the          £   rule is ultra vires, itis said. This has been said before, notably in Reg. v.
 jury, what it was, and should have assisted them with it by repeating             Surrey Coroner, Ex parte Campbell [1982] Q.B. 661. In giving the
 orally, perhaps with amplification, what he had already told them on the          judgment of the court I said, at p. 676:
 point, or given them entirely fresh instructions or directions ifnecessary.
 He ought to have proceeded to do this after discussion with counsel                     “Be that as it may, it is our view that on the facts of this case a
 who, undoubtedly, would have been of considerable help to him. It is                    verdict of ‘lack of care’would not have contravened rule 33.”— that
 not unknown in criminal trials for judges to answer jury’s questions as to              is the predecessor to rule 42— “It is therefore not necessary for us
 the law in writing; nor even to anticipate the possible need by a jury for    F         to decide whether the rule is ultra vires. But, we think we ought
 that, with a written direction upon a point or points of law. But this is a             nevertheless to express our conclusion upon this point, which is that
 practice which, for good reason, is sparingly resorted to. When it is it                Mr. Sedley’s submission upon it is ill-founded. Such conflict as may
 must be handled with circumspection, the judge being mindful of the                     in any given circumstance appear to arise between rule 33 and the
 need to consult with counsel beforehand, and to show them the note                      duty to inquire ‘how’ must be resolved in favour of the statutory
                                                                                         duty to inquire whatever the consequences of this may be.”
 before it goes into the jury room.
      We have heard submissions upon the coroner’s decision to record as       q
                                                                                       I accept that instances may arise where observing the statutory duty
 the verdict merely the words “unlawful killing.” I can understand his             may carry the risk of a clash between section 4 and rule 42. But careful
 anxiety to record a verdict which did not offend against rule 42.                 framing of the verdict consistent, of course, with the jury’s conclusion
 Coroners quite often, for very good reason, have to refrain from putting          should, and indeed must, avoid that. Coroners by now are well used to
  upon the inquisition all the foreman says when announcing the jury’s             coping with this problem and I have no doubt do so successfully. I am
  conclusion. By rule he is prevented from doing that. He has to eliminate         firmly of the opinion that rule 42 is intra vires.
  irrelevant matter and only record what his good sense and experience                 Finally, the evidence. The jury’s finding of unlawful killing by neglect
  leads him to conclude is the formal verdict, being one which the jury is         is, it is submitted on behalf of the police officers, against the weight of
  entitled in law to find.                                                         the evidence. It used to be said, and maybe by some still is, that
      Here, however, I regret to say that the coroner’s judgment was at            insufficiency of evidence is no ground for quashing a coroner’s jury’s
  fault. Whichever version of what the foreman said be right, it is clear          verdict. I cannot subscribe to that. The development of judicial review
480                                                                                              1 Q.B.
Watkins L.J.       Keg. v. West London Coroner, Ex p. Gray (D.C               [1988]
                                                                                            A                                    [c o u r t O f   appeal]
to its present state with its devotion to, amongst other ngs, natural
justice, cannot possibly allow verdicts by juries at inquests to stand
which are based upon no or wholly insufficient evidence. By analogy, I                                        G O L D v. HARINGEY HEALTH AUTHORITY
see nothing in section 6 of the main Act which runs counter to that.                             1987 March 10, 11, 12;                       Watkins, Stephen Brown and Lloyd L.JJ.
    However, that is not the position here, in my opinion. I express no                               April 14
view on the strength of the evidence, except to say that another jury
may not have found itcompelling enough, especially ifproperly directed,                          Medical Practitioner—Negligence—Duty           to inform—Sterilisation
to have found a verdict of unlawful killing. There were of course other g                   .B       operation—Failure to give warning o f possibility o f fertility being
                                                                                                     restored—Subsequent pregnancy—Claim in negligence fo r non­
verdicts other than an open verdict, which the jury could have returned.                             disclosure o f risk—Body o f medical opinion against giving warning
I have already referred to some, at least, of those. In my opinion, a                                as to risk o f pregnancy—Whether accepted professional standard test
number of those could have been left to this jury in the circumstances                               applicable to non-therapeutic advice
but were not. As to whether there was material at this inquest fit to be
left to a jury to consider a verdict of unlawful killing by neglect, I prefer                            During the course of her third pregnancy in 1979, the plaintiff,
to express no opinion with in mind what might happen hereafter. I think                              after indicating that she did not wish to have any more children,
differently with regard to all that took place on arrest. Without going q                   C        was advised to undergo a sterilisation operation at the defendants’
into that evidence in detail, the medical aspects of it especially, I am in                          hospital after the birth of her child. The operation was duly
                                                                                                     carried out but the plaintiff later became pregnant and gave birth
no doubt that I would have directed the jury that it would have been                                 to a fourth child. She brought an action for damages for negligence
unsafe, wrong even, to find that the arresting officers misconducted                                 against the defendants alleging, inter alia, that she had not been
themselves in a difficult situation in any sense whatsoever.                                         warned of the failure rate of female sterilisation operations and
    So, this verdict has to be quashed. What then must be done? Further                              that if she had been warned her husband would have undergone a
relief lies also within the discretion of this court. Albeit with very                               vasectomy instead. Medical evidence was adduced at the trial that
considerable reluctance and with the provisions of section 13 of the Act ^                           there was a substantial body of responsible doctors who would not
of 1926 in mind, I see no alternative but to order a fresh inquest before                            have given any such warning in 1979. The judge however held that
another coroner and jury. I would also make the declaration as to the                                the test w hether there existed a substantial body of medical
standard of proof in accordance with what I have said as to that in this                             opinion who would have acted as the defendants had done applied
judgment.                                                                                            only to advice given in a therapeutic context and did not apply to
                                                                                                     advice given in a contraceptive context. Applying his own view as
    R och J. I agree that th e verdict o f th e coroner’s jury in this case                          to what information should have been given, he found that the
should b e quashed and that a fresh in q u est in front o f a new coroner b e          g    E        defendants had been negligent in not warning the plaintiff that the
                                                                                                     operation might not succeed.
ord ered . I concur in th e m aking o f th e d eclaration as to the standard o f
                                                                                                         On the defendants’ appeal:—
p roo f in coroners’ inquests.                                                                           Held, allowing the appeal, that for the purposes of ascertaining
    I add one comment to the judgment which Watkins L.J. has just                                    the test as to the duty of care owed by a doctor to a patient there
delivered, on the form of inquisition. It is made in the hope that those                             was no distinction to be made between advice given in a therapeutic
responsible for the framing of these forms might give further consideration                          context and advice given in a non-therapeutic context; that,
to the wording of one part of the form and that a redrafting might assist                            accordingly, the judge erred in holding that advice given in a
a coroner’s jury to concentrate on the matter which they are required to p                  ^        contraceptive context was not to be judged by the contemporary
consider. It is the third entry on the form which at present reads:                                  standards of a responsible body of medical opinion; and that, on
“Time, place and circumstances at or in which injury was sustained.” It                              the evidence, there was a substantial body of responsible doctors
seems to me that it should be: “Time, place and circumstances at or in                               who would not in 1979 have warned the plaintiff of the failure rate
which death was sustained,” and that if that amendment were made the                                 of female sterilisation operations (post, pp. 489f—490c, 491b- d ,
wording would then conform to the wording of rule 36(1)(Z>) of the                                   492c- e).
Coroners Rules 1984.                                                                                     Bolam v. Friern Hospital Management Committee [1957] 1
    Having made that comment, I concur in the judgment which Watkins                        G        W.L.R. 582 and Sidaway v. Board o f Governors o f the Bethlem
L.J. has just given.                                                        ^                        Royal Hospital and the Maudsley Hospital [1985] A.C. 871,
                                                                                                     H.L.(E.) applied.
                                       Application granted.                                              Decision of Schiemann J. reversed.
                                       Order for fresh inquest.
                                       N o order for costs save legal aid                            The following cases are referred to in the judgments:
                                          taxation of costs of next of kin.
                                                                                                     Bolam v. Friem Hospital Management Committee [1957] 1 W.L.R. 582; [19571
   Solicitors: Edward Fail, Neale & Co., Twickenham; Russell Jones &                   pj   H            2 All E.R. 118
                                                                                                     Emeh v. Kensington and Chelsea and Westminster Area Health Authority [1985]
Walker; Beachcrofts; Powell Magrath & Spencer.
                                                                                                         Q.B. 1012; [1985] 2 W.L.R. 233; [1984] 3 All E.R. 1044, C.A.
               [Reported by Simon C a s s e l l , E sq ., Barrister-at-Law]                          Eyre v. Measday [1986] 1 All E.R. 488, C.A.
                                                                                                     Jones v. Berkshire Area Health Authority (unreported), 2 July 1986, Ognall J.
                                                                                            Q .B .D .                             R. v. H .M . C o r o n e r f o r E a s t K e n t   11
10                                                         '1 9 8 9 ) 88 C r . A p p .R .

drawn from the fact that the first limb is satisfied, or to cl ace any explanation          death of persons o      ie ferry as a result of the capsize, the coroner decided as a
advanced by the driver, they can do so by any evidence which is admissible:                 matter of law that (1) a corporate body could not be guilty of manslaughter; (ii)
and, (3) evidence of alcoholic consumption sufficient to impair control is                  where the acts or omissions of employees or managers of a corporate body were
                                                                                            not sufficient to render them guilty of manslaughter, those acts or omissions could
admissible for this purpose.
  There being for the foregoing reasons no basis for interfering with the                   not be aggregated so as to render the corporate body guilty; _(iu) the acts or
conviction the appeal is dismissed.                                                         omissions of the company which owned the vessel were not the direct cause of the
  There remains for consideration the question certified by the judge. As it                deaths', and (iv) the evidence to be adduced at the inquest would be narrowed
stands, the answer must be in the negative for it omits the whole of the first              down. The applicants, relatives of named victims, sought judicial review of the
limb of the R. v. Lawrence test. If, however, it were amended so as to read: is             coroner’s decision and relied on three points made against the company in the
the offence of causing death by reckless driving proved where, having taken                 Sheen report, i.e. the company had failed to consider seriously a proposal to fit a
alcoholic drink in sufficient quantity such that he knew or must have known that            warning light system on the ferry; five or six previous incidents of ferry doors being
his ability to drive was substantially impaired and that there was therefore a risk         left open had not been properly reported and collated by the company and it
of his causing injury to other road users, the defendant chose to drive a motor             lacked any proper system to ensure that the highest standards of safety were
vehicle and the manner of his driving was such that: (a) it created an obvious              observed.
and serious risk of causing physical injury to some other person who happened
or might happen to be using the road, or of doing substantial damage to                     Held, refusing the applications, the Court was prepared tentatively to accept that a
property, and (b) it did cause the death of another road user, we would answer              corporate body was capable of being found guilty of manslaughter; however, no
the question, “prima facie, yes, in the absence of some other explanation.”                 sustainable case had been made against the named directors of the company, the
                                                                                            owners of the ferry. In exceptional cases the Court would intervene while
                                                               Appeal dismissed.            proceedings were in progress; but in the instant case the Court was very reluctant
                                                                                            to intervene, especially because it was an inquest. A coroner acted as an inquisitor
     Solicitors: Leslie Maddrell & Co, Cheltenham, for the Crown.                           and as such was the master of his own procedure. Great weight had to be given to
                                                                                            the coroner’s judgment, whose duty it was to guide the jury to a correct verdict by
                                                                                            way of a fact finding mission, and not to apportion blame and liability.
                                                                                               Applications for judicial review.
                                                                                               The applicants, Peter Alan Spooner, Pamela Muriel Spooner, Alan Frederick
                                                                                             Reynolds, Joan Patricia Reynolds, Maurice De Rohan and Margaret De Rohan,
                                                                                             applied for judicial review of decisions of the Coroner for East Kent (Mr. Richard
                                                                                             Harry Brooke Sturt) made on September 19, 1987, in the course of an inquest into
R. v. H.M. CORONER FOR EAST KENT, Ex parte                                                   the death of 188 people arising out of the capsize on March 6, 1987 of the Herald
            SPOONER AND OTHERS                                                               of Free Enterprise stating that as a matter of law a corporate body could not be
                                                                                             guilty of manslaughter. An application for an order postponing the publication of
                                                                                             any report of the proceedings until after the jury had returned their verdict in the
R. v. H.M. CORONER FOR EAST KENT, Ex parte De                                                inquest was allowed under section 4 of the Contempt of Court Act 1981.
             ROHAN AND ANOTHER                                                                 The grounds of the application and the ruling of the coroner are set out in the
                                                                                             judgment of Bingham L.J.
Q u e e n ’s B e n c h ( D iv is io n a l C o u r t ) (Lord Justice Bingham, Mr.               The applications were argued on October 5, 1987, when the Court stated that
      Justice Mann and Mr. Justice Kennedy): October 5, 6, 1987                              they would be refused.

Manslaughter—Capacity— Corporate Body— Whether Corporation Capable o f                          Alastair John Forrest for the applicants Spooner and Reynolds.
Committing Manslaughter—Whether Aggregation o f Acts by Individuals in                          Edward Lawson for the applicants De Rohan.
Corporation Can A m ount to Manslaughter                                                        David Guy for the coroner.
                                                                                                                                                                      Cur. adv. vult.
  A corporate body can be guilty of manslaughter on the appropriate facts where
the mens rea and actus reus of manslaughter can be established against those                   October 6. BINGHAM L.J. delivered the following judgment: There are before
identified as the embodiment of the company itself. Evidence must be adduced to              the Court two renewed applications for judicial review. The first application is made
show guilt on the part of the corporation as such. Evidence against one individual           on behalf of Mr. and Mrs. Spooner and Mr. and Mrs. Reynojds. The application
cannot be added to that against another so as to provide the necessary ingredients           was made on September 22, 1987, and refused by McCowan J. on September 24.
                                                                                             The second application is made on behalf of Mr. and Mrs. de Rohan and was first
of aggregation.
  The vehicle ferry ship Herald of Free Enterprise capsized outside Zeebrugge                made on September 23, being refused by McCowan J. also on September 24.
harbour with the resultant heavy loss of life. A public inquiry took place shortly             Both applications relate to an inquest currently being conducted in Dover by Her
after the capsize and a report was published. In the course of an inquest into the           Majesty’s Coroner for East Kent. Both applications are made by parents and
 relatives of the deceased. Both seek to quash decisioi       f the coroner made on           managemen         :ve proper and clear directions was a contributory cause of
September 18 and 19.                                                                          the disaster. Th. i a serious finding which must be explained in some detail.’
   The grounds of the application are, put broadly, that uie coroner made an                  The report then goes into very considerable detail and in the course of the
incorrect ruling on issues of law arising during the hearing before him and, as a         present hearing three points are relied on as being particularly relevant. First, it is
result, improperly limited the scope of the inquest. The parties ask this Court to        pointed out that the company and its representatives failed to give serious
make a declaration as to the law and to direct the coroner to call additional             consideration to a proposal that lights should be fitted on the bridge of the vessel
evidence, or to reconsider what evidence should be called in the light of the Court’s     which would inform the Master whether the bow doors and, for that matter, the
declaration.                                                                              stem doors were closed or not. Such a warning system, if duly heeded by the
   The inquest arises from the capsize of the vehicle ferry “Herald of Free               Master, would have prevented this disaster. This was a suggestion which was made
Enterprise” off Zeebrugge on March 6, 1987 and the huge loss of life, both of             but seems unhappily to have been the subject of facetious comment.
passengers and crew, to which that tragic disaster gave rise. Nearly 200 lives were           Secondly, attention is drawn to the failure of the company and its representatives
lost, causing widespread grief, and the facts of the disaster are etched not only on      to report and collate information relating to previous incidents when vessels had
the recollections of all who were involved, directly or indirectly, but on the            sailed with their doors open. It appears that there were five or six such incidents
consciousness of the nation as a whole.                                                   between October 1983 and February 1987. Had knowledge of these repeated
   Very shortly after the disaster the Secretary of State for Trade ordered a formal      incidents been appreciated it should have alerted the officers of the company to the
investigation under section 55 of the Merchant Shipping Act 1970. Sheen J. sitting        risk of disaster, but it appears that there was no person within the company who
with Assessors, was appointed to conduct it. There was a long, comprehensive and           ever knew of all the incidents.
well publicised investigation culminating in a full report and recommendations                 Thirdly, attention is drawn to the lack of any proper system within the company
published in July of this year.                                                            to ensure that the vessels were operated in accordance with the highest standards of
   The investigation found that the immediate cause of the vessel’s loss was that she      safety. It is rightly urged upon us that where the result of an unsafe system is liable
sailed with her bow doors open trimmed by the head, i.e. with her nose down. The           to be so grave, the onus on a company to ensure safe operation is correspondingly
manoeuvre in which she engaged led to the entry of water into the vehicle deck,            high.                                                                .                ,
the heavy listing of the vessel and her speedy capsize.                                        At the very end of his report, Sheen J. answered the questions posed for the
   Sheen J. criticised a number of individuals who had failed to perform their duty,       investigation by the Secretary of State. Question 3 was in these terms: ‘Was the
in particular those responsible for failing to close the bow doors, failing to see that    capsize of the ‘Herald of Free Enterprise’ caused or contributed to by the fault of
the doors were closed and sailing without knowing that the doors were closed. He           any person or persons and, if so, whom and in what respect? The answer given to
expressed his criticisms in strong terms. The vessel was owned and operated by             that question was: “Yes, by the faults of the following,” and three individuals are
Townsend Car Ferries Ltd., and that company also was the subject of severe                  listed. Then: “4. Townsend Car Ferries Limited at all levels from the Board of
criticism.                                                                                  Directors through the managers of the Marine Department down to the Junior
   It is right that I should refer to the terms in which Sheen J. expressed those           Superintendents. As to the respects in which each of the above-named was guilty of
criticisms. In paragraph 14.1 of his report he said this:                                   causative fault, see Report."
                                                                                               One might suppose that one Inquiry of this magnitude, even into a disaster on
    “A t first sight the faults which led to this disaster were the aforesaid errors of     this scale, would be enough but the law required Her Majesty’s Coroner for East
    omission on the part of the Master, the Chief Officer and the assistant bosun,          Kent to conduct an inquest with a jury pursuant to section 3 of the Coroners Act
    and also the failure by Captain Kirby to issue and enforce clear orders. But a          1887. It was the coroner’s duty to ascertain in each case who the deceased was and
    full investigation into the circumstances of the disaster leads inexorably to the       how, when and where the deceased came by his or her death.
    conclusion that the underlying or cardinal faults lay higher up in the Company.            This inquest was very different from most inquests, both because of the huge
    The Board of Directors did not appreciate their responsibility for the safe             number of deceased persons with whom it was concerned and also because of the
    management of their ships. They did not apply their minds to the question:               mass of material relating to the incident, particularly following the inquiry of Sheen
    What orders should be given for the safety of our ships? The Directors did not          J. But, as with any other inquest, its conduct was in the hands of the coroner
    have any proper comprehension of what their duties were. There appears to                whose duty was to conduct an inquisition and not an adversarial trial. He had to
    have been a lack of thought about the way in which the HERALD ought to                   consider a huge mass of material in order to determine, in accordance with his duty
    have been organised for the Dover/Zeebrugge run. All concerned in                        under section 4 of the 1887 Act, whom he thought it expedient to examine. He also
    management, from the members of the Board of Directors down to the junior                had to bear in mind that at the conclusion of the hearing the jury would have to
    superintendents, were guilty of fault in that all must be regarded as sharing            give a verdict and certify who the deceased was and how, when and where the
    responsibility for the failure of management. From top to bottom the body                deceased came by his or her death.
    corporate was infected with the disease of sloppiness. This became particularly             The evidence which we have seen suggests to me that this coroncr set about his
    apparent from the evidence of Mr. A. P. Young, who was the Operations                    task with great conscientiousness and assiduity. After a formal opening of the
    Director and Mr. W. J. Ayers, who was Technical Director. As will become                 inquest at an earlier date the substantive opening of the inquest into 188 deaths
    apparent from later passages in this Report, the Court was singularly                    began on September 7, 1987. The coroner then delivered a very full and carefully
    unimpressed by both these gentlemen. The failure on the part of the shore                constructed opening address to the jury, telling them of the coroner s functions,
                                                                                                                                  IX .   V • 1 1 . iVJL. V U I V U l ' b f t l VI
                                                              (1989) 88 C r . A pp .R.     Q .fc S .U .


their functions and the whole background to the han .0 ° task which they had                    The coroner           ired the matter and gave a ruling on September 18. He
jointly to carry out. It could not be suggested that a speec n this scale would be         referred to the five w n esses, two of whom had not given evidence to Sheen J. and
suitable in other than exceptional cases, but on this particular occasion it was no        the other three of whom had given evidence amounting to some 467 pages of
doubt helpful for the jury to be given such a compendious introduction to their            transcript. The coroner reached four conclusions. First, he expressed his opinion
task.                                                                                      that there was no arguable case of manslaughter against the five named individuals.
   It is not, I think, necessary to go in great detail into the opening address of the     Secondly, he expressed the opinion that a company cannot in law be indicted for
coroner but I should draw attention to what he said on p. 76 of the transcript of his      manslaughter. Thirdly, he ruled that there was no evidence of conduct which would
address. He said this:                                                                     found a charge of manslaughter against the company even if such a crime could be
                                                                                           committed by a company. Fourthly, he ruled that a charge of manslaughter cannot
      “Another potential verdict you will have to consider in due course, and              be founded on the aggregation of individual acts which do not individually constitute
     perhaps most controversially, is the verdict of unlawful killing. The notes,           gross negligence. He did however agree to call limited evidence from one of the
     again they are not part of the law, suggest that in the case of murder!                five witnesses. On September 21 the coroner gave further reasons for the ruling that
      manslaughter or infanticide, the following form be adopted, ‘so and so was            he had delivered on the earlier occasion and dealt in more detail with the
     killed unlawfully.’ Members of the jury, again I think we can eliminate the
                                                                                            aggregation point.
     infanticide and almost certainly murder from this consideration but the                     On September 22 Messrs. Kingsley Napley wrote to the coroner, drawing his
     manslaughter will require more detailed consideration. I shall be directing you        attention to a further authority on the question whether manslaughter could be
     on the subject of manslaughter leading to a Coroner’s verdict of ‘kijled               committed by a corporation. The authority referred to was a case tried at the
     unlawfully’ in due course but perhaps I need to introduce the subject now by           Glamorgan Assizes in February 1965, when a contracting company was indicted for
     saying three things and they are very important: (i) You will remember that if         manslaughter and the trial proceeded before Streatfield J. The prosecution were
     you were to decide upon such a verdict, no individual should be named as                represented by Mr. Philip Wien Q.C. as he then was, and the Corporation
     having been responsible, (ii) Secondly, to arrive at a verdict of unlawful killing      represented by Mr. Mars-Jones Q.C. as he then was. The company was acquitted
     you need to be satisfied beyond all reasonable doubt that the act of omission           but the significance attached by Kingsley Napley to the report of the case is that the
     of an individual caused substantially one or more of the deaths and that that           prosecution failed on its facts, and neither of those distinguished counsel nor the
     individual was guilty of gross negligence. By this I mean that he did or omitted        extremely experienced judge evidently considered that a company could not in
     to do something which created an obvious and serious risk of physical injury;           principle be indicted for manslaughter.                                   . . . .
     and that this was done without having given any thought to the possibility of                The case having been drawn to the coroner’s attention—and no possible criticism
     the risk or that whoever did or omitted to do the thing recognised the risk and          is to be made of the fact that it was not drawn to his attention before because the
     nevertheless decided to take it. (iii) The third thing that I wish to say at this       earlier submissions had been made at short notice—the Coroner replied by a letter
     stage is that although it is possible for several persons to be guilty individually     of September 23. He said: “I am very grateful to you for drawing my attention to
     of manslaughter, it is not permissible to aggregate several acts of neglect by           the case of Northern Strip Mining Construction Co. Ltd. (unreported, 1956). It is
     different persons, so as to have gross negligence by a process of aggregation.           not clear whether the question of corporate liability was argued. However, as I said
     That is a very important point of law, Members of the Jury, which I will                 in my ruling of September 18 at pp. 5 and 6, the acts of the company would have
     emphasise again in due course.”                                                          to be those of an individual (and I should have said an individual director) who was
   No criticism is I think made of what the coroner said about manslaughter as                himself guilty of unlawful killing. I made it clear there was no prima facie evidence
against a personal defendant, but criticism has been made before us as to what he              that any of the three relevant directors had done any art or been guilty of any
said about aggregation. The point has been made that a company can be guilty of                omission which could be said to be a direct or substantial cause of the capsize and
manslaughter as well as an individual.                                                         that therefore the question of corporate manslaughter did not in any event arise.
   After the coroner’s opening address the Inquest proceeded. A very large number                 At the time when that letter was written, on September 23, 340 witnesses had
of witnesses were called and a very large number of proofs of written evidence                given evidence orally and 400 statements had been read to the jury. The matter was
were read to the jury. So matters continued until September 17 when Sir David                  re-argued before the coroner on October 1, the argument before him being, I think
Napley, on behalf of Mr. and Mrs. de Rohan, made submissions to the coroner.                   it is fair to say, no doubt more elaborate but to substantially the same effect as
  The burden of his submission was that the coroner should call five witnesses (who            before. He gave a further ruling in these terms: “As I have said, Mr. Forrest
were named and identified) belonging to the management of the owning and                       submitted that the actus reus and the mens rea may be found in the hands and
operating company. Sir David submitted to the coroner that a corporation can be                brain of the company, respectively. Had the facts been, as in the Glamorgan
guilty of manslaughter, and he referred to a body of authority—albeit somewhat                 Assizes case, i.e. Northern Strip Mining Construction Co. Ltd., (where the instruction
inconclusive to that effect. He further urged that the coroner should investigate in           alleged, which had been given by the Managing Director, was to demolish a bridge
evidence the responsibility of senior management of the company in order to leave              starting in the middle) that the company brains had given instructions to go out to
to the jury the question whether the company itself was guilty of manslaughter, or             sea with the bow doors open, at full speed, when trimmed by the head, that would
unlawful killing. He drew the attention of the coroner to, and relied on, evidence in           be a wholly different set of facts. The submission might then have been relevant. It
Sheen J. s report. He further urged that different acts all contributing to a death            has not been suggested by anyone that that is what happened here. I have
can each found an indictment for manslaughter against the company. Mr. Forrest                 considered all the'evidence given by the Directors to the Sheen Inquiry, and that,
on behalf of other parties adopted and elaborated those submissions.                            incidentally, is 467 pages of transcript and not 367 as I mistakenly said on a
 16                                                           (1989) 88 C r . A pp .R.                                         R. v. H .M . C o r o n e r f o r E a s t K e n t   17
                                                                                          C .A .
 previous occasion, when -I gave these rulings, and I huv aw also considered the          properly addressed to showing guilt on the part of the corporation as such. On the
 evidence given by one former director to this inquest, and I can see nothing in any      main substance of his ruling I am not persuaded that the coroner erred.
 of that evidence to support such a suggestion. It accordingly seems to me to be             Indeed, on the materials I have seen I would reach that conclusion even if the
 irrelevant to the issues before the jury. Quite apart from anything else, a failure to   inquest had been concluded. But I reach the conclusion with some relief given that
 act would only ground manslaughter if it was that person’s duty to act. The jury         the Inquest is in progress and that the coroner is in the course of summing-up.
 would need evidence of the extent of the duties of each of the directors concerned.         I accept that in exceptional cases the Court will intervene by way of judicial
 It would also need evidence of the powers which each director had to take action.        review while a proceeding is in progress. If intervention were necessary to prevent
 And, for example, would he have had to persuade the whole Board, or some other           this inquest having to be conducted all over again because of legal or procedural
 director, to agree with the proposal. It is obvious, as a matter of ordinary common      error, it might very well be such an exceptional case. But just as the Court of
 sense, that the whole subject goes far beyond the proper scope of an Inquest,            Appeal is very slow to interfere in the conduct of a trial proceeding before a judge,
 which is essentially a fact finding and not a fault finding enquiry. For these reasons   so this court should, in my judgment, be very reluctant to intervene in the conduct
 I intend to tell the jury that they are not concerned with corporate manslaughter,       of an inquest in train before a coroner. The fact that it is an inquest perhaps makes
 whether it exists or not, and that in this inquest, when considering the possible        the argument even stronger because the coroner is by law an inquisitor; the
 verdict of unlawful killing, they are only concerned with the acts or omissions of       witnesses called are those whom he, under the statute, thinks it expedient to
 those individuals who could be said to have caused the deaths.”                          examine, and he is very much the master of his own procedure.
    The arguments which were deployed and elaborated before the coroner have, in             These considerations are fortified here because the coroner has immersed himself
 substance, been repeated with great cogency and skill before us. The first question      in a huge mass of material which the court has not seen. We have scarcely glimpsed
 is whether a corporation can be indicted for manslaughter. The coroner originally        the tip of the iceberg of evidence with which he is familiar. Very great weight
 ruled that it could not. In the course of argument in this Court we indicated at an      therefore should be given to his judgment, although on questions of law he is of
 early stage that we were prepared to assume for the purposes of this hearing that it     course exercising a judgment, not a discrection.
 could. As a result the question has not been fully argued and I have not found it           It is his duty to guide the jury to a correct verdict but his responsibility is to
 necessary to reach a final conclusion. I am, however, tentatively of opinion that on     conduct a fact-finding exercise, not to apportion blame and not to decide civil
 appropriate facts the mens rea required for manslaughter can be established against      liability. In a case such as this the chain of causation may be of almost infinite
a corporation. I see no reason in principle why such a charge should not be               length. The coroner had to break it somewhere to keep his enquiry within tolerable
established. I am therefore tentatively of opinion that the coroner’s original ruling      bounds. He broke it at what I judge to be a reasonable and sustainable point,
was wrong, and indeed I would need considerable persuasion to reach the                    particularly bearing in mind the exhaustive public inquiry which had already been
conclusion that it was correct.                                                           conducted by Sheen J.
    But that is not the end of the matter because the coroner clearly adhered to his         Those are my reasons for the conclusion announced at the end of yesterday’s
substantial ruling even on the assumption that a company could in principle be             hearing that leave to move for judicial review should not be given.
guilty of manslaughter. The coroner made it clear that he was of opinion that the
                                                                                            MANN J.: I agree with the reasons given by Bingham L.J. Like Bingham L.J., I
evidence which he had considered was not capable of supporting the conclusion that
                                                                                          am of the view that a body corporate can in appropriate circumstances be guilty of
those who represented the directing mind and will of the company and controlled           a crime of manslaughter, but would not wish to decide the matter on an application
what it did had been guilty of conduct amounting to manslaughter.                         for leave to move.
    I am not persuaded that that is a conclusion which is or may be wrong. Nothing
was, in my judgment, said by Sheen J. or by way of concession before him which               KENNEDY J.: I agree.
undermines that conclusion. It is important to bear in mind an important distinction.                                                                     Applications refused.
A company may be vicariously liable for the negligent arts and omissions of its            Solicitors: Pannone Napier, for the applicants Spooner and Reynolds. Kingsley
servants and agents, but for a company to be criminally liable for manslaughter—on        Napley for the applicants de Rohan. Sharpe Pritchard & Co. agents for W. G.
the assumption I am making that such a crime exists—it is required that the mens          Hopkin, Maidstone for the Coroner.
rea and the actus reus of manslaughter should be established not against those who
acted for or in the name of the company but against those who were to be
identified as the embodiment of the company itself. The coroner formed the view
that there was no such case fit to be left to the jury against this company. I see no
reason to disagree. I would add that I see no sustainable case in manslaughter
against the directors who are named either.
   I do not think the aggregation argument assists the applicants. Whether the
defendant is a corporation or a personal defendant, the ingredients of manslaughter
must be established by proving the necessary mens rea and actus reus of
manslaughter against it or him by evidence properly to be relied on against it or
him. A case against a personal defendant cannot be fortified by evidence against
another defendant. The case against a corporation can only be made by evidence
                                              T h e W e ek ly Law K e p o r ts £3 M ay ly v u

718                                                                                             1 w .i                            In re A D ebtor (Cli.D.)                    Scott J.
Scott J .                    Io re A Debit.   J' r' )                                 [1990J
                                                                                                excessive *apse of time that there has been in bringing the approval of
mandatory order. Accordingly, I reject tue first ground on which the                            the voluntary arrangement that was proposed to a conclusion since the
debtor attacked the registrar’s decision.                                                       interim order was first made in October 1988. For those reasons I
     The second, third and fourth submissions made to me by the debtor                          dismiss this appeal.
were in a sense subsidiary. He submitted that the registrar was not
justified in basing his decision on difficulties there might be in ascertaining                                                                               Appeal dismissed.
with precision which creditors would have what voting rights at the
creditors’ meeting. The Insolvency Rules 1986 and in particular rule                                 Solicitors: Hempsons.
5(17) provide for the nominee, as chairman of the meeting, to decide
questions as to votes to be cast at the meeting and so the difficulties                                                                                              T. C. C. B.
referred to, submitted the debtor, were unreal. That may be right.
      In addition, the debtor referred to the extent to which the registrar
based himself on the lapse of time since the original interim order was
 made back in October 1988. He submitted that the delay had been no
 fault of his. My conclusions on this appeal are not to be taken that I
 disagree at all with that comment made by the debtor. I am prepared to
 accept that the delay has been no fault of his—I have not gone into the
 reasons behind the difficulties regarding ascertainment of creditors and
 debtors to enable me to dispute—and I do not wish to do so—the
 debtor’s submission that the delay has not been any fault of his. But nor
                                                                                                                                   [court    of a pp ea l ]
 has the delay been any fault of the creditors. It is prima facie the right
 of an unpaid creditor, having first served a statutory demand, to institute
                                                                                                  ‘REGINA v. WOLVERHAMPTON CORONER, Ex parte McCURBIN
 bankruptcy proceedings. That right of an unpaid creditor has been
 interfered with by statute—the interim order provisions so interfere. But                       1990 March 12                                    Lord Donaldson of Lymington M.R.,
 the evident intention of the legislature was that the resolution of issues                                                                                  Stocker and Woolf L J J .
 arising in regard to an interim order would be dealt with speedily and
 expeditiously, see e.g. the initial period of 14 days prescribed under                          Coroner—Inquest—Standard o f proof—Death in course o f police
  section 255(6).                                                                                    arrest—Coroner's directions on verdicts o f unlawful killing and
       In the present case some 12 months have expired since the interim                             misadventure—Whether jury required to be satisfied beyond
                                                                                                     reasonable doubt—Whether misdirection by coroner—Whether
  order was made. For some 12 months the ability of the respondent                                   relief appropriate
  creditors as unpaid judgment creditors to present a bankruptcy petition
  against the debtor has been interfered with. In my judgment, a delay of                                    During a violent struggle with police officers the deceased
                                                                                                         died attempting to escape arrest. At a coroner's inquest to
  that sort is a long way outside the sort of delay that was contemplated                                inquire into the cause of his death one of the police officers
  by the statutory provisions. The registrar was, in my judgment, well                                   gave evidence that having forced the deceased to the ground, he
  justified in treating as an important matter for him in the exercise of his                            had held him there with his arm around the deceased’s head.
  discretion the lapse of time that had occurred since the interim order                                 There was other evidence that the officer’s arm had gone
                                                                                                         around the deceased's neck and it was further suggested that
  was made.                                                                                              the officer’s arm might have inadvertently slipped down from
       Finally, the debtor referred me to a possible misapprehension on the                              the chin to the neck in the struggle. The medical evidence was
  part of the registrar as to the difficulties of the nominees in ascertaining                           that the deceased had died from asphyxia. In indicating possible
  the details of his debtors and thereby ascertaining the value of his assets.                           verdicts of death by misadventure and unlawful killing, the
                                                                                                         coroner directed the jury in relation to the latter to apply the
  The debtor, referred me to an affidavit of Miss Baker, sworn on behalf                                 criminal standard of proof, namely, that they should be satisfied
  of the Law Society, in which reference is made to the willingness of Mr.                                beyond all reasonable doubt. He further directed them that
   Roberts, the intervening solicitor, to provide lists of debtors to the                                 unlawful killing amounted to death caused by gross negligence
   nominees.                                                                                              or recklessness, or resulting from an unlawful and dangerous act
                                                                                                          which would necessarily involve the use by the officer of greater
        There may have been the misapprehension to which the debtor                                       force than was reasonable in making the arrest. The jury
   refers. I do not think it necessary for me to express a concluded view on                              returned a verdict of death by misadventure. In proceedings for
   that—I am prepared to proceed on the assumption that there was that                                    judicial review the applicant, the brother of the deceased,
   misapprehension. But that matter does not outweigh, in my judgment,                                    challenged the jury’s verdict on the ground that the coroner had
                                                                                                          misdirected the jury in requiring them to apply ihe criminal
   the two overwhelming factors which justify the order made by the                                       rather than the civil standard of proof and by wrongly directing
   registrar and the decision to which he came. They are, first, the very                                 them as to the elements of unlawful killing. The Divisional
   strong probability that the creditors’ meeting would serve no useful                                   Court dismissed the application.
   purpose and would be just a waste of money; and, secondly, the
                                                                                                                                                                             721
                 Reg. v. Wolverhampton Coe*---, Ex p. Y "urbin (C.A.)             11990J            l W .'             . Wolverhampton Coroner, Ex p. McCurbin (C.A.)
                        On appeal by the a ^ . o a - —
                       ,Wf W; dismissing the app , (1) that, although there was a          A   A    properly . the burden of proof in an inquest in that (a) there should
                   technical distinction between the standard of proof in criminal                  have been no different standard of proof between a verdict of unlawful
                   proceedings and that in civil proceedings, the civil standard                     killing and any other verdict, such as misadventure, (b) being an
                   appropriate to a verdict of unlawful killing would, having regard                inquisition and not a criminal trial the standard of proof was not the
                  to the gravity of the issue, be so high that it was effectively the               criminal standard of “beyond reasonable doubt” as the coroner directed
                  same as the criminal standard, so that the result would be the                    in respect of a verdict of unlawful killing, (c) alternatively, if a criminal
                  same whichever were applied; that a coroner’s direction on
                        sf® ..ard ? f Proof appropriate to a verdict of unlawful killing   B        standard were to apply, the same standard ought also to apply to a
                  should therefore indicate that the jury were to be satisfied                      verdict of misadventure and the coroner should so have directed the
                  beyond all reasonable doubt or so that they were sure: but that                   jury; (2) in summing up the coroner failed properly to direct the jury, or
                  in respect of a verdict of death by misadventure they should be                   alternatively misdirected them as to the requirements in law of a verdict
                  directed to apply the less heavy standard of the balance of                       of unlawful killing or why such a verdict might or might not have been
                  probabilities; and that, accordingly, the coroner had not                         appropriate in that (a) having correctly directed the jury that a verdict
                  misdirected the jury on the appropriate standard of proof (post
                  pp. 726e - f , 727g - h , 728a , c - e , 731b ) .                    ’            of unlawful killing meant that someone had committed murder or
                       Hornal v. Neuberger Products Ltd. [ 1957] 1 Q B 247 C A             C   C    manslaughter he failed to direct them as to the constituent elements of
                  and Reg v. Secretary o f State for the Home Department, Ex                        either, (b) he muddled up and confused the elements of manslaughter
                 parte Khawaja [1984] A.C. 74, H.L.(E.) applied.                                    through an unlawful act and manslaughter by gross negligence, and (c)
                      Dicta of Watkins L.J. in Reg. v. West London Coroner, Ex                      he wrongly directed the jury that they could have a verdict of unlawful
                 par,f G r a y [1988] Q.B. 467, 477-478, D.C. approved.                             killing by neglect or lack of care. On 29 June 1989 the Divisional Court
                      ( 2) That in referring to manslaughter due to gross negligence
                                                                                                    (Glidewell L.J. and Rose J.) dismissed the application.
                 or recklessness which was inappropriate in the present
                 circumstances, the coroner had introduced an irrelevant matter            n             By a notice of appeal dated 25 July 1989 the applicant appealed on
                 tor the jury s consideration; but that since the remainder of his                  the grounds, inter alia, that (1) Reg. v. West London Coroner, Ex parte
                 direction on unlawful killing was satisfactory and since it was                    Gray [1988] Q.B. 467 was wrongly decided and the Divisional Court
                 clear that the introduction of the irrelevant matter, even if it                  were wrong to follow it; (2) being an inquisition and not a criminal trial
                               t0 a misdirection, had had no bearing on the outcome                 the proper standard of proof was not the criminal standard of “beyond
                 so that the jury had returned a proper verdict, the court in the                  reasonable doubt” as directed by the coroner, but the civil standard of a
                 exercise of its discretionary judicial review jurisdiction would
                 not intervene (post, pp. 729p - h , 730c - d , h — 731a ) .                        balance of probabilities; (3) except in the case of an open verdict there
                     Decision of the Divisional ’Court of the Queen’s Bench                E   E   should be no different standard of proof as between a verdict of
                 Division affirmed.                                                                unlawful killing and any other verdict such as misadventure; (4) if,
                                                                                                   alternatively, the criminal standard of proof were appropriate, the same
     The following cases are referred to in the judgment of Woolf L.J.:                            standard should have applied to a verdict of misadventure and the
     Hornal v. Neuberger Products Ltd. [1957] 1Q.B. 247- [19561 3 W I R                            coroner ought, but failed, to have so directed the jury; and (5) having
         1034; [1956] 3 All E.R. 970, C.A.                      1 1                                accepted that the coroner had misdirected the jury on the issue of
     Reg'< ^ o % Cre‘2 ry 0fr Slate f ° r ,he Home Department, Ex parte Khawaia                    manslaughter and that therefore there was an error of law, the Divisional
         [ 1984] A.C. 7 4 ; [ ! 983] 2 W.L.R. 321 ; [ ! 983] 1 All E.R. 765, H.L (E )      F       Court erred in holding that nevertheless the application for judicial
                                                                                                   review should be dismissed in that (a) the test proposed by the Divisional
       g w \ R“ l020” u987?2T,rE.R"f27DGCfly ^                   ^      W ; [198?1 2               Court, namely that an applicant for judicial review had to show not only
                                                                                                   that there had been an error of law but also that the error had or might
    The following additional cases were cited in argument:
                                                                                                   have resulted in a wrong verdict, went too far and placed too great a
    Reg 1982^D C L° nd0n Coroner' Ex Par,e Ruddock (unreported), 8 July                            burden on the applicant, (b) a court should have refused to exercise its
                                                                                               G   discretion to grant certiorari or mandamus where there had been a
    Stirland v. Director o f Public Prosecutions [19441 A C 315- fl9441 2 All ^                    material error of law, as in the present case, only if the court found that
         E.R . 13, H .L.(E.)                                    1 1
                                                                                                   the jury would inevitably have come to the same conclusion if properly
                                                                                                   directed, and (c) on the present facts it was not possible to say whether
    A ppeal   from the Divisional Court of the Queen’s Bench Division                              the jury properly directed would not have brought in a different verdict
a       notJc,e ° f application dated 17 April 1989 the applicant, Desmond                              The facts are stated in the judgment of Woolf L.J.
Anthony McCurbin, the brother of the deceased, applied for judicial
review of the verdict of the Wolverhampton coroner’s               jury on 1 H                 H
  ovember 1988, at the conclusion of theinquest into the death of                                      lan Macdonald Q.C. for the applicant.
C inton Ludlow McCurbin at the “Next” shop in Dudley Street                                            Nicholas Underhill for the police officers.
Wolverhampton on 20 February 1987, that the cause of death was                                         Patrick McCahill for the coroner.
misadventure. The applicant sought an order of certiorari to quash the
decision of the j'ury, and an order of mandamus directing that a new                                  W o o l f L.J. This is an appeal from a decision of the Divisional
inquest be held before another of H.M. coroners on the grounds, inter                              Court presided over by Glidewell L.J. on 29 June 1989, when the
alia, that (1) in his summing up the coroner failed to direct the jury                              ivisional Court refused an application for judicial review seeking to set
                                                                                          1 VT'Voekl     R e p r Wolverhampton Coroner, Ex p. McCurbin (C.A.)   Woolf L.J.
aside a decision of a coroner sittii.to with a jfry on 24 October and 1       a
November 1988.                                                                        A   He indicated that the first and, indeed in my view, the primary question
    The facts giving rise to the appli* in for judicial review and the                    of fact    was in issue was:
coroner’s inquest to which the application relates are set out clearly and                      ‘Did P.C. Hobday have his arm around the deceased’s neck? In
very succinctly in the judgment of Glidewell L.J. in the Divisional Court                      evidence he denied it. He said that his arm was around the
and I cannot do better than repeat what he had to say.                                         deceased’s head. Other witnesses in the shop, and there were a
    He points out that it was an inquiry into the death of Clinton Ludlow                      number of civilian witnesses in the shop who gave evidence at the
McCurbin in respect of which the jury had returned a verdict that the         ®       g       inquest, said that Hobday’s arm was around the deceased’s neck.”
deceased died as a result of misadventure. Glidewell L.J. indicated that
                                                                                          Glidewell L.J. then goes on to point out that Dr. West, the pathologist
many of the facts were not in dispute and then he went on to say:
                                                                                          called on behalf of the family, in the course of his evidence, suggested a
     “They are, shortly, that on the afternoon of 20 February 1987 the                    hypothesis, namely that:
     deceased went into the ‘Next’ shop in Dudley Street, Wolverhampton.                       “P.C. Hobday’s arm might have been originally around the
     He was in possession of a stolen visa credit card, which he                               deceased’s chin, which would not have caused any serious injury,
    attempted to use to buy goods. The shop staff became suspicious           ^       C       but may have slipped during the course of the struggle so that it
    and the police were alerted. Two uniformed police constables,                              then lay around the deceased’s neck.”
    Hobday and Thomas, went to the shop. They asked the deceased to
    go with them. He made it clear that he had no intention of doing so                   He then finally referred to a third piece of evidence. That was evidence
    and made to leave. They attempted to arrest him; a violent struggle                   from Mr. Belcher, the person who had been at the deceased’s feet. He
    ensued and the deceased tried to escape. In the struggle, the                         said that he heard the constable say at one point: “Hold his neck—I’ll
    deceased fell or was pushed to the floor of the shop. He finished up      D           break his bloody neck.” Glidewell L.J. said with regard to that: “Did
    lying face down; Hobday was at his head, with an arm round either                 D   Hobday say that and, if he did, did he mean it?”
    his head or his neck; Thomas was somewhere around his waist; and                          Having referred to those facts, I turn to deal with the three
    a customer, a Mr. Belcher, who took the view that the police were                     submissions which Mr. Macdonald, on behalf of the family, has advanced
    not succeeding in the struggle, joined in to help them, holding                       before this court (they being the same submissions which he advanced in
    McCurbin’s feet. I should say that the evidence showed that                           the court below and which were rejected by that court) for saying that
                                                                                          the jury’s verdict in this case should be set aside,
    McCurbin weighed 10£ stone, or perhaps something [ess, and that           E
    Hobday weighed 17 stone. Nevertheless it is quite obvious from the                g      The first is that the coroner incorrectly directed the jury as to the
                                                                                          burden of proof. There is no doubt that, at one stage of his summing
    evidence that McCurbin was putting up a very violent struggle and
    there was a prospect of him escaping. The officers and Mr. Belcher                    up, he clearly directed them in accordance with the criminal standard of
                                                                                          proof. In the passage to which I would draw attention the coroner said:
    held the deceased in that position until other police officers arrived;
    and then the deceased was handcuffed and carried to the rear of the                        “As you will naturally be considering a verdict of ‘unlawful killing’ I
    shop. At that point it was seen that he was not moving. The police                         must now direct you as to the standard of proof which is required
    officers, and then some ambulance men who arrived, tried mouth-           F                by law. It is that you must be satisfied beyond all reasonable doubt
    to-mouth resuscitation, but to no avail; a police surgeon who was                          that some one person has been guilty of the highest degree of
    summoned found him to be dead. The whole incident, from the first                          negligence or recklessness known to the law, thereby committing a
    arrival of the two police constables until the ambulance was                               criminal offence. If you have any doubt in this respect it would be
    summoned, lasted no more than 12 minutes. Until this incident the                          quite wrong to bring in a verdict of ‘unlawful killing.’”
    deceased was a fit young man, 24 years of age. There were two                             Mr. Macdonald submits that the coroner was in error in giving that
    pathologists who gave evidence at the inquest, Dr. Kenneth Scott          q           direction. He submits that, although a verdict of unlawful killing would
    on behalf of the Home Office and Dr. Ian West on behalf of the                        be one which involves a finding of serious misconduct, the appropriate
    family. They expressed the cause of death, in somewhat different                      burden of proof is not the criminal burden of proof but the civil burden
    words, as being asphyxia as a result of compression of the neck.                      of proof, albeit that he accepts that, in applying the civil burden of
    There were three possible verdicts open to the jury: unlawful                         proof, it would be right for the jury to be reminded that, the more grave
    killing, misadventure or an open verdict. In the context of this case                 the allegation, the more clear must be the proof.
    it is agreed that unlawful killing meant manslaughter; there was no       H               In approaching this question, I have been helped by the skeleton
    question of murder.”                                                      H       H   argument which has been put before the court by Mr. McCahill on
                                                                                           ehalf of the coroner, albeit that the court did not find it necessary to
    Glidewell L.J. then turned to the facts and he pointed out, first of                  call on Mr. McCahill to address the court. In that skeleton argument
all, that:                                                                                Mr. McCahill reminds the court that the law with regard to coroners was
    “Both pathologists agreed that the asphyxia probably occurred as a                    codified by the Coroners Act 1887 (50 & 51 Viet. c. 71). Section 4(3) in
                                                                                          dealing with the functions of a coroner’s jury, stated:
    result of an arm being held tightly around the neck of the deceased
    under his chin.”                                                                           After viewing the body and hearing the evidence the jury shall
                                                                                              give their verdict, and certify it by an inquisition in writing, setting




                                                                                  I
                                                    T he W eekly Law R eports 25 May 1990
726                                      -->■              ::
                                                                                                l w.                /. Wolverhampton Coroner, £x p. McCurbin (C.A.)   Woolf L.J.
W oolf L .J .   Reg. v. W olverham pton Co.   ..k   x   p. ..icC urbin (C.A.)      [19901
                                                                                                       [1975] 1 W .L.R. 1310, 1313, said: ‘If that is a fair statement of the
      Court of Appeal not to be a misdirection. But Denning L.J.                            a
                                                                                                       coroner’s approach, and I sincerely hope it is because I have no
      observed that, had the judge said the case required to be proved                                 desire to be unfair to him, it seems to me to fail to recognise what
      with the same strictness as a crime in a criminal court, that would                              is perhaps one of the most important rules that coroners should
      have been a misdirection. He put it thus, at pp. 36-37: ‘The                                     bear in mind in cases of this class, namely, that suicide must never
      difference of opinion which has been evoked about the standard of                                be presumed. If a person dies a violent death, the possibility of
      proof in recent cases may well turn out to be more a matter of                                   suicide may be there for all to see, but it must not be presumed
      words than anything else. It is of course true that by our law a                                 merely because it seems on the face of it to be a likely explanation.
      higher standard of proof is required in criminal cases than in civil                  B          Suicide must be proved by evidence, and if it is not proved by
      cases. But this is subject to the qualification that there is no                                 evidence, it is the duty of the coroner not to find suicide, but to find
      absolute standard in either case.’”                                                              an open verdict. I approach this case, applying a stringent test, and
After a further citation from Denning L.J., Lord Scarman goes on to                                    asking myself whether on the evidence which was given in this case
say, at p. 113:                                                                                        any reasonable coroner could have reached the conclusion that the
                                                                                                       proper answer was suicide.’
      “It is clear that all three members of the court (Bucknill, Somervell                 q
                                                                                                            “It will be noted that Lord Widgery C.J. alluded to the stringent
      and Denning L.JJ.) found difficulty in distinguishing between the                                test, but without reference to what may be called the conventional
      two standards. If a court has to be satisfied, how can it at the same                            standards of proof. I cannot believe, however, that he was regarding
      time entertain a reasonable doubt (Bucknill L.J. at p. 36)?”                                     proof of suicide as other than beyond a reasonable doubt. I so hold
Lord Scarman summed up his views, at p. 114:                                                           that that was and remains the standard. It is unthinkable, in my
                                                                                                       estimation, that anything less will do. So it is in respect of a
      “Accordingly, it is enough to say that, where the burden lies on the                             criminal offence. I regard as equally unthinkable, if not more so,
      executive to justify the exercise of a power of detention, the facts                  D          that a jury should find the commission, although not identifying the
      relied on as justification must be proved to the satisfaction of the                             offender, of a criminal offence without being satisfied beyond a
      court. A preponderance of probability suffices: but the degree of                                reasonable doubt. As for the other verdicts open to a jury, the
      probability must be such that the court is satisfied. The strictness of                           balance of probabilities test is surely appropriate save in respect, of
      the criminal formula is unnecessary to enable justice to be done:                                course, of the open verdict. This standard should be left to the jury
      and its lack of flexibility in a jurisdiction where the technicalities of                        without any of the refined qualifications placed upon it by some
      the law of evidence must not be allowed to become the master                          g          judges who have spoken to some such effect as, the more serious
      of the court could be a positive disadvantage inhibiting the efficacy                             the allegation the higher the degree of probability required. These
      of the developing safeguard of judicial review in the field of public                             refinements would only serve to confuse juries and, in the context
      law.”
                                                                                                        of a jury’s role are, I say with great respect to those who have given
    The approach of Lord Scarman to the burden of proof was expressly                                   expression to them, I think, meaningless. Such matter as that led
adopted by the other members of their Lordships’ House. I would                                         the coroner astray in this case, by providing the jury with no plain
summarise Lord Scarman’s guidance in this way. Technically, there is a                      p           standard of proof to be guided by. He cannot be blamed for that,
distinction between the standard of proof in civil proceedings and                                      but it is another factor which must cause this verdict to be quashed.”
criminal proceedings. However, although there may be that technical
                                                                                                    As appears from the passage from the speech of Lord Scarman in
distinction—and particularly in judicial review this makes it undesirable
                                                                                                Reg. v. Secretary o f State fo r the Home Department, Ex parte Khawaja
to use the criminal standard—from a practical point of view the result in
the end will be the same, whichever approach is adopted.                                        [1984] A.C. 74, 112-114, which I have cited, in different proceedings
                                                                                                there are different considerations which lead to what is the appropriate
    It is now necessary to refer to a decision of the Divisional Court,
                                                                                                test which it is useful to apply, having regard to the role of the decision­
presided over by Watkins L.J., in Reg. v. West London Coroner,                              G
Ex parte Gray [1988] Q.B. 467. The Divisional Court was faced with                              making body who has the task of coming to the conclusion on the facts.
exactly the same problem as this court is faced with today, and the                             As 1 have sought to indicate, whether in a case of a serious nature such
judgment of Watkins L.J. in that case was expressly followed by                                 as unlawful killing you adopt the standard of proof which is technically a
Glidewell L.J. in the court below in the present case. In relation to a                         civil standard but you elevate it because of the gravity of the issue, or
possible verdict of unlawful killing, Watkins L.J. said, at pp. 477-478:                        whether you use the criminal standard of proof, the result will almost
                                                                                                inevitably be the same.
      “I turn now to the standard of proof. We heard much argument                          H       1 can see that there may be force in Mr. Macdonald’s submission that
      about this. There is a lack of direct authority on the point. We were                     perhaps in the case of a coroner’s inquest, theoretically speaking, the
      referred to cases on suicide going back into the last century, all of                     appropriate standard might be said to be a very high standard indeed
     which emphasise the presumption against suicide, and the require­                          on the basis of the civil standard of proof. However, whether that be
      ment of rebutting that presumption. Suicide was then a crime. It no                       right or not, what I am absolutely satisfied about is that the practical
      longer is. But it is still a drastic action which often leaves in its                     guidance which is given by Watkins L.J. in Reg. v. West London
     wake serious social, economic and other consequences. Lord                                 Coroner, Ex parte Gray [1988] Q.B. 467 is correct, bearing in mind that
      Widgery C.J. in Reg. v. City o f London Coroner, Ex parte Barber
     !LO
                                                                                                                                                                                            729
     W oolf L .J .        R eg. v. W o lv e rh a m p to n r   ^ ner, Ey   lcC u rb in (C.A.)   [1»90|
                                                                                                            I W.               /. W olverham pton C orouer, Ex p. M cC urbin (C.A.)   Woolf L .J.
     it is given in relation to the coroner    Ac in respect of his duty to direct                      a
                                                                                                                   practical demonstrations here in court by P.C. Hobday, with the
     a coroner s jury as to how that jury is to perform its task.
                                                                                                                   help of a young volunteer, showing exactly how he reckons he held
          I am quite satisfied that, in a case where it is open to a jury, as a                                    McCurbin. What struck me about those demonstrations was how
     result of a coroner s inquest, to come to a verdict of unlawful killing, the
                                                                                                                   difficult it would have been for any onlooker to have seen with any
     appropriate direction which the coroner should give to the jury is the
                                                                                                                   certainty the exact nature of Hobday’s hold. Bearing in mind the
     simple one that they should be satisfied beyond all reasonable doubt or
                                                                                                                   medical evidence as to the cause of death I would here like to
     as sometimes said, satisfied so that they are sure. That provides clear
                                                                                                                   remind you of the suggestion made by Dr. West. That suggestion
     guidance to the coroner’s jury which they will be able to follow, and it is                        B
                                                                                                                   was that to start with the hold was centred on McCurbin’s chin but
     not necessary for them to be involved with sliding scales which are more
     appropriate for a judge than a jury,                                                                          probably due to McCurbin’s struggling the hold slipped down to the
                                                                                                                   neck.”
r           *s      that, in many cases where it is open to a coroner’s jury to
    find a verdict of unlawful killing, they may also have to consider the                                  He then refers to the interruption when there was a comment which Mr.
    question of death by misadventure. However, in my view, this does not                                   Belcher heard and the coroner concludes this part of his summing up by
    and should not give rise to problems. The coroner should indicate to the                            p   saying: “If this was in fact the true sequence of events could anyone
    jury that they should approach, initially, the question as to whether or                                think the slipping of the hold was anything other than a tragic accident.”
    not they are satisfied so that they are sure that this is unlawful killing If                               I now refer to the passage in the summing up where the coroner
    they come to the conclusion that it is unlawful killing, there is no need                               deals with the verdict of unlawful killing. He says:
    for them to go on to consider death by misadventure. But, if they come
                                                                                                                 “A verdict of ‘unlawful killing’ in the circumstances of this case
    to the conclusion that it is not unlawful killing, they are not satisfied so
                                                                                                                 would mean that in your opinion some particular person who on no
    that they are sure that that verdict is appropriate, then they will consider
                                                                                                                 account can be named is guilty of murder or manslaughter. For such
    the question of misadventure and, in so doing, they do not need to bear                             D        a verdict you must be sure that the ‘unlawful killing’ was caused by
    in mind the heavy standard of proof which is required for unlawful                                           gross negligence or recklessness. There must be such disregard for
    killing. They can approach the matter on the basis of the balance of
                                                                                                                 life and safety as would amount to a crime against the state and be
    probabilities. The situation is that, just as it is important that a jury
                                                                                                                 conduct deserving punishment. Simple lack of care is not enough. A
    should not bring in a verdict of suicide unless they are sure, likewise
                                                                                                                 very high degree of negligence is required to be proved for unlawful
    they should not bring in a verdict of unlawful killing unless they are
    sure/?           />                                                                                          killing to be established. In other words you have to be completely
                                                                                                                 satisfied that Mr. McCurbin died as a result of an unlawful and
        r therefore do not consider that this jury were misled by the coroner                           E        dangerous act. Bearing in mind the facts of this case and the burden
    when he directed them in the terms to which I have referred on the                                           of proof, you have to be certain that there could not have been self-
    question of burden of proof in relation to unlawful killing.                                                 defence and you have to remember the right to use reasonable force
        Mr. Macdonald’s second submission is that the coroner misdirected                                        in making a lawful arrest. The issue for you is whether the force
    the jury on the question of what constitutes unlawful killing in the                                         used by the officers and Mr. Belcher was reasonable in the
    circumstances of the facts which were before the jury. It is right to say,                                   circumstances. And this means you have to decide what force was
    as was accepted in the court below by the Divisional Court, that the                                F        used by each of the individuals concerned in the arrest of
    coroner made his task more difficult than it needed to be. This was a                                        McCurbin.”
    case where, if the jury were satisfied on the facts that the police officer
    concerned had deliberately applied force to the deceased’s neck as                                          Unfortunately, the coroner is there referring to manslaughter due to
    opposed to his chin, then that would almost inevitably result in their                                  recklessness and gross negligence. It was not necessary for him to deal
    coming to a verdict of unlawful killing. However, the pathologist called                                with that type of manslaughter on the facts of that case, and so the
    on behalf of the family gave an explanation for the death which, if right,                          q   initial part of the passage to which I have referred really was irrelevant
    would indicate that the police officer's arm could have gone round the                                  to the considerations which the jury had to consider.
    deceased s neck by accident in the course of the struggle. If that is the                                   However, the second half of that passage was appropriate. He was
    explanation for how the deceased met his unfortunate death, then that                                   right to tell the jury that they had to be satisfied that McCurbin died as
    would clearly lead appropriately to a verdict of death by misadventure.                                 a result of an unlawful and dangerous act. Furthermore, he was right to
        Having said that, I will now draw attention to the way the matter                                   say that they had to be satisfied that the police officer had used more
    was dealt with by the coroner. He started off, in dealing with this critical                            force than was reasonably necessary in order to make a lawful arrest. If
    matter, in these terms in his summing up:                                                           H   the police officer had only used reasonable force in making a lawful
                                                                                                            arrest, his act would not be unlawful, and so his act could not amount to
           “I would now like to remind you of the question of the hold which                                manslaughter.
           P.C. Hobday had on McCurbin when they were on the floor of the                                       Later on in his summing up the coroner added to the passage to
           foyer. P.C. Hobday has consistently maintained he held McCurbin                                  which I have just referred, by saying:
           around the head or chin but not around the neck. However, various
                                                                                                                   ‘Nevertheless, members of the jury, if you not only believe that
           witnesses have spoken of having seen Hobday’s arm firmly around
                                                                                                                   P.C. Hobday said those words but what is more intended to carry
           McCurbin s neck and forcing his head upwards. You have seen two
                                                                                                                   out the threat then in the light of McCurbin’s death a verdict of
730                                                                                                                                                                           111
                                                                                     1 W.J                   •• Wolverhampton Coroner, Ex p. McCurbin (C.A.)          Woolf L.J.
Woolf L .J.    Reg. v. Wolverhampton   mer, E    UcCurbin (C.A.)        [19901

      unlawful killing would appear r .ima facie to be right and proper,         a
                                                                                     judicial icview. Judicial review is required to put right a situation where
                                                                                     things have gone wrong and an injustice requires to be remedied. In this
      However, no doubt you will bear in mind Mr. Belcher’s explanation
                                                                                     case there has been a proper verdict by the coroner’s jury. That being
      of this incident and my earlier remarks. The matter is one for you
                                                                                     so, there is no call for the court to intervene. In its discretion, the court
      to decide. To put this question of a verdict of unlawful killing to
      you in a slightly different way, I would tell you that you must be             below was right to refuse relief and I would come to exactly the same
                                                                                     decision as they did.
      satisfied that the act or omission of a single person amounted to
      unlawful conduct which was a substantial cause of death.”                          Accordingly, I would dismiss this appeal.
                                                                                 B
There, again, the coroner was dealing with the matter satisfactorily.                   S to c k er   L.J.    I agree and there is nothing I wish to add.
    Later in his summing up the coroner did again return to the question
of recklessness and, having done so, concluded with these words:                        L o r d D o n a l d s o n o f L y m in g to n   M.R.    I also agree.
      “I have felt it right and proper that I should deal with the subject of
                                                                                                                                          Appeal dismissed.
      unlawful killing by neglect or lack of care in some detail though in                                                                Costs application adjourned.
      my view it does not apply in this case . . . ”                             q
                                                                                                                                          Leave to appeal refused.
He was absolutely right to tell the jury that it did not apply in this case.
It is only regrettable in these circumstances that he mentioned the                    Solicitors: Bimberg & Co.; Russell Jones & Walker; Gregory,
matter to the jury at all.                                                           Rowcliffe & Milners for Fowler Langley & Wright, Wolverhampton.
    Having referred to those passages in the summing up of the coroner,
I ask myself, first of all, “was there a misdirection?” and to refer to a                                                                                       D. E. C. P.
matter wholly unnecessarily in the way that the coroner did, I accept,           D
can amount to a misdirection. However, having said that, I ask myself’
“did the misdirection have any bearing on the verdict which the jury
came to in this case?” and I say, with regard to that, that I am
absolutely satisfied that it had no possible bearing on the outcome.
    The position is this. The jury brought in a verdict of death by
misadventure. That means that the jury were satisfied, on the balance of
probabilities at any rate, that there was here a death caused by an
accident. That was the critical matter which they had to determine. In
other words, was it a case where the police officer’s arm was deliberately                                                [court    o f a ppea l ]
round the deceased’s neck or was it a case where his arm slipped? I then
take into account the fact that, although the coroner’s direction was                        ‘ DUBAI BANK LTD. v. GALADARI a n d O t h e r s (N o . 2)
unsatisfactory, it was only unsatisfactory because, as he himself said to
the jury, he was dealing with something which was unnecessary to deal            F                                        [1989 D. No. 2034]
with. In other respects the summing up was satisfactory.
   For those reasons, I come to the conclusion which I have indicated                1989 Dec. 8, 11; 21              Slade and Mann L.JJ. and Sir David Croom-Johnson
that the misdirection, if it be a misdirection, was not one which affected
the outcome.                                                                         Practice—Discovery—Inspection—Reference to documents in defen­
                                                                                         dant's affidavit—Plaintiff applying to inspect documents—Whether
    Having come to that conclusion, I turn to the question as to whether                 documents referred to—Whether inference that documents exist
or not the applicant is entitled to relief by way of judicial review. In                 sufficient—Whether inspection to be ordered—R.S. C., Ord. 24,
doing so, I adopt exactly the same approach as was adopted in the court          ®       rr. 10(1), 11(1)
below. Glidewell L.J., having recited the facts, went on to say:                             In an action by the plaintiff to recover moneys alleged to
     “On judicial review the test we have to apply is not simply, has                    have been fraudulently diverted by the first and second
     there been an error of law. We are concerned to inquire whether                     defendants and others, the plaintiff sought an injunction
                                                                                         restraining the tenth defendant, a Panamanian company, from
     the error has or may have resulted in a wrong verdict being entered.                disposing of a property into which the plaintiff claimed diverted
     If, in our view, on a proper summing up the same verdict would                      moneys could be traced. E., a director of the tenth defendant,
     have resulted so that we can be confident there had been no                 H       swore an affidavit describing the tenth defendant’s background
     injustice then the verdict should not be quashed.”                                  and the transaction whereby it had acquired the property. The
                                                                                         plaintiff served a notice pursuant to R.S.C., Ord. 24, r. 10*
I respectfully agree with that approach.                                                 requiring the tenth defendant to produce for inspection and
    The position here is that, in the case of any application for judicial               copying documents to which, it was claimed, reference had been
review, the remedy is discretionary. If, albeit there has been a
misdirection but the misdirection has not affected the outcome in any
way, the court were to intervene, they would, in my view, be misusing
492   .                                                                                                                                                                                                       493
 Lt       Roskill          In re Clayton (H X .(E .))         "        W3J         2 AG                                            In re Clayton (H.L.(E.))                                            Lord Roskill
'are connected, I can see no reason why they should not, ii ,e justices               L ord T e m p u ;man. My Lords, for the reasons advanced by my noble
 think fit, be heard together. In the present cases there were separate            and learned friend, Lord Roskill, I would allow these appeals and answer
 informations against the husband and the wife and a joint information             both certified questions in the negative.
 against them both. I can see no rational objection to all those informa­
 tions being heard and determined together. Of course, when this question                                                                      Appeals allowed.
 arises, as from time to time it will arise, justices will be well advised to                                                                  Costs of appellant and respondents
                                                                                                                                                 from central funds.
 inquire both of the prosecution and of the defence whether either side
 has any objection to all the informations being heard together. If consent           Solicitors: Sharpe, Pritchard & Co. for D. I. Tomlinson, Norwich;
 is forthcoming on both sides there is no problem. '<If such consent is not        Metcalfe Copeman & Pettefar, King’s Lynn.
 forthcoming, the justices should then consider the rival submissions and,
 under any necessary advice from their clerk, rule as they think right in                                                                                                                           M. I. H.
 the overall interests of justice. If the defendant is absent or not repre­
 sented, the justices, of course, should seek the views of the prosecution
 and again if necessary the advice of their clerk and then rule as they
 think fit in the overall interest of justice. Absence of consent, either
 express where the defendant is present or represented and objects or                                                                 [ho use of lords]
 necessarily brought about by his absence or the absence of representation,
 should no longer in practice be regarded as a complete and automatic              R E G I N A ......................................................................................................... R e s p o n d e n t
 bar'tohearing mo re than one information at the same time or informa-
                                                                                                                                                    AND
 tions against more than one defendant charged on separate informations
 at the'“same time when in the justices’ view the facts are sufficiently           S E Y M O UR ( E D W A R D ) ........................................................................... A p p e l l a n t
 closely connected to justify this course and there isno risk of injustice to
                                                                                   1983       June 7;                                           Lord Diplock, Lord Fraser o f Tullybelton,
 defendants by its adoption. Accordingly the justices should always ask
                                                                                              July 21                                               Lord Roskill, Lord Bridge o f Harwich
 themselves whether itwould be fair and just to the defendant or defendants                                                                                         and Lord Templeman
 to allow a joint trial. Only if the answer is clearly in the affirmative ^
 should they order joint trial in the absence of consent by or on behalf           Road Traffic— Reckless driving— Causing death by—Offence—
 of the defendant.                                                                    Whether co-existing with manslaughter— Whether ingredients
                                                                                      o f two offences co-extensive— Direction to jury— Power of
     To give magistrates’ courts this discretion and to change the practice           Prosecution to choose which offence to charge—Joinder o f
 and procedure which has seemingly prevailed in recent years is not to                charges in single indictment— Road Traffic Act 1972 (c. 20),
 invite magistrates’courts to embark upon long and complicated summary                s. 1 (as amended by Criminal Law Act 1977 (c. 45), s. 50 (1))
 trials with many charges being heard and many offenders being tried all p                    Lord Diplock in Reg. v. Lawrence [1982] A.C. 510, 526-
 at the same time. As Sachs J. said in Reg. v. Assim [1966] 2 Q.B. 249,                   527 stated that the appropriate direction to a jury considering
                                                                                          a charge o f causing death by driving recklessly contrary to
 it is impossible to lay down general rules applicable to every case which                section 1 o f the Road Traffic Act 1972 1 (as substituted by
 may arise but if justices ask themselves, before finally ruling, the single              section 50 (1) of the Criminal Law Act 1977) was that they
 question— what is the fairest thing to do in all the circumstances in the                should be satisfied:
                                                                                               “ First, that the defendant was in fact driving the vehicle
 interests of everyone concerned?— they are unlikely to err in their conclu­                   in such a manner as to create an obvious and serious risk
 sion, for the aim of the judicial process is to secure a fair trial and rules q               of causing physical injury to some other person who might
 of practice and procedure are designed to that end and not otherwise.                         happen to be using the road . . . and Second, that in
                                                                                               driving in that manner the defendant did so without having
     My Lords, in the result I would allow these two appeals and refuse                        given any thought to the possibility o f there being any
 the applications for judicial review. I would answer both the certified                       such risk or, having recognised that there was some risk
 questions in the negative. Since the appeals to the King’s Lynn Crown                         involved, had nonetheless gone on to take it.”
 Court were adjourned pending the applications for judicial review which                      The defendant while driving an 11 ton lorry on the highway
                                                                                          attempted to push a stationary motor car out o f his way and
 have now failed, these cases must be remitted to that court to continue jj               in so doing crushed B, with whom he had recently quarrelled,
 with the hearing of the appeals. Your Lordships may think it right in                    between the two vehicles. B, who had just got out o f the car,
 all the circumstances of these appeals to order that the costs of both the               was so severely injured that she died six days later. The
 appellant and the respondents should be paid out of central funds.                    1 Road Traffic Act 1972, s. 1 : see post, p. 502e-f.
                                                              ✓VJ/ J         VI * .IV.



drawn from the fact that the first limb is satisfied, or t   splace      explanation     death of persor      ’ 'he      1 as a result of the capsize, the coroner decided as a
advanced by the driver, they can do so by any evidenc           zhicn is admissible:     matter of law that         acoiporate body could not be guilty of manslaughter; (ii)
and, (3) evidence of alcoholic consumption sufficient             impair control is      where the acts or omissions of employees or managers of a corporate body were
admissible for this purpose.                                                             not sufficient to render them guilty of manslaughter, those acts or omissions could
   There being for the foregoing reasons no basis for interfering with the               not be aggregated so as to render the corporate body guilty; (iii) the acts or
conviction the appeal is dismissed.                                                      omissions of the company which owned the vessel were not the direct cause of the
   There remains for consideration the question certified by the judge. A s it           deaths; and (iv) the evidence to be adduced at the inquest would be narrowed
stands, the answer must be in the negative for it omits the whole of the first           down. The applicants, relatives of named victims, sought judicial review of the
limb of the R. v. Lawrence test. If, however, it were amended so as to read: is          coroner’s decision and relied on three points made against the company in the
the offence of causing death by reckless driving proved where, having taken              Sheen report, i.e. the company had failed to consider seriously a proposal to fit a
alcoholic drink in sufficient quantity such that he knew or must have known that         warning light system on the ferry; five or six previous incidents of ferry doors being
his ability to drive was substantially impaired and that there was therefore a risk      left open had not been properly reported and collated by the company and it
of his causing injury to other road users, the defendant chose to drive a motor          lacked any proper system to ensure that the highest standards of safety were
vehicle and the manner o f his driving was such that: (a) it created an obvious          observed.
and serious risk of causing physical injury to some other person who happened
or might happen to be using the road, or of doing substantial damage to                  Held, refusing the applications, the Court was prepared tentatively to accept that a
property, and (b) it did cause the death of another road user, we would answer           corporate body was capable of being found guilty of manslaughter; however, no
the question, “prima facie, yes, in the absence of some other explanation.”              sustainable case had been made against the named directors of the company, the
                                                                                         owners of the ferry. In exceptional cases the Court would intervene while
                                                               Appeal dismissed.         proceedings were in progress; but in the instant case the Court was very reluctant
                                                                                         to intervene, especially because it was an inquest. A coroner acted as an inquisitor
  Solicitors: Leslie Maddrell & Co, Cheltenham, for the Crown.                           and as such was the master of his own procedure. Great weight had to be given to
                                                                                         the coroner’s judgment, whose duty it was to guide the jury to a correct verdict by
                                                                                         way of a fact finding mission, and not to apportion blame and liability.
                                                                                           Applications for judicial review.
                                                                                           The applicants, Peter Alan Spooner, Pamela Muriel Spooner, Alan Frederick
                                                                                         Reynolds, Joan Patricia Reynolds, Maurice D e Rohan and Margaret D e Rohan,
                                                                                         applied for judicial review of decisions of the Coroner for East Kent (Mr. Richard
R.    v. H.M. CORONER FOR EAST KENT, Ex parte                                            Harry Brooke Sturt) made on September 19, 1987, in the course of an inquest into
                                                                                         the death of 188 people arising out of the capsize on March 6, 1987 of the Herald
               SPOONER AND OTHERS                                                        of Free Enterprise stating that as a matter of law a corporate body could not be
                                                                                         guilty of manslaughter. An application for an order postponing the publication of
R. v. H.M. CORONER FOR EAST KENT, Ex parte De                                            any report of the proceedings until after the jury had returned their verdict in the
                                                                                         inquest was allowed under section 4 of the Contempt of Court Act 1981.
             ROHAN AND ANOTHER                                                             The grounds of the application and the ruling of the coroner are set out in the
                                                                                         judgment of Bingham L.J.
Q u e e n ’s B e n c h ( D iv is io n a l C o u r t ) (Lord Justice Bingham, Mr.           The applications were argued on October 5, 1987, when the Court stated that
     Justice Mann and Mr. Justice Kennedy): October 5, 6, 1987                           they would be refused.
Manslaughter Capacity— Corporate Body—Whether Corporation Capable o f                      Alastair John Forrest for the applicants Spooner and Reynolds.
Committing Manslaughter— Whether Aggregation o f Acts by Individuals in                    Edward Lawson for the applicants D e Rohan.
Corporation Can A m ount to Manslaughter                                                   David Guy for the coroner.
                                                                                                                                                             Cur. adv. vult.
   A corporate body can be guilty of manslaughter on the appropriate facts where
the mens rea and actus reus of manslaughter can be established against those               October 6. BINGHAM L.J. delivered the following judgment: There are before
identified as the embodiment of the company itself. Evidence must be adduced to          the Court two renewed applications for judicial review. The first application is made
show guilt on the part of the corporation as such. Evidence against one individual       on behalf of Mr. and Mrs. Spooner and Mr. and Mrs. Reynolds. The application
cannot be added to that against another so as to provide the necessary ingredients       was made on September 22, 1987, and refused by McCowan J. on September 24.
of aggregation.                                                                          The second application is made on behalf of Mr. and Mrs. de Rohan and was first
  The vehicle ferry ship Herald of Free Enterprise capsized outside Zeebrugge            made on September 23, being refused by McCowan J. also on September 24.
harbour with the resultant heavy loss of life. A public inquiry took place shortly         Both applications relate to an inquest currently being conducted in Dover by Her
after the capsize and a report was published. In the course of an inquest into the       Majesty’s Coroner for East Kent. Both applications are made by parents and
if__________________________                                                              66 LR.APP.K.
                                                                                              Q .B .D .                            1 \.   V.   IX.IT*.   W I



relatives of the deceased. Both seek to quash decisio         ,f the     iner made on            managemer           've       per and clear directions was a contributory cause of
September 18 and 19.                                                                             the disaster. i n>- is a s^i ious finding which must be explained in some detail.
   The grounds of the application are, put broadly, that the coroner made an                     The report then goes into very considerable detail and in the course of the
incorrect ruling on issues of law arising during the hearing before him and, as a            present hearing three points are relied on as being particularly relevant. First, it is
result, improperly limited the scope of the inquest. The parties ask this Court to           pointed out that the company and its representatives failed to give serious
make a declaration as to the law and to direct the coroner to call additional                consideration to a proposal that lights should be fitted on the bridge of the vessel
evidence, or to reconsider what evidence should be called in the light of the Court’s        which would inform the Master whether the bow doors and, for that matter, the
declaration.                                                                                 stem doors were closed or not. Such a warning system, if duly heeded by the
   The inquest arises from the capsize of the vehicle ferry “Herald of Free                  Master, would have prevented this disaster. This was a suggestion which was made
 Enterprise” off Zeebrugge on March 6, 1987 and the huge loss of life, both of               but seems unhappily to have been the subject of facetious comment.
passengers and crew, to which that tragic disaster gave rise. Nearly 200 lives were              Secondly, attention is drawn to the failure of the company and its representatives
lost, causing widespread grief, and the facts of the disaster are etched not only on         to report and collate information relating to previous incidents when vessels had
the recollections of all who were involved, directly or indirectly, but on the               sailed with their doors open. It appears that there were five or six such incidents
consciousness of the nation as a whole.                                                      between October 1983 and February 1987. Had knowledge of these repeated
   Very shortly after the disaster the Secretary of State for Trade ordered a formal         incidents been appreciated it should have alerted the officers of the company to the
investigation under section 55 of the Merchant Shipping Act 1970. Sheen J. sitting            risk of disaster, but it appears that there was no person within the company who
with Assessors, was appointed to conduct it. There was a long, comprehensive and              ever knew of all the incidents.
well publicised investigation culminating in a full report and recommendations                   Thirdly, attention is drawn to the lack of any proper system within the company
published in July of this year.                                                               to ensure that the vessels were operated in accordance with the highest standards of
   The investigation found that the immediate cause of the vessel’s loss was that she         safety. It is rightly urged upon us that where the result of an unsafe system is liable
sailed with her bow doors open trimmed by the head, i.e. with her nose down. The              to be so grave, the onus on a company to ensure safe operation is correspondingly
manoeuvre in which she engaged led to the entry of water into the vehicle deck,               high.
the heavy listing of the vessel and her speedy capsize.                                           At the very end of his report, Sheen J. answered the questions posed for the
   Sheen J. criticised a number o f individuals who had failed to perform their duty,         investigation by the Secretary of State. Question 3 was in these terms: Was the
in particular those responsible for failing to close the bow doors, failing to see that       capsize of the ‘Herald o f Free Enterprise’ caused or contributed to by the fault of
the doors were closed and sailing without knowing that the doors were closed. He              any person or persons and, if so, whom and in what respect? The answer given to
expressed his criticisms in strong terms. The vessel was owned and operated by                that question was: “Yes, by the faults of the following,” and three individuals are
Townsend Car Ferries Ltd., and that company also was the subject of severe                    listed. Then: “4. Townsend Car Ferries Limited at all levels from the Board of
criticism.                                                                                     Directors through the managers of the Marine Department down to the Junior
   It is right that I should refer to the terms in which Sheen J. expressed those              Superintendents. As to the respects in which each of the above-named was guilty of
criticisms. In paragraph 14.1 of his report he said this:                                      causative fault, see Report.”
                                                                                                  One might suppose that one Inquiry of this magnitude, even into a disaster on
    “At first sight the faults which led to this disaster were the aforesaid errors of         this scale, would be enough but the law required Her Majesty’s Coroner for East
    omission on the part of the Master, the Chief Officer and the assistant bosun,             Kent to conduct an inquest with a jury pursuant to section 3 of the Coroners Act
    and also the failure by Captain Kirby to issue and enforce clear orders. But a             1887. It was the coroner’s duty to ascertain in each case who the deceased was and
    full investigation into the circumstances of the disaster leads inexorably to the          how, when and where the deceased came by his or her death.
    conclusion that the underlying or cardinal faults lay higher up in the Company.               This inquest was very different from most inquests, both because of the huge
    The Board of Directors did not appreciate their responsibility for the safe                number of deceased persons with whom it was concerned and also because of the
    management of their ships. They did not apply their minds to the question:                 mass of material relating to the incident, particularly following the inquiry of Sheen
    What orders should be given for the safety of our ships? The Directors did not             J. But, as with any other inquest, its conduct was in the hands of the coroner
    have any proper comprehension o f what their duties were. There appears to                 whose duty was to conduct an inquisition and not an adversarial trial. He had to
    have been a lack of thought about the way in which the HERALD ought to                      consider a huge mass of material in order to determine, in accordance with his duty
    have been organised for the Dover/Zeebrugge run. All concerned in                           under section 4 of the 1887 Act, whom he thought it expedient to examine. He also
    management, from the members of the Board of Directors down to the junior                   had to bear in mind that at the conclusion of the hearing the jury would have to
    superintendents, were guilty of fault in that all must be regarded as sharing               give a verdict and certify who the deceased was and how, when and where the
    responsibility for the failure of management. From top to bottom the body                   deceased came by his or her death.
    corporate was infected with the disease of sloppiness. This became particularly               The evidence which w e have seen suggests to me that this cproner set about his
    apparent from the evidence of Mr. A. P. Young, who was the Operations                       task with great conscientiousness and assiduity. After a formal opening of the
    Director and Mr. W. J. Ayers, who was Technical Director. As will become                    inquest at an earlier date the substantive opening of the inquest into 188 deaths
    apparent from later passages in this Report, the Court was singularly                       began on September 7, 1987. The coroner then delivered a very full and carefully
    unimpressed by both these gentlemen. The failure on the part of the shore                   constructed opening address to the jury, telling them of the coroner s functions,
 14                                                             (1989) 88 C r.A pp .R .     Q.B.D.                                K .   V.   n .lV l.   V^UKUNEK   ru n   U . A 0 1 4V U1 1



their functions and the whole background to the hai.             ■ tas vhich they had           The coroner            'rev   .e matter and gave a ruling on September 18. He
jointly to carry out. It could not be suggested that a speec. ^n this scale would be        referred to the five v,..nesses, two of whom had not given evidence to Sheen J. and
suitable in other than exceptional cases, but on this particular occasion it was no         the other three of whom had given evidence amounting to some 467 pages of
doubt helpful for the jury to be given such a compendious introduction to their             transcript. The coroner reached four conclusions. First, he expressed his opinion
task.                                                                                       that there was no arguable case of manslaughter against the five named individuals.
   It is not, I think, necessary to go in great detail into the opening address of the      Secondly, he expressed the opinion that a company cannot in law be indicted for
coroner but I should draw attention to what he said on p. 76 of the transcript of his       manslaughter. Thirdly, he ruled that there was no evidence of conduct which would
address. He said this:                                                                      found a charge of manslaughter against the company even if such a crime could be
                                                                                            committed by a company. Fourthly, he ruled that a charge of manslaughter cannot
       “Another potential verdict you will have to consider in due course, and               be founded on the aggregation of individual acts which do not individually constitute
       perhaps most controversially, is the verdict of unlawful killing. The notes,         gross negligence. H e did however agree to call limited evidence from one of the
       again they are not part of the law, suggest that in the case of murder,               five witnesses. On September 21 the coroner gave further reasons for the ruling that
      manslaughter or infanticide, the following form be adopted, ‘so and so was             he had delivered on the earlier occasion and dealt in more detail with the
      killed unlawfully.’ Members of the jury, again I think we can eliminate the            aggregation point.
      infanticide and almost certainly murder from this consideration but the                    On September 22 Messrs. Kingsley Napley wrote to the coroner, drawing his
      manslaughter will require more detailed consideration. I shall be directing you        attention to a further authority on the question whether manslaughter could be
      on the subject of manslaughter leading to a Coroner’s verdict of ‘killed               committed by a corporation. The authority referred to was a case tried at the
      unlawfully’ in due course but perhaps I need to introduce the subject now by           Glamorgan Assizes in February 1965, when a contracting company was indicted for
      saying three things and they are very important: (i) You will remember that if         manslaughter and the trial proceeded before Streatfield J. The prosecution were
      you were to decide upon such a verdict, no individual should be named as               represented by Mr. Philip Wien Q.C. as he then was, and the Corporation
      having been responsible, (ii) Secondly, to arrive at a verdict of unlawful killing      represented by Mr. Mars-Jones Q.C. as he then was. The company was acquitted
      you need to be satisfied beyond all reasonable doubt that the act or omission           but the significance attached by Kingsley Napley to the report of the case is that the
      of an individual caused substantially one or more of the deaths and that that           prosecution failed on its facts, and neither of those distinguished counsel nor the
      individual was guilty of gross negligence. By this I mean that he did or omitted        extremely experienced judge evidently considered that a company could not in
      to do something which created an obvious and serious risk of physical injury;           principle be indicted for manslaughter.
      and that this was done without having given any thought to the possibility of               The case having been drawn to the coroner’s attention—and no possible criticism
      the risk or that whoever did or omitted to do the thing recognised the risk and         is to be made of the fact that it was not drawn to his attention before because the
      nevertheless decided to take it. (iii) The third thing that I wish to say at this       earlier submissions had been made at short notice—the Coroner replied by a letter
      stage is that although it is possible for several persons to be guilty individually     of September 23. He said: “I am very grateful to you for drawing my attention to
      of manslaughter, it is not permissible to aggregate several acts of neglect by           the case of Northern Strip Mining Construction Co. Ltd. (unreported, 1956). It is
      different persons, so as to have gross negligence by a process of aggregation.           not clear whether the question of corporate liability was argued. However, as I said
      That is a very important point of law, Members of the Jury, which I will                 in my ruling of September 18 at pp. 5 and 6, the acts of the company would have
      emphasise again in due course.”                                                          to be those of an individual (and I should have said an individual director) who was
   No criticism is I think made of what the coroner said about manslaughter as                 himself guilty of unlawful killing. I made it clear there was no prima facie evidence
against a personal defendant, but criticism has been made before us as to what he              that any of the three relevant directors had done any act or been guilty of any
said about, aggregation. The point has been made that a company can be guilty of               omission which could be said to be a direct or substantial cause of the capsize and
manslaughter as well as an individual.                                                         that therefore the question of corporate manslaughter did not in any event arise.”
   After the coroner’s opening address the Inquest proceeded. A very large number                 At the time when that letter was written, on September 23, 340 witnesses had
of witnesses were called and a very large number of proofs of written evidence                 given evidence orally and 400 statements had been read to the jury. The matter was
were read to the jury. So matters continued until September 17 when Sir David                  re-argued before the coroner on October 1, the argument before him being, I think
Napley, on behalf of Mr. and Mrs. de Rohan, made submissions to the coroner.                   it is fair to say, no doubt more elaborate but to substantially the same effect as
   The burden of his submission was that the coroner should call five witnesses (who           before. H e gave a further ruling in these terms: “As I have said, Mr. Forrest
were named and identified) belonging to the management of the owning and                       submitted that the actus reus and the mens rea may be found in the hands and
operating company. Sir David submitted to the coroner that a corporation can be                 brain of the company, respectively. Had the facts been, as in the Glamorgan
guilty of manslaughter, and he referred to a body of authority— albeit somewhat                 Assizes case, i.e. Northern Strip Mining Construction Co. Ltd., (where the instruction
inconclusive—to that effect. He further urged that the coroner should investigate in            alleged, which had been given by the Managing Director, was to demolish a bridge
evidence the responsibility of senior management of the company in order to leave               starting in the middle) that the company brains had given instructions to go out to
to the jury the question whether the company itself was guilty of manslaughter, or              sea with the bow doors open, at full speed, when trimmed by the head, that would
unlawful killing. He drew the attention of the coroner to, and relied on, evidence in           be a wholly different set of facts. The submission might then have been relevant. It
Sheen J. s report. He further urged that different acts all contributing to a death             has not been suggested by anyone that that is what happened here. I have
can each found an indictment for manslaughter against the company. Mr. Forrest                  considered all the'evidence given by the Directors to the Sheen Inquiry, and that,
on behalf of other parties adopted and elaborated those submissions.                            incidentally, is 467 pages of transcript and not 367 as I mistakenly said on a
16                                                      ^     (1989) 88 C r . A p p . R .                                        R. v. H .M . C o r o n e r f o r E a s t K e n t   17
                                                                                            C .A .

 previous occasion, when -I gave these rulings, and I iiav      m aiso considered the       properly addressed t(     owing guilt on the part of the corporation as such. On the
 evidence given by one former director to this inquest, ana i can see nothing in any        main substance of his mling I am not persuaded that the coroner erred.
 of that evidence to support such a suggestion. It accordingly seems to me to be               Indeed, on the materials I have seen I would reach that conclusion even if the
 irrelevant to the issues before the jury. Quite apart from anything else, a failure to     inquest had been concluded. But I reach the conclusion with some relief given that
 act would only ground manslaughter if it was that person’s duty to act. The jury           the Inquest is in progress and that the coroner is in the course of summing-up.
 would need evidence of the extent of the duties of each of the directors concerned.           I accept that in exceptional cases the Court will intervene by way of judicial
 It would also need evidence of the powers which each director had to take action.          review while a proceeding is in progress. If intervention were necessary to prevent
 And, for example, would he have had to persuade the whole Board, or some other             this inquest having to be conducted all over again because of legal or procedural
 director, to agree with the proposal. It is obvious, as a matter of ordinary common        error, it might very well be such an exceptional case. But just as the Court of
 sense, that the whole subject goes far beyond the proper scope of an Inquest,              Appeal is very slow to interfere in the conduct of a trial proceeding before a judge,
 which is essentially a fact finding and not a fault finding enquiry. For these reasons     so this court should, in my judgment, be very reluctant to intervene in the conduct
 I intend to tell the jury that they are not concerned with corporate manslaughter,         of an inquest in train before a coroner. The fact that it is an inquest perhaps makes
 whether it exists or not, and that in this inquest, when considering the possible          the argument even stronger because the coroner is by law an inquisitor; the
 verdict of unlawful killing, they are only concerned with the acts or omissions of         witnesses called are those whom he, under the statute, thinks it expedient to
 those individuals who could be said to have caused the deaths.”                            examine, and he is very much the master of his own procedure.
    The arguments which were deployed and elaborated before the coroner have, in               These considerations are fortified here because the coroner has immersed himself
 substance, been repeated with great cogency and skill before us. The first question        in a huge mass of material which the court has not seen. We have scarcely glimpsed
 is whether a corporation can be indicted for manslaughter. The coroner originally          the tip of the iceberg o f evidence with which he is familiar. Very great weight
 ruled that it could not. In the course of argument in this Court we indicated at an        therefore should be given to his judgment, although on questions of law he is of
 early stage that we were prepared to assume for the purposes of this hearing that it       course exercising a judgment, not a discrection.
 could. As a result the question has not been fully argued and I have not found it             It is his duty to guide the jury to a correct verdict but his responsibility is to
 necessary to reach a final conclusion. I am, however, tentatively of opinion that on       conduct a fact-finding exercise, not to apportion blame and not to decide civil
appropriate facts the mens rea required for manslaughter can be established against         liability. In a case such as this the chain of causation may be of almost infinite
a corporation. I see no reason in principle why such a charge should not be                 length. The coroner had to break it somewhere to keep his enquiry within tolerable
established. I am therefore tentatively of opinion that the coroner’s original ruling       bounds. He broke it at what I judge to be a reasonable and sustainable point,
was wrong, and indeed I would need considerable persuasion to reach the                      particularly bearing in mind the exhaustive public inquiry which had already been
conclusion that it was correct.                                                             conducted by Sheen J.
    But that is not the end of the matter because the coroner clearly adhered to his           Those are my reasons for the conclusion announced at the end of yesterday’s
substantial ruling even on the assumption that a company could in principle be              hearing that leave to move for judicial review should not be given.
guilty of manslaughter. The coroner made it clear that he was of opinion that the
                                                                                              MANN J.: I agree with the reasons given by Bingham LJ. Like Bingham L.J., I
evidence which he had considered was not capable of supporting the conclusion that
                                                                                            am of the view that a body corporate can in appropriate circumstances be guilty of
those who represented the directing mind and will of the company and controlled
                                                                                            a crime of manslaughter, but would not wish to decide the matter on an application
what it did had been guilty o f conduct amounting to manslaughter.                          for leave to move.
    I am not persuaded that that is a conclusion which is or may be wrong. Nothing
was, in my judgment, said by Sheen J. or by way of concession before him which                 KENNEDY J.: I agree.
undermines that conclusion. It is important to bear in mind an important distinction.                                                                       Applications refused.
A company may be vicariously liable for the negligent acts and omissions of its
                                                                                             Solicitors: Pannone Napier, for the applicants Spooner and Reynolds. Kingsley
servants and agents, but for a company to be criminally liable for manslaughter—on
                                                                                            Napley for the applicants de Rohan. Sharpe Pritchard & Co. agents for W. G.
the assumption I am making that such a crime exists—it is required that the mens            Hopkin, Maidstone for the Coroner.
rea and the actus reus of manslaughter should be established not against those who
acted for or in the name of the company but against those who were to be
identified as the embodiment of the company itself. The coroner formed the view
that there was no such case fit to be left to the jury against this company. I see no
reason to disagree. I would add that I see no sustainable case in manslaughter
against the directors who are named either.
   I do not think the aggregation argument assists the applicants. Whether the
defendant is a corporation or a personal defendant, the ingredients of manslaughter
must be established by proving the necessary mens rea and actus reus of
manslaughter against it or him by evidence properly to be relied on against it or
him. A case against a personal defendant cannot be fortified by evidence against
another defendant. The case against a corporation can only be made by evidence
           KEEBLE HAWSON                                                  Ms
                      SOLICITORS
           Incorporating Branson Bram ley & Co.

                                                  OLD CATHEDRAL VICARAGE.
                                                         ST JAMES' ROW.
                                                                 SHEFFIELD.
                                                                          S I 1XA.
                                                  TELEPHONE 0742-722061
                                                  MDX NO. 10527
                                                  FAX NO. 0742 - 700813
                                                  FAX NO. 0742 - 750243




With Compliments
1            9 _______________9 _______________1




INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS
 OF THE VICTIMS OF THE
 HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL
STADIUM DISASTER ON THE
    15th APRIL 1989




SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF
SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL




    Ref:   AAW/DEH

Messrs. Keeble Hawson,
Old Cathedral Vicarage,
St. James' Row,
Sheffield.
SI 1XA
               INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE VICTIMS OF THE

                  : HILLSBOROUGH F O O T B A L L 'STADIUM DISASTER ,■

                              ON THE 15th APRIL 1989




               SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL




INTRODUCTION

1.    These submissions relate only to the possibility of the Jury being

directed to consider a verdict of unlawful killing.         The submissions below

are developed both generally in order to make relevant submissions of law

and specifically with a view to showing that Sheffield City Council and the

Council's employees could not possibly be regarded as persons who unlawfully

killed any of the deceased.    Sheffield City Council do not presume to enter

the debate that will no doubt arise as to whether any other person, whether

corporation or natural human being, might, or might not, possibly be regarded
                                                                                    X
as one who unlawfully killed the deceased, and so far as that issue goes

Sheffield City Council take up a neutral position.




POSSIBLE BASIS FOR VERDICT OF UNLAWFUL KILLING




2.     For the purposes of these Inquests a verdict of unlawful killing would

be justified if the Jury were satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that some

person or persons (whom the Jury must under no account name or identify)

had brought about the death of the deceased, or some or any of them, as a

result of committing the offence of manslaughter.         It would be improper to

direct the Jury to consider the possibility of a verdict of unlawful killing

based upon the offence of murder having been committed, as there is no
evidence at all to show that any person caused the death of the deceased

through some unlawful act or that any person intended to kill or to cause

grievous bodily harm.    Neither the actus reus nor the mens rea of murder

is established on the evidence before this Jury.




3.     If the Jury are to be directed to consider a verdict of unlawful

killing on the basis that any or some or all of the deceased died as a

consequence of manslaughter then the Jury must be warned in terms that they

are being directed to consider whether a criminal offence of manslaughter

had been committed.     They must be given the appropriate direction as to the

standard of proof for manslaughter, and the appropriate direction is the

simple one that they should be satisfied beyond all reasonable doubt or,

as sometimes said, satisfied so that they are sure that all the necessary

elements of the offence are proved; and that the verdict of unlawful killing

must not be returned unless they are satisfied beyond all reasonable doubt         ^

that such elements are proved.     When directions are given as to any other

verdict that may be brought in, e.g., accident/misadventure or open, it

 should be stressed that a different standard of proof applies viz, proof

 on a balance of probabilities, with an appropriate    explanation of what that

 means and how that differs from the criminal standard of proof.




 4.     So far as the offence of manslaughter goes there is no question of

 any of the deceased having been killed as a result of an unlawful, act.     For

 these purposes an unlawful act is one which is unlawful for some reason other

 than the negligent manner of its performance.     The Jury should not,

 therefore, be directed to consider the possibility of any person having
killed the deceased or any of them as a result of an unlawful act.

Involuntary marislaughter of that form could not possibly form the basis for

a verdict of unlawful killing.



5.     The question is whether the Jury should be directed to consider a

verdict of unlawful killing based upon reckless manslaughter,           that is to

say to consider whether the Jury are satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt

that some person or persons (whom they must under no account name) has

brought about the death of any or some or all of the deceased as a result

of recklessness.    It is not necessary,      and it will be unhelpful and

confusing, to direct the Jury to consider "gross negligence manslaughter             .




FIRST ELEMENT OF RECKLESS MANSLAUGHTER            - CAUSATIVE CONDUCT




 6.    If the Jury are to consider whether some specific individual committed

 the offence of reckless manslaughter then the Jury have to consider firstly

 whether that person by his conduct, i.e., some act or omission to act (where

 there was a duty to act), was a substantial cause of the death of any or

 some or all of the deceased.      In order to prove causation the following

 matters must be established:



        (i)        that but for the conduct of the person under consideration

                   the    death of the deceased would not have occurred.




        (ii)       that although the conduct of the person' under consideration

                   need    not be the sole or the main cause of death it must

                   be a substantial c a u s e .




                                          -   3     -
      (iii)      that where the conduct of the person sunder consideration

                 was performed prior to the 15th April 1989 then a subsequent

                 and intervening act which causes death breaks the chain of

                 causation if that intervening act is not foreseeable;    and

                 that this means that such prior conduct is not,    in law, to

                 be regarded as a substantial cause of such subsequent event.

                 This is consistent with the Jury's function of establishing

                 how the deceased came by his death since the Jury are there

                 concerned to find out what circumstances are directly,

                 responsible for the death of the deceased.    Such an

                 intervening and unforeseeable act prevents any prior

                 circumstances, by way of earlier acts or omissions, from

                 being directly responsible for subsequent death.




(b)    It is submitted on behalf of Sheffield City Council that no reasonable

Jury properly directed could possibly conclude:




       (i)        That but for the conduct of the Sheffield City Council, or

                  any of its employees,   the deaths would not have occurred.




       (ii), .    That any conduct of the Sheffield City Council or any of

                  its employees was a substantial cause of death.




       (iii)      That the events occurring at the ground on the 15th April

                  1989 from 2.30 p.m. onwards were foreseeable.     The events

                  referred to are the sudden introduction of a large number

                  of fans en masse into an area of the terraces which was
                already crowded and full.      On the contrary, no reasonable

                Jury properly*directed could find that such events were

                foreseeable by Sheffield City Council or any of its employees

                or that any chain of causation which might otherwise have

                been established by any prior conduct on the part of

                Sheffield City Council was other than broken.




(c)   Accordingly as a matter of law the Jury should not be directed to

consider the conduct of Sheffield City Council or any of its employees in

the context of any verdict of unlawful killing based upon involuntary

reckless manslaughter.



(d)    If the submission at (c) is rejected,           then the Jury must be properly

directed to consider the issue of causation in the specific context of the

conduct of Sheffield City Council and be given full instructions to the

relevant criteria to be applied i.e. as per (b) above, but amplified as


necessary.



SECOND ELEMF.NT OF RECKLESS MANSLAUGHTER       -       MENTAL ELEMENT




7.     The. second matter to be considered is the mental element involved

 in reckless manslaughter.   So far as this mental element is concerned the

 appropriate direction is that known as the Lawrence Direction which is to

 be found in the following passage of the speech of Lord Diplock in

 Kgg -v- Lawrence 1982 A.C. 510 at 526 E to 527 B as f o ll ow s:




                                      -    5       -
"Recklessness on the part of the doer of an act does presuppose that

there is something in the circumstances that would have dravn the

attention of an ordinary prudent individual to the possibility that

his act was capable of causing the kind of serious harmful   consequences

that the section which creates the offence was intended to   prevent,

and that the risk of those harmful consequences occurring was not

so slight that an ordinary prudent individual would feel justified

in treating them as negligible.   It is only when this is so that the

doer of the act is acting "recklessly" if before doing the act, he

either fails to give any thought to the possibility of there being

any such risk or, having recognised that there was such risk, he

nevertheless goes on to do it.




In my view, an appropriate instruction to the Jury on what   is meant

by driving recklessly would be that they must be satisfied   of two     ^

thin gs :




First,   that the defendant was in fact driving the vehicle in such

a manner as to create an obvious and serious risk of causing physical

injury to some other person who might happen to be using the road

or of.doing substantial damage to property; and




Second, that in driving in that manner the defendant did so without

having given any thought to the possibility of there being any such

risk o r , having recognised that there was some risk involved, had

nonetheless gone on to take it.
      It is for the Jury to decide whether the risk created by the manner

      in which the vehicle was being driven was both obvious and serious

      and, in deciding that,       they might apply the standard of the ordinary

      prudent motorist as represented by themselves.




      If satisfied that an obvious and serious risk was created by the manner

       of the defendant's driving,      the Jury are entitled to infer that he

      was in one or other of the states of mind required to constitute the

       offence and will probably do so; but regard must be given to any

       explanation he gives as to his state of mind which may displace the


       inference."



A practical application of the Lawrence direction can be seen in action in

Reg _y_ Sevmour 1983 2 A.C. 4 9 3 .    The importance of this decision is that

Lord Diplock was a member of the Court and he (and all of their Lordships)          ^

agreed with the speech of Lord Roskill.        In the speech of Lord Roskill at

page 504 C to 504 G appears the following:



       "The learned judge rejected the submission and gave the "Lawrence

       direction" subject only to the omission of any reference to the

       obvious and serious r i s k       of doing substantial damage to property"

        see Reg. -v- Lawrence (Stephen)      [1982] A.C. 510, 526.   In my view,

        he was entirely right not to refer to damage to property, a reference

        to which was irrelevant in this case and might well have confused

        the J u r y .   His admirably clear direction not only properly reflected

        the decision of this House in Lawrence but also Lord Atkin's speech

        in Andrews [1937] A.C. 576.       I quote the relevant passages:
The second question you have to decide; was the driving that

caused those injuries    reckless?    If so, then it is

manslaughter.    If you are not satisfied that it was reckless,

then the verdict is not guilty.      To amount to reckless

driving mere negligence is not enough.      His conduct must

go beyond the question of compensation between citizens and

amount to,   in your view, criminal conduct requiring

p unishment.    You have to be satisfied upon the question of

recklessness that he drove in such a manner as to create

an obvious and serious risk of causing physical harm to some

other person who might happen to be using the road at the

time....Once you are satsified that the matter of his driving

was such as to create an obvious and serious risk of causing

physical harm to a person using the road at the time, you

also have to be satisfied that driving in that manner he          ^

did so without having given any thought to the possibility

 of there being any such risk, or alternatively, having

 recognised that there was some risk involved, nonetheless

 went on to take it; in other words, he was reckless.        He

 reckoned not of the consequences.




 "In determining the quality of his driving, you apply the

 standards of the ordinary reasonable motorist.      You, of

 course,   take into account all the evidence including his

    i    •
 explanation..... 1111
A suggested direction:-



The passage last quoted can be adapted as apropriate to the context of any

specific person, whether corporation or natural human being, whose conduct

the Jury are directed to consider for the purposes of deciding whether that

person committed reckless manslaughter.      The passage quoted from Lord

R o s k i l l 1s speech presupposes that the Jury have concluded that the issue

of causation is proved.    The adaptation of this passge of the speech might

be on the following lines:



       "If you are satisfied so as to be sure that the first question is

       proved that is to say that the act of X was a substantial cause of

        the death of any of the deceased then the second question you have

        to decide is was the act that caused those deaths reckless?        If so

        then it is manslaughter.    If you are not satisfied that it was reckless

        then a verdict of unlawful killing is not open to you.       To amount

        to a reckless act mere negligence is not enough.       His conduct must

        go beyond the question of compensation between citizens and amount

        to, in your view, criminal conduct requiring punishment.       You have

        to be satisfied upon the question of recklessness that he acted in

        such a manner as to create an obvious and serious risk of causing

        physical harm to some other person who might happen to be using the

        terraces at the time.    Once you are satisfied that his act was such

        as to create an obvious and serious risk of causing physical harm

        to a .person using the terraces at the time you also have to be

        satisfied that acting in that manner he did so without having given

        any thought to the possibility of there being any such risk, or
          alternatively having recognised that there was some risk involved

          nonetheless went on to take itfe in other words he was reckless.      He

          reckoned not of the consequences.       In determining the quality of his

          act you apply the standards of the ordinary reasonable person who

          happened to be in the same circumstances as X.       You of course take

          into account all the evidence including his explanation..."




Lord Roskill added at 508C that it is appropriate also to point out that

in order to constitute the offence of manslaughter the risk of death being

caused must be very high, and such a remark should be made to the Jury here.


Lord Roskill said:



           I would therefore answer the certified question as follows:       "Where

           manslaughter is charged and the circumstances are that the victim

           was killed as a result of the reckless driving of the defendant on

           a public highway,      the trial judge should give the Jury the direction

            suggested in Reg -v- Lawrence but it is appropriate also to point

            out that in order to constitute the offence of manslaughter the risk

            of death being caused by the manner of the defendant's driving must

            be very high."



 In d e c i d i n g   whether or not a risk was obvious the Jury should have regard

 to whether the risk would have been obvious to an ordinary prudent individual

 in the relevant circumstances.           The Jury should be told that they may take

 account of what any witness has told them was obvious or not to that witness

 as a risk.           The witnesses' perception of the risk can provide an indication

 of whether or not the risk was obvious to an ordinary prudent person, and
especially so if the Jury conclude that the witness in question was such

an ordinary prudent person.       For this purpose 'witness' includes a person

whose conduct has been called into question at the Inquest and Lord Roskill

made it clear that a Jury can take into account an explanation given by such


a person.



It is important to stress to the Jury that a failure to appreciate that there

was such a risk would not by itself be sufficient to amount to recklessness

see     Re° -v- W est- London Coroner ex parte Gray 1988 1 Q.B. paRe 4 7 7 _B per


Watkins L.J.



           "He deliberately chose to run the risk by doing nothing about it.

           It should be emphasised,   however,   that a failure to appreciate that

           there was such a risk would not by itself be sufficient to amount


           to recklessness.




 MrRTTTF.R RELEVANT MATTERS;,




 (•i)      PRIMA FACIE CASE



 8.        The Jury should only be directed to consider a verdict of unlawful

 killing based upon reckless manslaughter if the C o r o n e r concludes as a matter

  of law that there is a prima facie case, that is to say a case fit to be

  left to the Jury where the Coroner concludes, as a matter of law, that a

  reasonable. Jury properly directed might bring in such a verdict.         If the

  Coroner concludes as a matter of law that there is no such case fit to be
left to the Jury then the Coroner, must direct the Jury not to consider that

verdict, that is he must withdraw-the verdict from them.




(ii)   INDIVIDUAL CONSIDERATION    -   THE DECEASED




9.     The death of each deceased must be considered individually.    Before

the Jury may be invited to consider a verdict of unlawful killing in respect

of any of the deceased the Coroner must direct himself as to whether or not

there is a prima facie case so far as that individual deceased is concerned.




A verdict in the case of each deceased is required and if unlawful killing

is to be left to the Jury it must be considered by the Jury in relation to

each of the deceased.    The Jury should be directed that if, having considered

the circumstances of death affecting each of the individual deceased,      they

 are satsfied beyond reasonable doubt that some or all of them may be             ^

 considered as a group of persons whose death was caused as a result of

 reckless manslaughter committed by some specific individual or individuals

 (who must under no account be named or identified),   then similar verdicts

 may be returned in the case of each member of such group.    There will

 therefore be 95 verdicts but some or all may be in similar terms.




 However,   the Jury must be directed that it is improper to consider unlawful

 killing in relation to the 95 deceased as a whole or to any group of the

 deceased without first considering the individual circumstances of the death

 of each particular deceased.     The Jury must be warned that no short cut is

 available to them permitting them to proceed on the presumption that they

 are entitled to consider the circumstances of death of the 95- deceased as




                                       -   12/ - -
a whole,   or of any group of the deceased as a group, unless some cause is

shown why they should not do so.   That would reverse the order in which

relevant consideration should be dealt with.    They are concerned with the

Inquests relating to the deaths of the victims of the Hillsborough Football

Stadium Disaster.   There is no presumption that a verdict in common form

is applicable to the 95 deceased persons.    Only after a careful consideration

of each individual case can the Jury establish what verdict is appropriate.




(iii)   NO AGGREGATION




10.     The Jury must be directed that they can return a verdict of unlawful

killing only if they can attribute the ingredients of the relevant offence,

reckless manslaughter, to some individual person or persons whom they should

on no account name or otherwise identify:

Reg -y- West London Coroner ex parte Gray 1988 1 Q.B. at page 477 B.       In   ^

this context the Jury should consider the position of each single person

who may be a candidate taking each such person in turn and coming to a

conclusion.




In this context the Jury    must be warned that whatever person is being

considered (and be that person a corporation or a natural human being) the

ingredients of manslaughter must be established by proving the necessary

mens rea (mental element) and actus reus (criminal conduct) of manslaughter

against it or him by evidence properly to be relied on against it or him

and a case against any person cannot be fortified by evidence against another

person.    No aggregation of criminal culpability is permitted.
(iv)        ORDER OF PRIORITY IN CONSIDERING VERDICT




11.         If unlawful killing is to be left to the Jury as a possible verdict

then the Coroner should indicate to the Jury that they must deal with that

issue first; and that they should approach,              therefore,   initially the question

whether or not they are satisfied so that they are sure beyond a reasonable

doubt that the verdict of unlawful killing may be returned in respect of

any or some or all of the deceased.               If they conclude that unlawful killing

is not an appropriate verdict,              or are not sure that it is an appropriate

verdict, in the case of any or some or all of the deceased then they should

go on to consider other possible verdicts, i.e., accident/misadventure or

open verdict.            Support for this is to be found in R. -v- Wolverhampton

 P .n rn n e r    ex parte McCurbin 1990 1 WLR 719 at 728 BrD:



                 "It is true that,    in.many cases where it is open to a Coroner's J u r y ^

                 to find a verdict of unlawful killing,     they may also have to consider

                 the question of death by misadventure.      However,    in my view, this

                 does not and should not give rise to problems.         The Coroner should

                 indicate to the Jury that they should approach,        initially, the question

                 as to whether or not they are satisfied so that they are sure that

                 this is unlawful, killing.     If they come to the conclusion that it

                 is not unlawful killing,     they are not satisfied so that they are sure

                 that the verdict is appropriate,     then they will consider the question

                 of misadventure and, in so doing, they do not need to bear in mind

                 the heavy standard of proof which is required for unlawful killing.

                 They can approach the matter on the basis of the balance of

                  probabilities.     The situation is that, just as it i s ■important
       that a jury should not bring in a verdict of suicide unless they are

       sure, likewise they should not bring in a verdict of unlawful killing

       unless they are sure."




SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL



12.    The Jury have heard a variety of criticisms of different persons and

such criticisms have been voiced wholly or mainly in cross examination.

Representation of certain persons whose conduct was likely to be called into

question has been permitted.     One of those persons,   legal persons,   is- the

Sheffield City Council.



In the case of any such person whose conduct has been called into question

then, unless a reasonable Jury properly directed could conclude that such

person committed the offence of manslaughter against any or all or some of          ^

the deceased,     the Jury must be directed in terms either (1) to exclude that

person from their consideration of the issue whether or not they are

satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the verdict of unlawful killing is

appropriate or (2) to consider such a verdict only in the case of some other

 person or persons (who should be named in the direction but not of course

 in the verdict) and not to consider such a verdict in the case of any other


 person.




 The reasons for discriminating in this way are:-




 (a)       For reasons of justice and humanity there should be no question of

           any risk arising that a verdict of unlawful killing, where the Jury




                                       -   1   ^   -
      are forbidden to name any culprit, might be understood in the context

      of the evidence to refer to one or more of those persons whose conduct

      was called into question at the Inquest,    but in respect of whom no

      reasonable Jury properly directed could conclude that such person

      had committed the offence of manslaughter.     Such a risk does arise

      where there have been criticisms of and suggestions,    express or

      implied,   of negligence against a variety of persons; and all the more

      so where the verdict of unlawful killing involves a finding of

      recklessness which the Jury and the public may be at risk of confusing

      with negligence.    There must be no risk of those who are innocent

      of criminal culpability being caught up with any whom the Jury may

      regard as criminally responsible.




(b)   The converse to (a) is also true, namely that, in the case of a person

      whose conduct the Jury are rightly scrutinising to see whether they
                                                                              V
      are satisfied so as to be sure that such conduct is criminal, any

      allegations against or criticism of any other person might give rise

      to prejudice.    Such a risk does arise where the Jury may be tempted

       to aggregate fa ult.




(c)   Without discrimination and exclusion of persons who ought not to be

       regarded as candidates in terms of criminal culpability there is a

       risk that the Jury may be confused by an unnecessarily and erroneously

       wide choice of candidates.




13.    No reasonable Jury properly directed could find that Sheffield City

Council,   or any employee or agent of Sheffield City Council whether it be




                                     -   16   -
Mr. Butler or Mr. Bownes or anyone else employed by Sheffield City Council,

has or have committed any offence of manslaughter.         The Jury should be

directed accordingly, with an instruction that as a matter of law there is

no evidence on which the Jury could find that any of those persons committed

any such offence.         The Jury should be told in terms that quite apart from

the difficulties relating to the issue of causation (as Paragraph 6 above) :




       (i)             There is no evidence on which any reasonable Jury could find

                       that any of such persons acted in a manner so as to create

                       an obvious and serious risk of causing physical injury to

                       any football fan or fans.




        (ii)           There is no evidence on which any reasonable Jury could find

                       that any of such persons acted recklessly,   having regard

                        to the definition of such term as above.




        (iii)          Specifically in the case of Sheffield City Council no verdict

                        of corporate manslaughter could possibly be established here;

                        and any verdict that Sheffield City Council committed the

                        offence of manslaughter would be unreasonable and improper.

                        No further direction is needed, but if it was thought

                        desirable to amplify such direction then the appropriate

                        indication would be that for a corporation to be criminally

                        liable for manslaughter then it is required that the mens

               . ...    rea (alternatively the mental element of recklessness) and

                        the actus reus (alternatively the conduct complained of)

                         comprised in the alleged offence of manslaughter should be




                                               17
                 established not against those who acted for or in the name

                 of the corporation but against those who were to be

                 identified as the embodiment of the cororation itself.

                 Neither Mr. Bownes nor Mr. Butler nor anyone else referred

                 to at the Inquest could properly be regarded as the

                 embodiment of the Co u n c i l .     No sustainable case in

                 manslaughter arises here against Sheffield City C o u n c i l .




        See for .example R. — v— H.M. Coroner for East Kent ex parte Spooner

        1989 88 Cr. App. R. page 10 at page 16-17.




NOTE:   (i)      Copies of Cases referred to above are annexed for ease of

        reference,   to the copy of these submissions filed with the Coroner's

        Court. The cases are:




        Reg    -v- Lawrence 1982 AC510




        Reg    -v- Seymour 1983 2 AC 493




        R eg   -y- West London Coroner ex p. Gray 1988 1Q.B. 467




        Reg    -y- Wolverhampton Coroner ex p.McCurbin 1990 1 WLR 718




                                        -   1 8 - “
R eg   _y-   h   .M. Coroner for:East Kent ex p. Spooner (1989) 88 C r . App.

R.10



(ii)         The evidence of Mr. Arthur Butler for Sheffield City     Council

was given on Days 36 and       37 (23.1.1991 and 24.1.1991)




(iii)        The evidence of Mr. David Bownes for Sheffield City Council

was given on Days 37 and       38 (24.1.1991 and 25.1.1991)




                                                                                X




                                   -      -
T          Tk l/vk       rtilz            MUfa                     US VhiLfto                              (As                        Trt

T ) O C U M ^ ^ T                                            Lf                    fii/tf                                        TV



01 i             far         T               Lstuup                                 ^uffhS                            $vy
       /




U ) i'H-fk iz             iv r t MM           Hfi U           W      (I*                     TV


       -        ^ iifz     fii& H     t I t t k T *>D              /& af i - L L i             [ \




                                                        3f    i- ° u



                                                         So       f l ("it,             S<2x ^ .
                                                                                                                                       C«JS3*"**“~'~*
                                                                     & L t O C 'i £ #     *~C «G ><~<C S   • > - \ f - « v ' <*—*■»   C -v -^ Z 5   .
SHEFFIELD




__________________ I   v . j A N 1989'
SHEFFIELD                                SHEFFIELD          ,N 1989




                        II Tfti 1111
SHEFFIELD
                                                     1 6 JAN 1989
                                         SHEFFIELD




                                                      iiiii w m
SHEFFIELD                   S JAN 1989   SHEFFIELD
                                                Special Current
                                                Affairs Unit
                                                Radio
28 January 1991             -                   071.927.5907 (DL)




I am working with Dr James Thompson at the Middlesex Hospital's
Stress Clinic on a joint project about disasters. Though the subject
is distressing X believe that a lot can be done to improve the way in
which support services, the law, media, companies and victims or
relatives cope with such tragic events. I'm just beginning work on a
series of radio programmes on the subject. It's due to be broadcast
in April this year and Polly Toynbee is to present it.

I'm specially keen to make contact with people like yourself who, for
whatever reason, have been named in the press or official reports as
in some way being connected with tragic events. This is not in order
to reawaken disturbing memories or to point the finger but because I
believe that in many cases those so named are the forgotten victims
of tragedy - sometimes attacked in the press or_scapegoated by those
in positions of greater authority. For them this series might prove
to be a way of setting the record straight. A letter like this is
being sent to others involved in at least four1major disasters.

-Enclosed there's a questionnaire from the Middlesex Hospital. I'd be
 most grateful if you could fill it in. All replies to them will be in
 the STRICTEST confidence. Neither we at the BBC nor anyone other than
 those at the Middlesex will have access to your answers. Ncr will
 anyone be able to quote from the forms in any way though the overall
 statistical analysis will play an important part in the radio series.

 Obviously though, I am anxious to find people who are willing to^
 speak openly about their experiences. Statistics are helpful buL can
 tell only a limited story. Would you be willing to be interviewed by
 us about your part in the tragedy at Hillsborough: about how you were
 dealt with subsequently and about how those events made you feel? I
 guarantee that your story will be treated with the utmost discretion
 and respect. If you would like to find out more about the research
 or programmes you can speak to me directly on 071.927.590/ (I 1.1 c d l
 you back straight away) or you can leave a message. Talking with me
 on the phone would NOT oblige you to take part in the radio series.

 I am of course aware that the inquest into the tragedy at
 Hillsborough has not yet finished. If you feel that this inhibits
 you from taking part in our project please bear in mind that we don't
 intend to broadcast the programmes until after the inquest is over.
 If you have any other worries about the possible legal implications
 of taking part in our programme I'd be happy to talk to you about it.

                                                              P.T.O./
Sorry to contact you out of the blue like this but I hope that you
may feel you want to help. You need only fill in the questionnaire
and return it to the Middlesex within the next two weeks or by
March 1 at the latest. A prepaid envelope is enclosed. Sadly it
seems that major disasters have become a feature of modem life. I
want to do all I can-to increase the sensitivity of those responsible
for responding to them.

Yours sincerely,



Sue Davies
Producer - Shock Waves
                        UNIVERSITY COLLEGE &
UCL                 MIDDLESEX SCHOOL OF MEDICINE
                           D E P A R T M E N T OF PSYCHIATRY

                                                                                    Wolf sort Building
Head of Department                                             Middlesex Hospital
Professor R. M. Rosser                                           Riding                   H o m e Street
                                                                                    London W I N 8AA
                                                                                    Tel: 071-636 8333
                                                                                    Fax:071-323 1459


        I run a clinic which provides services to help those people who
        have survived disasters such as the King's Cross fire, the
        Marchioness sinking, those bereaved by the Lockerbie bombing, and
        many people caught up in other disasters.

        It would help me very much if you were able to answer the
        following questions so that I can find out how you were affected
        by the disaster, and what advice you can give me as to how people
        should be helped in future disasters.     Please answer all the
        questions, even though some may seem more relevant than others.

        Absolutely nothing that you say to me will be passed on to anyone
        else.  The overall results of a whole group of people will be
        shown anonymously to Sue Davies from the BBC, who is making a
        radio series about disasters.     I believe that it will be a
        sensitive and sympathetic account, paying attention to important
        issues, and looking at the ways in which all the authorities,
        including the media, should handle these matters.

        I would be grateful if you could return the questionnaire to me,
        using the enclosed prepaid envelope, within the next two weeks
        or by March 1st at the very latest. Please feel free to contact
       me for help or advice.    I can be telephoned on
      - I look forward to receiving your questionnaire.




        Dr James Thompson
        Senior Lecturer in Psychology.
On the 15th of April 1989 there was a disaster at Hillsborough.

Below is a list of comments made by people after stressful life
events. Please check each item, indicating how frequently these
comments were true for you DURING THE SEVEN DAYS BEFORE THIS
QUESTIONNAIRE ARRIVED . If they did not occur during that time,
please mark the "not at'all" column.

                                           Not At
                                            All   1 Rarely           1Sometimes 1 Often          1

   I thought about it when
   I didn't mean to.

   I had waves of strong
   feelings about i t .

   I had dreams about it.

   I tried not to think
   about i t .

   Any reminder brought back
   feelings about it.

   My feelings about it were
   sort of numb.


Please read this carefully:

We should like to know if you have had any medical complaints, and how your
health has been in general, over the past few weeks. Please answer ALL the
questions simply by underlining the answer which you think most nearly applies
to you. Remember that we want to know about present complaints, not those that
you had in the past.

HAVE YOU RECENTLY:
   Been feeling run down          Not at        No more            Rather more       Much more
   and out of sorts?              all           than usual         than usual        than usual

   Been getting a feeling         Not at        No more            Rather more       Much more
   of tightness or pressure       all           than usual         than usual        than usual
   in y o u r head?

   Lost m uch sleep               Not at        No more            Rather more       Much more
   over worry?                    all           than usual         than usual        than usual

   Been feeling nervous and       Not at        No more            Rather more       Much more
   strung-up all the time?        all           than usual         than usual        than usual

   Felt on the whole              Better        About              Less well         Much less
   you were doing                 than usual    the same           than usual        well
   things well?

   Felt capable of making         More so       Same as            Less so           Much
   decisions about things?        than usual    usual              than usual        less capable

   Felt that life isn't           Not at        No more            Rather more       Much more
   worth living?                  all           than usual         than usual        than usual

   Found that the idea            Definitely    I don't            Has crossed       Definitely
   of taking your own             not           think so           my mind           has
   life kept coming into
   your mind?

                                               Not        To a        To a       To a      Totally
                                               at         small       moderate   large
                                               all        extent      extent     extent


   If you have been feeling more unwell
   than usual in the past few weeks,
   to what extent would you say
   this was due to the disaster?




                                                             C O N FID E N £
If you consider how you feel now about the disaster, to what extent do you      ...

                                     Not At
                                       All      Rarely   Sometimes   Often

   Have fears that another
   disaster would happen.

   Feel bad about how you
   behaved during the disaster.

   Feel angry about
   the disaster.

   Feel guilty about how
   you may have suffered less
   than others.



To what extent do you blame the following__

                                                 Not      To a       To a         To a     Extremely
                                                 at       small      moderate     large
                                                 all      extent     extent       extent

    Destiny or fate?

    Chance circumstances?

    Yourself?

    Other people?

    South Yorkshire police force officers?

    The Football Association & its officials?

    Sheffield Wednesday FC S -its officials?

    Sheffield City Council?

    Local pub owners?

    Anyone else?    (please state)




  To what extent do you feel angry with the following...


                         *                       Not       To a      To a         To a     Totally
                                                 at        small     moderate     large
                                                 all       extent    extent       extent

    Other people at the scene?

    South Yorkshire police force officers?

    The Football Association t its officials?

    Sheffield Wedneday FC & its officials?

    Sheffield City Council?

    Local pub owners?

    The rescue services?

    The police?

    The media?

    Medical services?

    Social services?

    Lawyers?
                          been
    The way the inquest has^conducted?

    The findings of the inquest?

    The way the official inquiry was

    The findings of the official inquiry?

    Close relatives?

    Anyone else?    (please state)
Overall, looking back, to what extent ...

                                              Not      To a       To a       To a        Extremely
                                              at       small      moderate   large
                                              all      extent     extent     extent

    Do you feel that justice was done?

    Do you feel that you were made
    to take the blame?


    If so, by whom?




   What do you feel about this?




    In your opinion, what should have been done about pinning blame on those responsible?




    In your opinion, how could the aftermath of the disaster have been handled better?




PLEASE TORN OVER
                                                                       CONFIDENTIAL




Please complete these few questions. Although we will not pass any
of this information on to any other organisation, we may want to be
able to contact you in the future.

Background Details



Name:   ........... ................................................

Home address:




Any other contact address:




Home Telephone:

Work Telephone:

Date of Birth:    .....................

Occupation:    ........................

Who else lives in your home with you?




THANK YOU VERY MCTCH FOR TAKING THE TIME TO COMPLETE THIS QUESTIONNAIRE.
                                           L                            fit,

N
                                NEIGHBOURHOOD REVITALISATION SERVICES

LiVK                            1-13 Holme Lane
                                HILLSBOROUGH
                                Sheffield
                                                                G jJW L U s

                                S6 4JP
                                Tel No: 0742 322474

    Our Ref: PW/JLN

    24 January 1990

    Councillor C J C Betts BA (Cantab)
    Leader                                           CH!
    Sheffield City Council
    Leader's Office
    Town Hall
    SHEFFIELD
    SI 2HH


    Dear Councillor Betts

    I am writing to you to seek your views on and support for a
    proposal which could have both local and national significance.

    Over the past few months discussions have been taking place in
    Hillsborough concerning the establishment of a Hillsborough
    Community Development Trust. The starting point for these
    discussions was the desire amongst individuals and community
    groups to see the advice and assistance services and projects
    pioneered by the Neighbourhood Revitalisation Scheme supported by
    the Council, continued, expanded, and brought under local
    management and direction.

    A steering group was formed which, in a short period of time, has
    developed and accepted a series of proposals re: forming a
    locally managed neighbourhood-based trust serving Sheffield 6 and
    taking over the mantle from NRS. The objectives of the Trust are
    set out in the enclosed paper.

    A major motivator behind the trust proposal has been a widely
    held desire to create projects and services which will revitalise
    the 'spirit' of Hillsborough which has taken such a bashing since
    April 1989.

    In view of this, there is currently a specific proposal being
    considered by the HCDT Steering Group to launch the Trust, on or
    immediately after, the anniversary date of the 'disaster',
    15 April 1990. The day will inevitably be dominated by acts of
    remembrance. However, we feel it would be appropriate to end
    this year-long period of mourning, which has clearly had its
    effects on Hillsborough, with the launch of a community-led
    venture designed to carry out positive programmes to benefit the
    community and people of Hillsborough. Furthermore, it is
    proposed to name the home of the Trust and its services "Anfield
ft
     Anfield/cont...           (2 )

House" and dedicate it to the memory of those affected by the
"Hillsborough disaster".

We have already approached Sheffield Wednesday FC seeking their
support for the venture and launch proposals. I shall be writing
shortly too to Liverpool FC.

It would be of great significance if support and backing for
these proposals was also forthcoming from Sheffield City Council.
I would ask, therefore, for you to give serious consideration to
what is being proposed and let me know if it is something that
the Council would support.  If we receive the necessary
encouragements we would proceed to plan for an official ceremony
on or around 15 April 1990, which I hope could be attended by
Civic leaders from both Sheffield and Liverpool together with
representatives from both football clubs.

The next meeting of the Steering Group is on the 15 February 1990
so a reply before that date would be appreciated. I would be
quite happy to talk through the proposals for the launch and the
Trust with you if you require, or I can send you copies of
various papers prepared about the Hillsborough Community
Development Trust. The ward concillors for Hillsborough,
Owlerton and Walkley have been kept informed about the
development of the Trust proposal and one or two have on
occasions attended Steering Group meetings.

Yours sincerely




Paul Weston
Regional Manager
ow




cc Chief.Executi#
   Sh e ffi6 l<rCity Council
HILLSBOROUGH COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT TRUST


Purpose of Report

To recommend the setting up of a CDT for the Hillsborough area
of Sheffield and to provide the broad outlines, for discussion,
of what it should aim to achieve and how it will operate.

Background

. Hillsborough embraces a number of thriving neighbourhoods
  populated mostly by people who have lived in and around them
  all their life. There is, as a result, a larger than average
  proportion of elderly people within the population.

. There are a large number of community/resident groups within
  the area. Some are location based eg Stannington, Wisewood
  and Sutton Trust; some are church based; others serve
  particular age, sex or interest groups within Hillsborough.
  None would describe themselves as well off or adequately
  financially supported. There has been no attempt previously
  to foster collective support or shared resources.

. Hillsborough Neighbourhood Revitalisation Scheme was set up
  as a joint venture by Sheffield City Council and the National
  Home Improvement Council in September 1984. For almost five
  years it has provided a home and environment advice service
  to owner-occupiers and private tenants in the Dykes Hall
  Road, Taplin Road, Dykes Lane area. It has established a
  clear need for such a service in Hillsborough.

. Over the last ten years the residents and area of
  Hillsborough have suffered as a result of the economic
  recession and the general cut-back in availability of public
  funds.

. As the City's economic and physical regeneration gathers
  momentum Hillsborough is beginning to feel the pressures for
  change. Large scale and wide ranging plans are being
  prepared which could change Hillsborough dramatically and
  affect the lives of all who live and work in the area.

. Hillsborough is a good place to live but most of the area is
  now approaching 100 years old. Evidence of significant
  disrepair is clear to see both in the housing areas,
  commercial/shopping areas and factories. Hillsborough needs
  to attract finance and support to ensure that the disrepair
  problem is solved and it remains a good place to live, work
  and play.


                                                      cont/2
                                (2)


Aims and Objectives

It is proposed   to   form   a Hillsborough Community   Development
Trust


   . To make Hillsborough a more attractive place for existing
     inhabitants so thatthey will choose to stay  and live
     there;

   . To foster a greater community identityand promote
     community stability and self-reliance;

   . To further enhance a social environment in which the
     individual can flourish irrespective of ethnic origin,
     disability, gender, age, marital status or sexuality

   . To support and encourage community groups and
     community activity

   . To positively encourage and foster opportunities and
     facilities for young people and children in the
     Hillsborough area

    . To provide a community resource centre and encourage the
     development therein of community services;

   . To provide an opportunity for collective involvement in
     and response to decisions that affect the future well­
     being of Hillsborough; and

   . To campaign and lobby for adequate public and private
     resources to meet the needs and ensure the continued
     revitalisation of Hillsborough.
                              (3)

About Development Trusts
     "Development Trusts are independent, not for profit
     organisations which take action to renew an area
     physically, socially and in spirit. They bring
     together the public, private and voluntary sectors,
     and obtain financial and other resources from a
     wide range of organisations and individuals. They
     encourage substantial involvement by local people
     and aim to sustain their operations at least in part
     by generating revenue."

Whilst Development Trusts are a fairly new phenomena there are
now enough in existence to be able to identify the essential
components necessary to ensure the formation of a successful
Trust:-
   . there must be a definite commitment from all involved;

   . there must be good communication links between the Trust
     and the local community;

   . a definite strategy and management plan with clear aims
     and organisation is essential;

   . the formation of the Trust must take account of all legal
     and tax considerations;

   . the Trust must establish credibility with banks, building
     societies and other money lenders to ensure finance; and

   . the Trust must consider continued maintenance of its
     achievements, growth and change.




                                                       cont/4
                              (4)

Organisation
Whilst there is no single legal or organisational structure for
development trusts most have sought limited liability through
company status.   Forming a company also creates a permanent
legal body which owns the assets and in whose name all the
activities are undertaken.

There is a general agreement on a company limited by guarantee
as the best structure.     In many ways it is like a company
limited by shares but generally with a provision to prevent
distributing profits to members. The profits must generally le
ploughed back into the company, or distributed for charitable
purposes.

There is provision for a Board of directors who are responsible
for policy and act as the equivalent of a management committee.
The   directors  are   generally  unpaid.     They   must  tale
responsibility for the actions of the company but - provided
they are not negligent - their personal liability for debt and
company actions is limited to their guaranteeing to pay a
nominal amount (usually £1).

The company would have members, not share-holders (who can te
individuals or organisations) who may elect the directors.
Members' rights and duties will depend upon the Memorandum and
Articles of Association - the constitution of the company.
This may specify different classes of member; for example,
sponsoring organisations which are members may have special
rights to nominate directors.     The structure of a company
limited by guarantee is highly flexible, and is unlikely to le
a constraint on specifying the rights and responsibilities of
the different interests involved.

A company limited by guarantee can apply for charitable status.
This brings with it considerable advantages.    It does however
prohibit trading.   To do so it would be necessary to adopt a
dual structure comprising a charity (trust or company) which
owns a limited company for trading purposes.     The charitable
Trust would concern itself with setting priorities for action;
with fund-raising and obtaining financial and other support
from people and organisations; and keeping local people
informed.  The Trust would then own an operating company which
would be responsible for developing and running the various
services and businesses, marketing, and management.


                                                       cont/5
                                (5)

Membership

A  Hillsborough   Community  Development  Trust   could  be  a
worthwhile and successful venture if it gains the full support
of the community groups in Hillsborough.   All such groups are
invited to consider pledging support to the proposal to form a
CDT and become a founder-member organisation.    Invitation is
extended to:-
     .   Hillsborough and District Environmental Association
     .   Hillsborough NRS Residents Group
     .   Hillsborough traders
     .   Malin Bridge Community Association
     .   Malin Bridge traders
     .   Regents Court residents
     .   Stannington Community Association
     .   Stannington Tenants Association
     .   Sutton Trust Community Association
     .   Sutton Trust residents
     .   Wadsley Community Association
     .   Winn Gardens Tenants Association
     .   Wisewood Tenants and Residents Association

It is proposed that all founder-member organisations would be
entitled to nominate a director of the Trust when formed.

Other groups and all individuals with an interest in the future
well-being   of  Hillsborough   would  also   be  entitled   to
membership.

Immediately however it will be necessary to form a steering
group of representatives of organisations and individuals to
set  about the task of forming a CDT for Hillsborough. An open
invitation is made to all with an interest inHillsborough's
future with energy, enthusiasm and commitment to come together
to make it happen.




                                                         cont/6
                                 (6)

Strategy and Services

The tenancy of 1-13 Holme Lane (including the shop unit, 5
Holme Lane) has been secured for community purposes.    It is
proposed that this would form the 'home     of the Community
Development Trust and from where services for the area can be
provided.

The best way of making the case for a Trust and securing
support is to show what it can do.     Listed below are those
services and ventures     already proposed as desirable and
practicable.   This list however is not exhaustive and further
suggestions are welcome.

     Community Advice Centre

     Community Resource Centre

     Fund-raising centre

     Campaign rooms and shop-front

     Interpretive centre for public authorities

     Credit Union

    Housing Trust (funded through Business Expansion Scheme)

    Building Agency Service/Technical Aid Centre

     Community Businesses   .   typing service
                            .   poster/leaflet service
                            .   gardening service
                            .   community caretaker
                            .   community newspaper
    Voluntary service bureau




                                                    NRS/PAW
                                                    November 1989
AH/EB/GJ

21 January 1991



Mr D M Bownes
Chief Licensing Officer
Licensing Section
Administration and Legal Department
Town Hall
SHEFFIELD




Dear Mr Bownes

                     Hillsborough Disaster, 15th April. 1989 -
                         Possible Disciplinary Proceedings

I write to clarify the position regarding the possibility of disciplinary
proceedings against you in connection with your Safety of Sports Ground
duties and the Hillsborough Disaster on 15th April, 1989.

I have decided that, on the basis of the information available to me at
this point in time and having regard to the following matters

       1.         the decision by the DPP not to institute criminal proceedings
                 against the Council or any individual officer

       2.         the fact that Sheffield City Council has not been ordered by
                 the Court to contribute to the compensation payments made
                 through civil proceedings

       3.         the advice of Counsel acting on behalf of Sheffield City
                 C o u ncil’s insurers

that there are no grounds for taking disciplinary action against you.

I know that you remain under considerable pressure regarding this issue,
in particular because of the continuing requirements to give evidence to
the Inquest, but I trust that this decision will go some way in helping
you to cope with that pressure.

Yours sincerely




Chief Executive



 C   _____________________
      rf - W e
AH/EB/GJ

21 January 1991



Mr A Butler
Principal District Surveyor
Building Surveyor’s Division
Department of Land and Planning
Town Hall
SHEFFIELD




Dear Mr Butler

                  Hillsborough Disaster, 15th April. 1989 -
                      Possible Disciplinary Proceedings

I write to clarify the position regarding the possibility of disciplinary
proceedings against you in connection with your Safety of Sports Ground
duties and the Hillsborough Disaster on 15th April, 1989.

I have decided that, on the basis of the information available to me at
this point in time and having regard to the following mattersi-

      1.     the decision by the DPP not to institute criminal proceedings
            against the Council or any individual officer

      2.     the fact that Sheffield City Council has not been ordered by
            the Court to contribute to the compensation payments made
            through civil proceedings

      3.     the advice of Counsel acting on behalf of Sheffield City
            C ounc i l ’s insurers

that there are no grounds for taking disciplinary action against you.

I know that you remain under considerable pressure regarding this issue,
in particular because of the continuing requirements to give evidence to
the Inquest, but I trust that this decision will go some way in helping
you to cope with that pressure.

Yours sincerely




Chief Executive
       T o       U 2 _                       .


             2   _



/




                     with compliments
                            of
                      H.M. Coroner
Christopher P. Dorries
Medico-Legal Centre
Watery Street
Sheffield                   Telephone: Sheffield (0742) 738721
S3 7ET                                     Fax: (0742) 726247
               Office of H.M. Coroner
               T h e M e d i c o - L e g a l C e n t r e , W a t e r y S tr e e t, S h e f f ie ld   S3 7ET

HM  Coroner:                                                                           South Yorkshire (West)
Christopher P. Dorries                                                                     (Oi1 4 )273-8721


                                                                                                02 June 1995
Your ref:
Our ref:



Private & Confidential
Dr D N Slater
Consultant Pathologist                                                                                       ^ „
Rotherham District General Hospital
Moorgate
Rotherham
S60 2UD




Dear Dr Slater

Kevin Williams (Deceased)

I understand that you have been contacted by Mrs Ann Williams in relation to the death of
her son Kevin at Hillsborough. You are probably aware that Mrs Williams was one of the
relatives who sought judicial review of Dr Popper's Inquest. Indeed, to this day, she
remains deeply distressed and suspicious that the full circumstances of her son’s death
are the subject of a cover up.

As part of her protest against the inquest verdict Mrs Williams has never registered her
son’s death and thus remains in possession of the Coroners After Inquest Certificate. In
1989 the form of Certificate used required the Coroner to include details (in the case of
accident or misadventure) of the type of injury and the parts of the body injured. This is
not actually part of the jury’s verdict but, on my understanding, is merely the Coroner
assisting statistical collection by government sources.

In this particular case the type of injury has been marked as “crush” and the parts of body
injured has been marked as “chest”. Mrs Williams indicates to my staff that you disagree
with this assessment and feel that the injuries were in fact to the neck. Accordingly I have
been asked to amend the Certificate. I am not at all sure whether I am legally entitled to
do this but before I take advice from the Home Office will be grateful for your confirmation
that Mrs Williams is correct.




                                              Fax: (0114) 272-6247
                                                                                                      CSL1035I.D0C
I have of course reviewed the post-mortem report and it seems that Mrs Williams has a
point. I suppose there may be some argument as to where the chest begins and the neck
ends etc but from my own point of view I do not see any gain in adding to this lady’s
undoubted distress simply for the sake of being inflexible. Having said that, I imagine that
any decision to change the Certificate will generate further publicity.

I look forward to hearing from you in due course. I am away for the next two weeks on
leave. If you wish to discuss this with me on the telephone I will be back in the office from
Monday 19th of June.

Many thanks for your assistance.
Y o u rs sin cfiralv




u K uorries        '
H M Coroner




                                       Fax: (0114) 272-6247
                                                                                     CSL1035LD0C
