                 S H E F F I E LD   C I T Y   C O U N C I L



           MEETING OF THE POLICY REVIEW SUB-COMMITTEE (POLICY)

                             held 9th May, 1989


      PRESENT:   Councillors Wigfield (Chair), Boyce, Heath and G. Mathews.




(1)   SOUTH YORKSHIRE JOINT CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE
      RESOLVED: That the minutes now submitted of the meeting of the
      South Yorkshire Joint Consultative Committee held on 22nd March,
      1989 be approved.

(2)   SOUTH YORKSHIRE JOINT AUTHORITIES
                The Sub-Committee received and noted the minutes of the
      meeting of the South Yorkshire Passenger Transport Authority held
      on 15th February, 1989.

(3)   CHIEF EXECUTIVE'S DEPARTMENT - CENTRAL POLICY UNIT -
      PERSONNEL REPORT
                The Sub-Committee received and noted a report of the
      Head of Central Policy Unit    with regard to theUnit's performance
      on various personnel issues during the period December 1988 to
      March 1989.

(4)   DECENTRALISATION
                The Decentralisation Officer submitted a report on proposed
      arrangements for the continuation and development of work on
      decentralisation consequent upon the transfer of his post from
      the Central Policy Unit to the Communications Unit of the Publicity
      Department.
      RESOLVED: That (a) approval be given so far as this Sub-Committee
      is concerned, to the abolition of the Decentralisation Working
      Party and to the transfer of its duties to the Sub-Committee/Panel
      proposed to be established by the Policy Committee to take responsibility
      for Council policy on the provision of information and the communication
      and promotion of the City Council's work with respect to its workforce
      and the local community and beyond; and
                 (b)          reports be submitted to the new Sub-Committee/Panel
      on the development of neighbourhood based information/consultation
      activities resulting from the work of the expanded Communications
      Unit.

(5)   COUNCIL RESOLUTIONS
      National Membership Scheme for Football Supporters
                 The Chief Executive submitted copies of letters received
      by Mr. Bill Michie M.P. and Mr. Martin Flannery M.P. from the Minister
      of Sport in response to the resolution passed by the City Council
      at its meeting on 4th January, 1989 concerning the proposed national
      membership scheme for football supporters, together with a copy
      of a question and answer briefing paper about the scheme prepared
      by the Department of the Environment.
                The Sub-Committee were of the opinion that the Government
      should be urged to reconsider their proposals for the introduction
Policy Review Sub-Committee (Policy)   9.5.89           Page 2


       of a national membership scheme for football supporters particularly
       in the light of the tragic events which took place at the F. A.
       Cup Semi-Final Football Match at Hillsborough on 15th April, 1989,
       but decided that further.consideration be given to this matter
       at the next monthly meeting of the Policy Committee when a report
       will be presented by the Council's delegates on the proceedings
       at the Conference on the Football Supporters Bill arranged by the
       Hammersmith and Fulham Council and to be held on 16th May, 1989.

       Homelessness
                 The Chief Executive submitted letters which had been
       received from the Minister for Housing Environment and Countryside
       and Mr. Matthew Taylor, M.P., the SLD Spokesman on Housing, in
       response to the resolution passed by the City Council at its meeting
       on 5th April, 1989 concerning the Government's policies on homelessness.
       It was explained in the Minister's letter that a copy of the Council's
       resolution had been passed to the Department of Social Services
       for their comments on those parts relating to housing benefit and
       income support.
       RESOLVEDt That (a) the contents of the letters now submitted be
       noted;
                 (b) the Department of Social Services be pressed for a reply
       to the City Council's resolution on homelessness; and
                 (c) the resolution and the Minister's reply thereto be
       brought to the attention of the Association of Metropolitan Authorities.

       Under-Fives Provision
                 The Sub-Committee noted a letter received from the Department
       of Education and Science in response to the resolution passed by
       the City Council at its meeting on 5th April, 1989 concerning under
       fives provision.




             /
