Policy Committee      22.5.90                                 Page 7

      RESOLVED: That (i) the information contained in the report now submitted
      }d0 noted j
                  (ii) the Race Equality Unit Co-ordinator be authorised, in
      consultation with the Chair of the Municipal Enterprise and General
      Services Programme Committee, to formulate a response to the draft
      circular which takes into account the previous camnents of this
      Committee and also any views arising out of the Seminar on the training
      and employment implications of the new arrangements for Section 11
      funding, which has been organised by the City Council in conjunction
      with the Hone Office and is to be held in Sheffield on 24th May,
       1990; and
                  (iii) arrangements be made for a draft of the proposed
      response to fee supplied to each member of the Policy Committee prior to
      its submission to the Heme Office by 1st June, 1990.

20.   EEnHOH                                      . ,     ,.              _    ,
                 TT-ita Committee received the petition, which had been referred
       frcm the City Council at its meeting on 2nd May, 1990, containing 345
       signatures of residents of the Woodseats area requesting that they be
       allowed to pay the Poll Tax at their local Post Office without incurring
       charges.
       RESOLVED: That no action be taken on this matter for the tune being but
       that the present arrangements with regard to the ^payment of Poll Tax at
       local Post Offices be kept under review by the City Treasurer.

21.   N0R1H WMES MBXCKS' EUDOD DISASTER HMD
                 The Committee received and noted a letter which had been
       received fr>-im the Mayor of the Colwyn Borough Council seeking a donation
       frcm the City Council to the North Wales Mayors' Flood Disaster Fund
       which had been established by the Boroughs of Colwyn, Ruddlan and Delyn
       to raise funds to help those who were suffering as a result of the sea
       flooding which devastated parts of North Wales in February 1990.

22.   HUISBCROOGH DISASTER APPEAL
                 The Cdimittee received and noted the Interim Report published
       by the Trustees of the Hillsborough Disaster Appeal in April 1990 and
       arising therefrom placed on record their appreciation of the extremely
       efficient and fair- manner in which the Trustees have administered the
       Fund and in parti mil ar requested that their thanks be conveyed to Mr.
       Norman Adsetts for his work as a member of the Trust.

23.   SEMINARS
       RESOLVED: That the Chair (or his nominee) be appointed as a delegate to
       attend the following seminars :-
            S<grni ny>r-                       D a te and V enue

            Seminar organised by               1st June, 1990
            CIPFA on "Basics of Local          - London
            Government Finance"

            Two one-day Seminars                21st June and
            organised by the Institute          10th July, 1990
            of Local Government Studies         - Birmingham
            on "Community Government or
            the Future of Local
            Government"
