                         EMPLOYMENT PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                                            895

4 Kennings Redevelopment—Managed Workspace Phase 1
  The Director of Design and Building Services submitted a report on tenders received in respect of
the Kennings Redevelopment—Managed Workspace Phase 1.
resolved   : That (a) subject to the receipt of the necessary consents, the tender of A. Monk Building
and Civil Engineering Ltd., in the sum of £823,323.00 on a firm price basis except for tax
fluctuations, be accepted;
   (b) authority be given for the Director of Design and Building Services to issue an instruction to
the successful tenderer in advance of (i) the signing of the contract and (ii) the submission of a
further report to the Finance Sub-Committee (Policy), as required by the Policy Committee at its
meetings held on 28th July and 3rd August, 1989, and the acceptance by the City Council of the
financial implications, to do whatsoever is necessary to enable work to commence on site on 11th
December, 1989, being the stipulated date for possession; and
  (c) the spending profile for the project be noted.

5 Industrial Land Acquisitions and Development Strategy
  The Committee considered a joint report of the Director of Land and Planning and the Director
of Employment and Economic Development on the development of a strategy for the acquisition
and development of industrial land, which report had also been considered by the Planning and
Transportation Programme Committee.
r e s o l v e d : That (a) this Committee concurs with the recommendations agreed by the Planning and

Transportation Programme Committee at its meeting held on 17th November, 1989; and
  (b) copies of the joint report be circulated to all members of the City Council.

6 Audit Commission Report “ Urban Programme and Economic Developm ent—The Local
Government Dimension”
  A joint report of the Director of Employment and Economic Development and the Director of
Land and Planning was submitted (a) summarising the main conclusions contained in a report
produced by the Audit Commission entitled “Urban Regeneration and Economic Development—
The Local Government Dimension” which analysed the economy, efficiency and effectiveness of
local authority involvement in local regeneration and (b) outlining the key recommendation in the
report for a regeneration audit comprising five stages and comparing this process to the proactive
approach to social and economic regeneration developed by the City Council in partnership with the
private sector.
r e s o l v e d : That (i) the information contained in the joint report now submitted be noted and the
Audit Commission’s report be welcomed;
  (ii) copies of the joint report be referred to the Policy Committee, the Audit Commission, the
Association of Metropolitan Authorities and the Sheffield Economic Regeneration Committee;
  (iii) Mr. H. Davis of the Audit Commission be invited to visit Sheffield;
  (iv) the Director of Employment and Economic Development, in conjunction with appropriate
Chief Officers, prepare a joint report outlining the strategic work undertaken in Sheffield over
recent years.
896                                    POLICY COMMITTEE

                                  Meeting held 21st November, 1989

Present— Councillors Betts (Chair), Mrs. Barton, Boyce, Chadwick, Ms. Fiore, Godber, Heath,
Heslop, Mrs. Jackson, P. H. Jackson, Jones, H. Knight, Mrs. Nicholson, Price and Wigfield.

1 Minutes of Meeting held 24th October, 1989
 It was reported that the City Council on 1st November, 1989 had confirmed the minutes of the
meeting of this Committee held on 24th October, 1989 with the amendment of—
  (a) the resolution in Item 12 relating to the South Yorkshire Joint Authorities by
1. the insertion of “ (a)” immediately after the word “That” in the first line; and
2. the addition of a new paragraph as follows—
“and (b) the South Yorkshire Pensions Authority be recommended to appoint Councillor Mrs.
Jackson as the Authority’s nominated spokesperson and Councillor Watson as the substitute
spokesperson to the City Council.”
  (b) the amendment of Item 17 relating to Sheffield’s Priorities for the Environment to provide
that the Special Panel, referred to in paragraph (ii) of the resolution, will be Councillors Buckley,
Godber, Heath, Jones, Memmott, Mrs. P. Midgley, Mrs. Mosley, Price, Ms. Robinson and White.

2 Information, Communications and Promotions Panel
resolved: That the following minutes, which incorporate the alteration made at this meeting, be
approved—
    Meeting of the Information, Communications and Promotions Panel held 25th October, 1989.
  Present— Councillors Mrs. Barton (Chair), Betts, Chadwick, Ms. Fiore, Seaton and Mrs. P.
  Smith.
  ( 1 ) MINUTES OF LAST MEETING
    The Panel received and noted the minutes of the meetings of the Panel held on 31st July and
  18th September, 1989.
  (2) HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER: TH E PUBLICITY DEPARTM ENT’S RESPONSE
    The Chief Publicity Officer submitted a report outlining the operational measures taken by her
  Department in the immediate aftermath of the Hillsborough Disaster on 15th April, 1989,
  including the establishment and co-ordination of an Appeal Fund, the attendance of officers at
  daily briefings, the organisation of press conferences and the involvement of the Department in
  the organisation of the Public Inquiry into the disaster.
   Resolved: That (a) the thanks of this Panel be conveyed to appropriate staff in the Publicity
  Department for work carried out by them during the aftermath of the Hillsborough Disaster; and
     (b) the Chief Publicity Officer be authorised to initiate corporate discussions on the
  information and communication aspects of the City’s Plan for Peacetime Emergencies within the
  City Council and with other organisations involved in the Plan, i.e., the emergency services.
  (3) DEBT INFORMATION PROJECT AND HYPOTHERM IA CAMPAIGN
    The Panel received and noted a report of the Director of Libraries and Information Services
  outlining the work carried out by (a) the Council’s Debt Information Project, in co-operation
  with the Citizen’s Advice Bureau Debt Support Unit, which Project had been established to
  provide advice to people with debt problems and (b) the Hypothermia Campaign which had been
  in operation for several years and attempted to alert elderly people to the risks of hypothermia
  and other cold-related illnesses.
      (4) COMMUNITY HANDBOOK
        The Panel received and noted a report of the Communications Co-ordinator on the steps which
      had been taken to improve the information available in Community Handbooks which had been
      produced to provide information on Council and other services for various local communities.
      (5) POLL TAX INFORMATION CARAVAN PROJECT
        The Communications Co-ordinator submitted a report referring to the operation of the City
      Council’s Poll Tax Information Caravan which had visited busy shopping centres in the City
      during September and October, 1989 in an attempt to inform the public about all aspects of the
      Poll Tax including Poll Tax benefits.
