          ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                            307

                                      Meeting held 12th July, 1991

Present— Councillors Mrs. Midgley (Chair), Ms. Bullement, Chaplin, Mrs. Fleming, Hartley,
Memmott, J. A. Moore, Moscrop, Sangar, Ms. Sheldrick, Mrs. Shepherd, Mrs. E. Smith,
Mrs. P. M. Smith, Mrs. Walton, Webster and Ms. Whitty.

1 Licensing Panel
reso lv ed: That, except so far as they relate to matters delegated to the Licensing Panel, the
following minutes be approved—
        Meeting of the Licensing Panel held 18th June, 1991. Present— Councillors Butler (Chair),
    Chaplin, Mrs. Leach, Memmott, Mrs. Midgley, Mrs. Shepherd, Mrs. E. Smith and Mrs. P. M.
    Smith. Also in attendance— Councillor George.
    (1 ) EXCLUSION OF THE PUBLIC AND THE PRESS
      Resolved: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before discussion takes
    place on the following item of business relating to hackney carriage and private hire licensing on
    the grounds that, in view of the nature of the business to be transacted, if the public and press
    were present, there would be a disclosure to them of exempt information as described in
    paragraphs 7 and 12 of Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act 1972, as amended by the
    Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985, relating to the financial or business affairs
    of other persons and legal matters and advice.
★   (2) HACKNEY CARRIAGE AND PRIVATE HERE LICENSING
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted details in respect of four cases
    relating to hackney carriage and private hire licensing. The applicants in three cases attended the
    meeting and addressed the Panel.
      Resolved: That (a) in respect of Case No. 18/91 the applicant be warned as to his future
    conduct and granted a hackney carriage and a private hire driver’s licence for nine months;
      (b) the applications now submitted for the renewal of a hackney carriage and private hire
    driver’s licence be granted (i) for six months in respect of Case No. 16/91 and the applicant be
    given a severe warning as to his future conduct and (ii) for nine months in respect of Case No.
    17/91; and
      (c) consideration of the application now submitted in respect of Case No. 15/91 be deferred to a
    future meeting to enable the applicant to attend before the Panel.
    ( n o t e : Councillor Mrs. Midgley entered the meeting during consideration of the above item and
    did not speak or vote thereon.)
      A t this point in the proceedings, the meeting was re-opened to the public and press.
★   (3) PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT LICENSING
    Individual Cases
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration summarised orally the current applications for
    the grant or renewal of public entertainment licences in respect of various premises in the City.
      Resolved: That (a) consideration of the applications now reported in respect of the Woodstock
    Exchange, 95 Ecclesall Road South, the Marshal Hall Dining Room and the main hall at the
    Sheffield City Polytechnic Collegiate Crescent Site and the Punch Bowl, Crookes, be deferred;
      (b) the Director of Recreation and Amenities be requested to confirm whether he intends to
    proceed with applications in respect of the Chapeltown and King Edward VII Baths or to
    withdraw and resubmit them at a later date;
      (c) subject to all inspecting Authorities being satisfied as to the condition of the premises, the
    applications now submitted in respect of the Bee Hive, West Street, the main hall of Sheffield
    City Polytechnic Pond Street site, the Mapin A rt Gallery and the Novo tel Hotel be approved and
    the applicants be granted a public entertainment licence for a period of 12 months; and
      (d) the applications now reported in respect of St. Theresa’s Parish Centre, Sheffield City
    Polytechnic A rt Gallery and Southboume Drama Studio, the Mosborough Methodist Church
    School Room, Ratners Rest, the Merlin Theatre, the Embassy and Isabellas Night Club, be
    granted for a period of 12 months.
    308      ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

         Delegated Authority
            Resolved: That confirmation be given to the action of the City Solicitor and Head of
         Administration in granting public entertainment licences in respect of premises at the Rock
         Island Diner, Nottingham House and the Sheffield Arena.
         (4) TRACK BETTING LICENCE—APPOINTMENT OF ACCOUNTANT
           The City Solicitor and Head of Administration reported orally that the Accountant of the
         Sheffield Sports Stadium Limited had resigned his appointment from 30th June, 1991, and that a
         successor had been nominated.
          Resolved: That confirmation be given to the appointment now reported of Messrs. West and
        Foster as Accountant to the Sheffield Sports Stadium Limited with effect from 1st July, 1991,
        subject to and in accordance with the Schedules of the Betting, Gaming and Lotteries Act 1963.
        (5) SEMINAR
           Resolved: That confirmation be given to the arrangements now reported under which members
        of the Licensing Panel attended a Seminar which was held on the 31st May, 1991, and that such
        attendance be recognised as an approved duty for the purposes of the payment of appropriate
        allowances.
    ★    ( 6 ) SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS-DON VALLEY STADIUM
        Turnstiles and Security Fence to Main Stand
          With reference to his report to this Panel of 11th December, 1990, (page 1043 of the printed
        minutes), the City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a further report on action he
        had taken, following consultation with the Council’s Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group,
        in approving a proposal submitted by Architects acting on behalf of the owners, Sheffield for
        Health Limited, for the installation of 20 turnstiles and security fencing to serve the main stand at
        the Sheffield International Stadium (Don Valley).
          Resolved: That (a) confirmation be given to the action of the City Solicitor and Head of
        Administration in (i) approving the proposal now submitted for the installation of 20 turnstiles
        and security fencing serving the main stand at the Don Valley Stadium and (ii) requesting the
        Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group to submit comments directly to the Architects on the
        proposed signs serving the new extended fence and turnstiles with a copy to the Chief Licensing
        Officer on the lines now discussed; and
           (b) all works and the provision of electrical services to the turnstiles be completed to the
        satisfaction of the City Solicitor and Head of Administration, in consultation with the Safety of
        Sports Grounds Advisory Group, for the opening ceremony of the World Student Games.
★ Emergency Landline Telephone System
    Further to his report of 11th December, 1990, informing this Panel of the recommendations
  contained in Lord Justice Taylor’s Final Report on the Hillsborough Disaster relating to the
  provision of emergency landline telephone systems (page 1042 of the printed minutes) the City
  Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action he had taken in approving a
  proposal for the provision of an emergency landline telephone system at the Sheffield
  International Stadium.
           Resolved: That (a) confirmation be given to the action taken by the City Solicitor and Head of
        Administration, in approving the proposal now reported to install an emergency landline
        telephone system at the Sheffield International Stadium; and
           (b) all works be completed to the satisfaction of the City Solicitor and Head of Administration,
        in consultation with the Chief Constable, South Yorkshire Police, prior to the opening of the
        World Student Games.
★       (7) SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS—SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB
        Exit W Spion Kop
           The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action he had taken,
        following consultation with the Council’s Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group, in
        approving a proposal submitted by Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to redevelop Exit W on
        the Spion Kop of the Hillsborough Stadium. He stated that concerns had been raised that during
        the last football season there had been crowd congestion at the end of each game around that exit
        from the Spion Kop.
        ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                          309

       Resolved: That (a) confirmation be given to the action taken by the City Solicitor and Head of
    Administration in approving the proposals now reported and submitted by Sheffield Wednesday
    Football Club to redevelop Exit W of the Spion Kop subject to the incorporation of (i) the
    alterations detailed in Section 4 of the report now submitted and which were agreed by the Safety
    of Sports Grounds Advisory Group and (ii) any minor alterations to the Scheme that may be
    agreed between the Club and the Advisory Group following the ongoing discussions now
    reported; and
      (b) the Chief Constable, South Yorkshire Police, be requested to monitor the use of the exit
    during the coming season and report any problem to the Chief Licensing Officer (Sports
    Grounds).

★ Emergency Landline Telephone System
    The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action he had taken in
  approving a proposal submitted by Consultants on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
  for the installation of an emergency landline telephone system at the Hillsborough Stadium.
      Resolved: That (a) confirmation be given to the action taken by the City Solicitor and Head of
    Administration in approving the proposals now reported and submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and
    Partners to install an emergency landline telephone system at the Hillsborough Stadium, subject
    to the incorporation within the scheme of the comments of the Council’s Safety of Sports
    Grounds Advisory Group and as detailed in Section 3 of the report now submitted; and

      (b) the works be completed if possible for the World Student Games events at the Stadium in
    July, 1991, but if this is not feasible then all works be completed and the system tested and
    approved to the satisfaction of the Chief Constable, South Yorkshire Police, prior to the
    commencement of the 1991/92 football season.

★   ( 8 ) SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS—SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB
    New First A id Facilities
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action he had taken,
    following consultation with the Council’s Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group, in
    approving an amended proposal submitted by Consultants on behalf of Sheffield United Football
    Club for a new First Aid Centre which would be sited between the Bramall Lane Terrace and the
    South Stand at the Bramall Lane Stadium.
      Resolved: That (a) confirmation be given to the action taken by the City Solicitor and Head of
    Administration in approving the proposal now reported for a new first aid facility at the Bramall
    Lane Stadium, subject to the incorporation of the recommendations of the Safety of Sports
    Grounds Advisory Group set out in Section 3 of the report and in the correspondence now
    submitted; and

      (b) the works be completed and the facility fully stocked and inspected by representatives of
    the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service prior to the commencement of the 1991/2
    football season.

    (9) EXTENSION OF POWERS TO THE NEW FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY
      The Panel received and noted a report submitted by the City Solicitor and Head of
    Administration on provisions contained in the Football Spectators Act 1989 which were brought
    into effect on the 3rd June, 1991, and which empowered the New Football Licensing Authority to
    (a) keep under review the discharge by Local Authorities of their functions under the Safety of
    Sports Grounds Act 1975 in relation to sports grounds at which designated football matches were
    played and (b) include in any safety certificates issued such terms and conditions as they may
    specify by notice served on the Local Authority and (c) request that they be furnished with
    information relating to the discharge of the Safety of Sports Grounds function.
    (note:   Item 4 on the Agenda (Amusement Arcades) was withdrawn from consideration.)


      Meeting of the Licensing Panel held 27th June, 1991. Present— Councillors Butler (Chair),
    Chaplin, Mrs. Leach, Memmott, Mrs. Shepherd, Mrs. E. Smith, Mrs. P. M. Smith and Webster.
    Also in attendance— Councillor Whitfield.
310     ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

    ( 1 ) EXCLUSION OF THE PUBLIC AND PRESS
      Resolved: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before discussion takes
    place on the following item of business relating to hackney carriage and private hire licensing on
    the grounds that, in view of the nature of the business to be transacted, if the public and press
    were present, there would be a disclosure to them of exempt information as described in
    paragraphs 7 and 12 of Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act 1972, as amended by the
    Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985, relating to the financial or business affairs
    of other persons and legal matters and advice.

★   (2) HACKNEY CARRIAGE AND PRIVATE HIRE LICENSING
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted details in respect of an application
    for the issue of a hackney carriage and private hire driver’s licence. The applicant attended the
    meeting and addressed the Panel.

      Resolved: That the application now submitted in respect of Case 19/91 for a hackney carriage
    and private hire driver’s licence be refused.

    ( n o t e : Councillor Memmott entered the meeting during consideration of the above item and did
    not speak or vote thereon.)

      A t this point in the proceedings, the meeting was re-opened to the public and press.

★   (3) SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
    Don Valley Stadium—Safety Certificate
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on an application received
    from Sheffield for Health Limited, the owners of the Sheffield International Stadium (Don
    Valley), for a Safety Certificate in respect of the main covered stand at the Stadium and he stated
    that since the Home Office had not yet designated Don Valley Stadium, it was considered that
    the Certificate would be required to meet the provisions of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of
    Sport Act 1987. The report outlined the criteria for the regulation of a covered stand and the
    comments of the Council’s Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group recommending that the
    activities permitted at the Stadium be restricted to athletics, Rugby Union and Rugby League,
    cricket and seated religious conventions, were appended to the report. A representative from
    South Yorkshire Police addressed the Panel and (a) stated that the Police Authority had no
    objections to the granting of a Certificate subject to the restrictions proposed by the Safety of
    Sports Grounds Advisory Group and (b) conveyed his appreciation to Officers of the
    Administration and Legal Department and in particular Mrs. Bashforth and Mr. Derricott for
    producing the comprehensive report now before the Panel.

       Resolved: That (i) in the circumstances outlined in the report now submitted, the main covered
    stand at the Don Valley Stadium, which includes the two wing stands, be regulated in accordance
    with the Fire Safety and Safety Places of Sport Act 1987 under which provisions the applicant,
    Sheffield for Health Limited, qualifies for the issue of a General Safety Certificate in respect of
    the Stadium; and

       (ii) authority be given to the City Solicitor and Head of Administration to take appropriate
    steps to issue a General Safety Certificate in accordance with the provisions of the Act to
    Sheffield for Health Limited in respect of the Don Valley Stadium (covered stands) subject to the
    restrictions now discussed and detailed in the report now submitted.

★    (4) PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT LICENSING
    Hillsborough Leisure Centre
       The City Solicitor and Head of Administration reported orally on various inspections which
    had been carried out by the relevant inspecting authorities following an application for a Public
    Entertainment Licence at the Hillsborough Leisure Centre. He stated that all the outstanding
    issues resulting from the inspections would be dealt with by the applicant, with the exception of
    an alteration recommended by the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service to the
    width of the First Aid Room door. The representative of the Ambulance Service was unable to be
    present at the meeting, but he submitted a letter for consideration by members of the Panel,
    outlining the Ambulance Service’s concerns regarding the First Aid Room door. The Manager of
    the Leisure Centre, together with an officer from the Department of Design and Building
