            MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

                                      Meeting held 18th April, 1990

Present— Councillors Ms. Fiore (Chair), Butler, Crowder, Godber, Griffiths, M oore, Moscrop,
Mrs. M ulheam, Mrs. Nelson, Pye, Saunders, Mrs. E. Smith, Mrs. Walton and White.

1 General Purposes Panel
           : That, except so far as they relate to matters delegated to the General Purposes Panel,
    resolved

the following minutes be approved—
        Meeting of the General Purposes Panel held 2nd April, 1990. Present— Councillors Butler
      (Chair), Lamb, Moscrop, Mrs. Mulheam, Mrs. E. Smith, Mrs. Walton and White.
★      ( 1 ) PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT
      The Mill Public House, Westfield
        The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported on an application for the renewal
      of the public entertainment licence issued in respect of The Mill Public House, Westfield. The
      Panel received copies of (a) a letter which accompanied the petition submitted to them at their
      meeting held on 2nd January, 1990 (page 1089 of the printed minutes), signed by 47 residents of
      Westfield objecting to alleged noise and vandalism arising from the disco at The Mill Public
      House, (b) a letter from Bass Taverns enclosing the application and (c) a letter to the licensee
      from the Director of Health and Consumer Services following an inspection of the premises by an
      Environmental Health Officer. The meeting was attended by representatives of the applicants
      and of the Department of Health and Consumer Services.
        At this stage in the proceedings, the Panel
         Resolved: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before a decision is made on
      the application under consideration and before discussion takes place on the subsequent item of
      business which relates to an application for the renewal of the public entertainment licence issued
      in respect of Charlie Parkers Nightclub, Charles Street, on the grounds that, in view of the nature
      of the business to be transacted, if the public and press were present there would be a disclosure
      to them of exempt information as described in paragraphs 7 and 12 of the Local Government Act,
      1972 as amended, relating to the financial or business affairs of other persons and legal matters
      and advice.



         Resolved: That the application now submitted be granted for a period of three months upon
      the applicant’s undertaking (a) to comply with the requirements of the Director of Health and
      Consumer Services contained in his letter dated 22nd March, 1990, and (b) to liaise with the
      appropriate Environmental Health Officer concerning requirements to abate the noise nuisance
      at the premises and take steps to resolve the problems referred to in the petition.
     ( n o t e : Councillor Mrs. Walton declared an interest in the above petition and did not speak or
     vote on this item.)
     Charlie Parkers Nightclub, Charles Street
       The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported further on an application for the
     renewal of the public entertainment licence issued in respect of Charlie Parkers Nightclub,
     Charles Street, consideration of which application was deferred by the Panel at their meeting
     held on 5th March, 1990. He stated that the applicants had given no indication that they intended
     to prepare the premises for re-opening in the foreseeable future.
        Resolved: That the application now submitted be not granted.
        At this stage in the proceedings, the public and press were re-admitted to the meeting.
★     (2) SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
     Urgent Item—Removal o f Perimeter Fences
       The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on applications
     submitted by the Sheffield Wednesday and Sheffield United Football Clubs to remove the pitch
     perimeter fences from the Hillsborough and Bramall Lane Sports Grounds, respectively. The
      MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

report enclosed copies of correspondence from the Home Office, the Head of Administration
and Legal Department and the Football Clubs concerned and an extract from the Final Report of
Lord Justice Taylor.
  Resolved: That (a) approval in principle be given to the proposals outlined in the report now
submitted for the removal during the coming close season of pitch perimeter fences at the
Hillsborough and Bramall Lane Sports Grounds;
  (b) the Chief Licensing Officer (Sports Grounds) be authorised to call a meeting of
representatives of the two football clubs concerned and the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory
Group to discuss proposals for suitable structures to replace the perimeter fences; and
   (c) the two football clubs concerned be required to submit to the Council proposals for the
removal of the pitch perimeter fences and their replacement by suitable alternative structures in
time to enable the necessary works to be carried out in the close season.
        In accordance with the provisions of Section 100B(4)(b) of the Local Government Act,
(n o t e :
1972 as amended, the Chair of the Panel (Councillor Butler) decided that the above item should
be considered as a m atter of urgency as formal applications had not been received until after the
despatch of the agenda and it was necessary to make an early decision in principle, to enable
proposals to be developed with a view to the works being completed during the close season.)
Advisory Group
  The Panel received and noted the minutes of meetings of the Safety of Sports Grounds
Advisory Group held on 9th and 22nd February, 1990.
Proposed Sports Grounds Forum
   With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its meeting held on 27th November, 1989,
in the light of the interim report of Lord Justice Taylor into the Hillsborough Disaster, to
establish a Safety of Sports Grounds Forum to discuss general matters relating to the safety of
sports grounds with representatives of the football clubs and supporters associations, the Head of
Administration and Legal Department submitted a report reviewing the Panel’s decision in the
light of Recommendation 31 of the Final Report of Lord Justice Taylor.
  Resolved: That (a) the resolution of this Panel of 27th November, 1989 (page 947 of the
printed minutes) relating to the establishment and operation of a Safety of Sports Grounds
Forum be rescinded;
  (b) the Chief Licensing Officer (Sports Grounds) be authorised to arrange appropriate regular
meetings with representatives of the Sheffield Wednesday and Sheffield United Football Clubs
and the supporters associations to discuss general issues relating to the safety of sports grounds;
and
   (c) the Head of Administration and Legal Department be requested to report back at the end
of the 1990/91 Football Season on the suitability and effectiveness of this arrangement.
Expiry o f Safety Certificates
  The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report referring to the
recommendation in the Final Report of Lord Justice Taylor that safety certificates should be
reviewed by the Local Authority at least once annually and should be required to be renewed
annually, and containing proposals for the three General Safety Certificates currently in force to
be amended accordingly. The report enclosed extracts from the Safety of Sports Grounds Act,
1975 and the Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations, 1976 and 1987.
  Resolved: That the Head of Administration and Legal Department be authorised
  (a) to take all necessary action to amend the General Safety Certificates currently in force in
respect of the Hillsborough (Sheffield Wednesday) and Bramall Lane (Sheffield United) Sports
Grounds and Sheffield Sports Stadium (Owlerton), (i) to provide for the expiry of the Certificates
on 31st July, 1990 and (ii) to include a condition that Certificate Holders should apply to renew
their respective Certificates at least three months before the 31st July, 1990, or such shorter
period as the City Council agrees to permit and, if an application is properly submitted, the
condition should allow for the current certificate to remain in force until the application for its
renewal is determined by the Council; and
  (b) to inform Certificate Holders in writing that (i) should they fail to apply to renew a
Certificate, the Council will consider as soon as possible on the expiry of such Certificate whether
    MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

or not to issue a prohibition notice in respect of the respective sports ground and (ii) with regard
to any such application, the inspection procedure to be detailed will be an integral part of the
process adopted by the Council to determine the application.
Bramall Lane Sports Ground—Emergency Lighting
  With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its meeting held on 5th February, 1990
(page 1220 of the printed minutes), the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted
a report on a proposal submitted by the Consulting Engineers on behalf of Sheffield United
Football Club for the upgrading of the emergency lighting provision at Bramall Lane Sports
Ground. The report enclosed copies of letters from the Consulting Engineers and the South
Yorkshire County Fire Service relating to the proposal.
  Resolved: That approval be given to the proposal contained in the letter of the Consulting
Engineers of 6th February, 1990, for the improvement of the emergency lighting at Bramall Lane
Sports Ground (Sheffield United), on the understanding that all associated works are completed
before the beginning of the 1990/91 Football Season.
Bramall Lane Sports Ground—First-Aid Facilities
  With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its meeting held on 2nd January, 1990
(page 1088 of the printed minutes), the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted
a report on a proposal of the Sheffield United Football Club to use temporary mobile
accommodation for the provision of first-aid facilities at the Bramall Lane Sports Ground.
   Resolved: That (a) approval in principle be given to the proposal outlined in the report now
submitted for the use of temporary mobile accommodation for the provision of first-aid facilities
at the Bramall Lane Sports Ground for the 1990/91 Football Season;
   (b) the H ead of Administration and Legal Department be requested to give notice in writing to
the Sheffield United Football Club that a permanent first-aid facility will be required before the
start of the 1991/92 Football Season;
  (c) the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group be requested to undertake a site visit with
representatives of the Sheffield United Football Club to ascertain a suitable location for the
temporary accommodation; and
  (d) the Sheffield United Football Club be required to deposit with the City Council not later
than 15th May, 1990, an appropriate scheme for the provision of first-aid facilities in the proposed
temporary accommodation.
Hillsborough Sports Ground—Emergency Lighting
   With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its meeting held on 22nd December, 1989
(page 1086 of the printed minutes), the Head of Administration and Legal Departm ent submitted
a report on a proposal submitted by the Consulting Engineers on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club for the upgrading of the emergency lighting provision at the Hillsborough Sports
Ground. The report enclosed copies of letters from the Consulting Engineers and the South
Yorkshire County Fire Service relating to the proposal.
  Resolved: That approval be given to the proposal contained in the letter of the Consulting
Engineers of 6th February, 1990, for the improvement of the emergency lighting provision at
Hillsborough Sports Ground (Sheffield Wednesday), on the understanding that all associated
works are completed before the beginning of the 1990/91 Football Season.
Hillsborough Sports Ground—First-Aid Facilities
  With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its meeting held on 2nd January, 1990
(page 1088 of the printed minutes), the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted
a report on a proposal submitted by the Consulting Engineers on behalf of the Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club for the extension of existing first-aid facilities at the Hillsborough
Sports Ground. The report enclosed copies of letters from the Consulting Engineers, the South
Yorkshire County Fire Service and the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service and
memoranda from the Building Surveyor and the Director of Health and Consumer Services.
  Resolved: That approval be given to the proposal contained in the letter from the Consulting
Engineers dated 24th January, 1990 and plan No. 12267/8 referred to therein, subject to the
inclusion in the proposal of the recommendations of the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory
Group as detailed in Section 3 of the report now submitted and on the understanding that all
associated works will be completed before the start of the 1990/91 Football Season.
        MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

    Sheffield Sports Stadium (Owlerton)—Provision o f Doctor
      The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on an application of
    Owlerton Sports Stadium Limited for their current General Safety Certificate to be amended so
    as to remove the requirement for at least one medical practitioner to be present at each specified
    sporting activity at the Sheffield Sports Stadium, as there was no reasonable expectation of more
    than 2,000 spectators attending such activities. The report enclosed a copy of a letter from
    Owlerton Sports Stadium Limited.
      Resolved: That (a) the application now submitted by Owlerton Sports Stadium Limited for the
    amendment of the General Safety Certificate issued in respect of Sheffield Sports Stadium so as
    to remove the requirement for the attendance of a medical practitioner at all specified sporting
    activities be granted; and
       (b)    the Head of Administration and Legal Department (i) be authorised to amend the relevant
    General Safety Certificate accordingly and as soon as is practicable with the inclusion in a suitable
    condition within the Certificate of the comments of the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group
    in the m atter and (ii) be requested to report back to the next meeting of this Panel giving details
    of the costs incurred by the Council in undertaking such amendment of the Certificate.
★    (3) REVIEW O F LICENCE FEES
      The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report reviewing the fees
    charged by the City Council for the issue of miscellaneous local licences. The report also
    contained information on the assessment of administrative costs of the operation of the licensing
    function.
      Resolved: That (a) the fees to be charged for the issue of licences as detailed below be
    increased with effect from 3rd April, 1990, as follows—
                                              Existing                           Proposed
    Licence Type                      1st Licence      Renewal           1st Licence      Renewal
                                           £              £                   £              £
    Track Betting
    Licence Annual
    (Statutory Maximum)                 350               350              350               350
    Initial                               10                                 10
    Public Entertainments
    Licences
      Class I (Annual
      Licences—
      Nightclubs, etc.)                 600               600             1025              1025
      Class II (Annual
      Licences—
      Other Premises)                    185              185              210               210

      Class III (Annual
      Licences—Incidental
      Music Only)                         36               36                38               38
      Class IV (Occasional
      Licences)                           26                                 29
      Transfer of Licences                46                                 58
      Variation of Licences                                                  58
    Certificate of
    Suitability                         600               600              620               620
    Cinemas (Statutory
    Maxima)
      Annual Licences                   173.50            173.50           173.50            173.50
      Monthly Rate                       58                58               58                58
      Transfer                           35                                 35
        MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

                                                Existing                             Proposed
    Licence Type                       1st Licence       Renewal             1st Licence      Renewal
                                            £               £                     £              £
    Theatres
      Annual Rate                         387                387                456                456
      Monthly Rate                        129                  —                152                  ““
      Occasional Licences
      (per 7 days)                          26                                   29                  —
      Transfer of Licence                   46                    “              58                  —
    Sex Shops
      Annual Licences                    2700               2700               2850               2850
      Transfer of Licences               1200                  —               1246                  —
    Pet Shops                               66                 60                67                 60
    Riding Establishments                   99                 77               103                 79
    Dog Breeders                           104                 63               109                 65
    Annual Boarding
    Establishments                         144*                77               151*                79
    Dangerous Wild
    Animals                                127*              121*               133*               127*
    Slaughtermen                            20                20                 25                 25
    Street Trading Consent
    (Three original consent
    holders only)                           —               1600                  —               1900
    (* Includes veterinary charge)
      (b) the classes of premises used for public entertainment currently recognised for the purpose
    of assessing licensing fees be redefined as follows—
    Class I —Premises (or part(s) thereof) primarily used for the provision of public entertainment
    (for example, nightclubs)
    Class II —Premises where the provision of public entertainment is ancillary to other activities
    taking place at the premises (for example, church halls); and
       (c) this Panel notes the information contained in the report that the costs of running the cinema
    licensing system are not capable of being covered by the permissible licence fees and that the
    Head of Administration and Legal Department has made representations to the Home Office
    regarding this matter.
★     (4) FILM CERTIFICATION
       Resolved: That the requests contained in the report of the Senior Film Officer, now submitted,
    to exhibit the following films in the categories indicated be granted—
    Film                                          Former Category             Proposed Category
    Just Say No To Drugs                         Uncertificated               “Sheffield   U”
    Choose Cruelty-Free                          “ 15”                        “Sheffield   PG ”
    Female Trouble                               Uncertificated               “Sheffield   18”
    Der Morder Dimitri Karamazov                 Uncertificated               “Sheffield   15”
    Amore (The Miracle)                          Uncertificated               “Sheffield   15”

2 Trading Services Panel
r e s o l v e d : That, except so far as they relate to matters delegated to the Trading Services Panel, the

following minutes be approved—
      Meeting of the Trading Services Panel held 3rd April, 1990. Present— Councillors Ms. Fiore
    (Chair), Butler, Crowder, Lamb, M oore, Mrs. M ulheam, Mrs. Nelson, Mrs. E. Smith and
    White.
        MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

    ( 1 ) VULCAN CATERING SERVICE
      The Senior Assistant Head of Administration and Legal Department (Administration) and the
    Catering Manager reported on the monitoring of the revenue budget relating to the Vulcan
    Catering Service, and in changes which had occurred since the last report, particularly in relation
    to a down-tum in the previously reported income at Thombridge Hall.
      The Panel noted the information reported.
    (2) PRINTING SERVICES
    Revenue Budget
      The Panel received and noted a report of the Manager of Design & Print on the monitoring of
    the revenue budget for his Trading Service.
    Post Surplus to Requirements
      With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its meeting held on 4th January, 1990
    (page 1090 of the printed minutes), the Manager of Design & Print submitted a report on
    proposals for the retirement of employees whose posts were surplus to requirements.
      Resolved: That the Manager of Design & Print be authorised to discuss with employees whose
    posts are surplus to requirements, the possibility of early retirement with appropriate
    enhancements.
    (3) MARKETS
    Report on action taken
      The Panel received and noted a report of the General Manager, Markets, on action taken
    under delegated powers for the letting of stalls at The Market Place, Crystal Peaks Shopping
    Centre.
    Monitoring o f the Revenue Budget
      The Panel received and noted a report of the General Manager, Markets, on the monitoring of
    the Revenue Budget for the Markets undertaking.
    Parkway Wholesale Fish Market—Review o f Rentals
      Resolved: That approval be given to the terms contained in the report of the General Manager,
    Markets, now submitted, for revised rentals of fish sale stands at the Parkway Wholesale Market
    with effect from 1st July, 1989.
    Setts Market—Early Morning Trading
      Resolved: That approval be given to the proposal contained in the report of the General
    Manger, Markets, now submitted, for trading on The Setts Open Market to be allowed before
    9.00 a.m. on a three months trial basis, at an additional charge pro rata to the normal daily charge
    for stalls at the Market.
    Application to operate open market at Wales Village
      The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on an application
    received from Wales Parish Council for consent to the operation of an open market at Wales
    Village in the Rotherham Metropolitan District. The report indicated that the proposal was for
    an open market of 15 stalls to operate for two or three days per week on a site well within 6%
    miles of the City Council’s existing markets at Killamarsh and Crystal Peaks, W aterthorpe.
       Resolved: That (a) City Council (i) is of the opinion that the proposed market at Wales Village
    is within the area of the City Council’s market rights being less than 6% miles from the City
    Council’s markets at Killamarsh and Crystal Peaks, W aterthorpe, and if established would be
    detrimental to trading at those markets and (ii) is determined to protect its market rights in this
    area; and
      (b)    the Head of Administration and Legal Department and the General Manger, Markets, be
    authorised to investigate the possibility of (i) the City Council operating the proposed market at
    Wales Village or (ii) the Parish Council operating the proposed market under licence from the
    City Council.
★    (4) SHEFFIELD PURCHASING ORGANISATION
    Selection o f Tenderers
      Resolved: That tenders for the provision of the following supplies be invited from the firms
    indicated in the report of the Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer now submitted—
       MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

  Frozen Foods                —12 firms
  Fish                        — 8 firms
  Fruit and Vegetables        — 9 firms
  Late Night Taxi Services
     With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its meeting held on 6th March, 1990 (page
  1398 of the printed minutes), the Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer submitted a report on the
  late-night taxi services provided by companies having contracts with the City Council for the
  homeward transport of employees at the City Hall and the Anvil Cinema.
     Resolved: That the Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer be requested—
    (a) to seek offers from Shefftax 85 Limited, Byran Coaches and the Transport Officer of the
  Central Transport Fleet for a guaranteed late-night transport service at specified prices; and
    (b) to include in the tender documents currently being prepared for taxi services for the new
  contract period commencing 1st August, 1990, a price schedule for late-night working.
★ Electricity Supplies
    The Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer submitted a report on the effect on electricity
  supplies to the Town Hall complex of changes in the electricity industry which took effect from
  1st April, 1990, under the provisions of the Electricity Act 1989. The report indicated that the
  Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer, after discussions with officers of the Council’s Energy
  Unit, had accepted offers of the Yorkshire Electricity Board for contracts for the supply of
  electricity which would result in a saving of some 13% in costs for the financial year 1990/91 as
  against the costs for 1989/90, if consumption remained the same and that there was provision in
  the contracts to enable the Council to seek and evaluate alternative sources of supply as provided
  for in the new legislation.
   Resolved: That (a) approval be given to the action taken by the Chief Purchasing and Supplies
  Officer, as outlined in the report now submitted;
     (b) the Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer be requested to continue his liaison with
  interested parties and to report back to this Panel as appropriate on any future developments;
  and
    (c) this report be referred for the information of the Technical Services Panel of the Policy
  Committee.
  Conference—The Purchasing Challenge
     The Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer submitted a report on the conference organised
  jointly by the Association of Metropolitan Authorities, the Institute of Purchasing and Supply,
  the Association of County Councils and the Association of District Councils held in London on
  13th March, 1990, entitled “The Purchasing Challenge” and on discussions which he had held
  with other officers of the Council for the holding, in conjunction with the relevant training and
  legal services personnel, of a workshop for relevant officers of the Council on EEC Directives
  and public procurement.
     Resolved: That (a) the report of the Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer on the proceedings
  at the conference held on 13th March, 1990, be noted; and
     (b) the Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer be authorised to co-ordinate preparations for
  and organise a suitable forum on the EEC Directive and public procurement for the benefit of
  relevant Council officers.
  Control o f Substances Hazardous to Health Regulations 1988
    The Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer submitted a report on the implications of the
  Control of Substances Hazardous to Health Regulations 1988, which came into effect on 1st
  October, 1989, with regard to the work of the Sheffield Purchasing Organisation which report
  indicated that the Organisation had a specific and important role to play in ensuring that the
  requirements of the Regulations were met.
    Resolved: That (a) the contents of the report now submitted be noted; and
     (b)   the Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer be requested to circulate the report to all
  relevant Council Departments.
       MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

  Monitoring o f the Revenue Budget
   The Panel received and noted a report of the Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer on the
  monitoring of the Revenue Budget.
  ( n o t e : An item relating to a report of the Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer on a Business
  Plan for his Trading Service was withdrawn from consideration.)

3 International and Anti-Apartheid Panel
r e s o l v e d : That the following minutes which incorporate the alteration now made at this meeting be

approved—
   Meeting of the International and Anti-Apartheid Panel held 6th April, 1990. Present—
  Councillors Pye (Chair), Mrs. Askham, Ms. Fiore, Godber and Lamb; Mr. P. Blomfield.
  ( 1 ) DONETSK, USSR
    The Principal International Officer submitted a report on a working visit to Donetsk, USSR,
  undertaken by the Chair (Councillor Pye), the Principal International Officer and Mr. Bob
  Walkden (Trade Consultant/Interpreter).
     Resolved: That (a) the contents of the report now submitted be noted;
     (b) approval be given to the outline programme of activities, contained in Appendix B to the
  report now submitted, to be undertaken under the Shefield-Donetsk Town-Twinning link in the
  financial year 1990/91; and
    (c) subject to confirmation when the final budget for the International Unit is determined,
  funding for the Sheffield-Donetsk Town-Twinning link for the financial year 1990/91 be
  maintained at the 1989/90 level of £7,000.
  (2) BOCHUM , WEST GERMANY
    The Principal International Officer submitted a report on the Sheffield-Bochum conference
  “Economic Regeneration in the New Europe” held in Sheffield from 21st-24th March, 1990, and
  on the official delegation from Bochum which visited Sheffield from 20th-25th March, 1990.
     Resolved: That (a) the contents of the report now submitted be noted; and
    (b) the Principal International Officer be authorised to continue to provide appropriate
  support and assistance to future projects under the Sheffield-Bochum Town-Twinning link,
  resulting from the Conference.
    (3) KIT W E, ZAMBIA
     The Principal International Officer submitted a report enclosing correspondence from the
  Sheffield-Kitwe Society requesting financial assistance towards the running costs of the Society
  and making recommendations for a delegation to Kitwe from Sheffield at some future date. The
  Principal International Officer reminded the Panel that at its meeting held on 9th December,
  1988 (page 1121 of the printed minutes), the former International Affairs Panel of the Municipal
  Enterprise and General Services Programme Committee had supported in principle a proposal of
  the Sheffield-Kitwe Society for a four-person delegation to Kitwe in 1989 but no action had been
  taken on the proposal.
    Resolved: That (a) a grant of £300 be made towards the running costs of the Sheffield-Kitwe
  society for the financial year 1990/91; and
    (b)    the recommendations of the Sheffield-Kitwe Society for a delegation to Kitwe be borne in
  mind when consideration is given to the programme of work to be undertaken in the financial
  year 1990/91 under the Sheffield-Kitwe twinning link.
  (4) CON FERENCES, ETC.
  Seminar on European Community Action to Promote Twinning
     Resolved: That confirmation be given to the action of the Chief Publicity Officer, in
  consultation with the Chair of this Panel, in authorising the Principal International Officer to
  attend a two-day Seminar on “European Community Action to Promote Twinning” to be held on
  a date to be arranged.
  International Conferences
    Resolved: That no action be taken on the investigations now submitted for the Council to send
  delegates to attend (i) an East-West Twinning Conference to be held in Rotterdam, Netherlands
       MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

   from 15th-19th May, 1990, and (ii) the VXIII Assembly of European Municipalities and Regions
   to be held in Lisbon, Portugal, from 3rd-6th October, 1990.
   (5) SOUTHERN AFRICA RESOURCES CENTRE
     The Panel received a request from the Southern Africa Resources Centre for a contribution to
   cover half the costs of works necessary to extend their existing premises in the basement of St.
   Matthews Church, Carver Street.
     Resolved: That a grant of £525 be made to the Southern Africa resources Centre as a
   contribution towards the costs of extending their premises.
   ( 6 ) TOWN TWINNING GRANT
     Resolved: That a grant of £400 be made towards the cost of a visit by eight members of the
   Sheffield University Students Union to Donetsk, USSR, from 2nd to 23rd September, 1990.

4 Direct Services Organisation Panel
r e s o l v e d : That the following minutes which incorporate the alteration now made at this meeting be

approved—
    Meeting of the Direct Services Organisation Panel held 11th April, 1990. Present—
   Councillors Mrs. Nelson (Chair), Butler, Ms. Fiore, Godber and Hattersley.
   ( 1 ) EQUIPM ENT FO R THE CLEANING O F BUILDINGS
    The Director of Cleansing Services submitted a report on tenders which had been invited
  through the Sheffield Purchasing Organisation for the supply of equipment for use in the cleaning
  of buildings. He stated that the tenders had been received on the 5th April, 1990, but a number of
  the tenderers had been requested to submit equipment for evaluation by his Department and that
  when such evaluation had been carried out he would report further on the tenders.
     The Panel approved of this course of action.
  (2) EXCLUSION OF THE PUBLIC AND PRESS
    Resolved: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting during the consideration of
  the next item of business which relates to the retirement of employees of the Cleansing Services
  Department on the grounds that, in view of the nature of the business to be transacted, if the
  public and press were present there would be a disclosure to them of exempt information as
  described in Paragraph 1 of Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act, 1972, as amended by
  the Local Government (Access to Information) Act, 1985, relating to particular employees.
  (3) CLEANSING SERVICES DEPARTM ENT
  Retirements
    The Director of Cleansing Services submitted a report on the recent retirements, due to ill
  health, of three former employees of his Department.




     At this stage in the proceedings, the meeting was re-opened to the public and press.
  Internal Audits
    The City Treasurer submitted a report on internal audits which had been carried out by his
  Department within the Cleansing Services Department in areas of operation relating to wages,
  vehicles and plant, and income.
     Resolved: That (a) the contents of the report now submitted be noted; and
    (b)    the Director of Cleansing Services be requested to report further on the matters raised in
  the report.

5 Institute of Local Government Studies—Seminar
r e s o l v e d : That the Chair of this Committee and Councillor Cromar (or their nominees) and two

officers to be nominated by the Head of Administration and Legal Department, be appointed as
       MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

delegates to attend a Seminar on the implications of the Taylor Report on Local Authority—
Football Club Relationships, to be held by the Institute of Local Government Studies in London on
Friday, 11th May, 1990.

6 Town Hall Extension—Basement Car Park
  The Director of Land and Planning submitted a report on a proposal for the reallocation of car
parking permits for staff, elected members and other users of the Council’s official car parks. The
report indicated that the proposed reallocation of permits arose from the imminent closure of
certain surface car parks required for redevelopment.
r e s o l v e d : That approval be given so far as this Committee is concerned to the proposal contained
in the report now submitted for the placing by the Director of Land and Planning of orders for the
replacement of car park locks, keys, passes and stickers in connection with the reallocation of car
parking permits, and the recharging to this Committee of so much of the cost of such replacements
as relates to the use of the Town Hall Extension Basement Car Park, estimated at £1,250.

7 Exclusion of the Public and the Press
r e s o l v e d : That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before discussion takes place on
the remaining items of business on the grounds that, in view of the nature of the business to be
transacted, if the public and press were present, there would be a disclosure to them of exempt
information as described in paragraph 1 of Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act, 1972, as
amended by the Local Government (Access to Information) Act, 1985, relating to particular
employees.

8 Sheffield Council for Racial Equality




9 Administration and Legal Department
Review o f the Law Library
      MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

10 Publicity Department
  The Chief Publicity Officer submitted a report on a proposal for payments to be made to the Lord
Mayor’s Mace Bearer and Attendant in recognition of excess hours worked by them during the
aftermath of the Hillsborough Disaster. The report indicated that normally, excess hours would
have been taken as leave at quieter times but that Mayoral duties had not permitted this course of
action.
reso lv ed : That in the exceptional circumstances described in the report now submitted, approval
be given to the proposed payments to the Lord Mayor’s Mace Bearer and Attendant set out in the
report for excess hours worked.
