                                                                                                                                                                         I
                                                                                                                                                                         I
                                                                                                                                                       mSiMSMsmmtstete

                                                                                                          si#s
                                                                                                                                                                                 :f?i
                                                                                                                            WSSISiM
                                                                                                                            isilsistS                                     j ,'
                                                                                       «liSlgt®§




WS^mmmi•ISfM#i                                                            jp iii
                                                                                                                                                                   |j|g|g||




^JIII^PRitll



M l!




r%fe'T»|;y«||S&>i*gs-£|;K;^ j
■jMMi|?iSfe^lil:S^fesii:   !
                           ?Ste3




               ft-                                          r^t*a<4 -g.
                                                                               fte
                                                                               gft#
                                                                                  fHtft£l
                                                                                        ;l
                                                                                         il
                                                                                            C»?SS?|'J:S
                                                                                          ^ Sllflfffji       9MM
                                                                                                                                                  fW®|S#ll|i
                                        a il       tM9R                        gj§j|
                                                                                                                                                ifif#i^tPl5^P


                                       liig f                                                                                           HtH®
                                                                                                                                        tl#i«

                                                :?4%tfff#
                                                « »                                                              §jSftl§t
                                                            ffPl^              f llllill
                                                                              BISIIISI?
                                   .
               ’ilt%S?
                     WI®%
               11PPIIS1
  Thank you for bringing your flowers or
          wreaths to Sheffield

   Your flowers or wreaths will be laid on the
       terraces at the end of the match.

 Later, they will be placed by volunteers at the
Memorial Stone, at the junction of Wadsley Lane
            and Middlewood Road.

            Once again, thank you.

            SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL
         FAMILY and COMMUNITY SERVICES
                 SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB pic
Telephone: 343122                    ^   „
Telegrams: WEDNESDAY, SHEFFIELD 6                  HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD S 6 1SW




                             2 9 ™ NOVEMBER 1989


            ADMIT BEARER TO ALL PARTS OF THE GROUND
         P O ST C A R D
■THE   ADDRESS   TO   BE   WRITTEN   ON   1 HIS   S IM
           City of Sheffield
Family and Community Services Dept.
  HILLSBOROUGH TASK TEAM
        Hillsborough Library
        Middlewood Road
        Sheffield 6
        Tel: 734666(7)
  Office Hours
  9 am - 5 pm Mon - Thurs
  9 am - 4.45 pm Friday
              FOR ANY HELP, SUPPORT OR ADVICE

     PLEASE CONTACT ONE OF THE FOLLOWING CENTRES



WIRRAL                         KNOWSLEY

Hillsborough Advice Centre     Hillsborough Support Team
Birkenhead Town Hall           The Connaughtons
Brandon Street Entrance        House No. 1
Birkenhead     L41 5EU         Tarbock Road
                               Huyton
051 647 2306                   Merseyside       L36 5XW

                               051 443 3549

LIVERPOOL

The Hillsborough Centre
1 Anfield Road                 SEFTON
Liverpool 4
                               Sefton Helpline
051 263 5366                   Marbenthe
                               14 Marine Terrace
                               Waterloo
                               Liverpool   L22 5PR
SHEFFIELD
                               051 928 1571
Hillsborough Task Team
Hillsborough Library
Middlewood Road
Sheffield       S6 4HD

0742 734666



               ANY OTHER AREA, PLEASE RING

                  HELPLINE - 051 225 3413
                             051 225 3414
     HUlstovoaAt*                  foo4t>ail         PilZlitA'

      M tfciW Prv |oc^( Keirole*.+s

£ '{ou a*t irwi+cct -fo a public mtl-hViq
   Oft WUdnuria^ 'Lmdt o£ Auqt<s-t a* 7pm
     m £ sk d ak Coyyiynuyu-Kj CC»>4vt. £skdak
     Close .
^ 'This »v»ee+'h<5 will b«- 3v> oppav4u*ii+^
      dAscms issues of ccrvter* «h> lotU
   vesicU*+s foilowim^ +ht clisas+ev.
% Rfcpm®**4a>Kvti (wm Social services
  ujiu bt &H8.hcUha 4 ha wic.s.’Knd„ *© m ill
  local councillors,       J
* PltdSi comt jUona . for fmr+htv-
      itr\f»»rma+\6K\ ,pUas* pkone. LM-na 3 om«S,
      P rin c ip a l Co(v>wwm'i4u W o rk tv ©ft TEH'883^
it   i*   *    *   *   *   *   .    *    *    •* *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *   *

C la iw s +o *Hu 0 i\ j3 s+«-v £u*»<i shotuci &«
ividdi bi| 51M JtU^                          gq . 'feu £kouidl w»»+<
\wl-Ux cAt+ailS af             mom*     cast-{o Mr. C.M. R«ddiiwfon
•1Yu*+ £u*>4 M&*aa«.r , Otfi- O.M, ttiUsbbvouAk
 OisA^+tv &ppta\ , P.O. So* Z2.0 , U vtvpoel |_fe^ ZfM-
 PKaSi        'f , ^ A*a»*plt , m«u Wirt out of
 p6tltt+ btcautt of 'pliAht calls (ic<
                Notes from 2nd August meeting with
                Leppings Lane Triangle resisdents"


Present were: Peter Duff - chair
                          I- PSW - Hillsborough Task Team
                                  - SW - Hillsborough Task Team
                _             - SW- Hillsborough Task Team
                        H - PCW - Div 2 F&CS
                               - Fielding Road
                          - Eskdale Road
              |    “ ] - Leppings Lane
              |          |- Bickerton Road
                            - Leppings Lane
                            - Eskdale Close
                             | - Fielding Road
                      -! Eskdale Road
              Another Resident
Apologies:    Councillors Jackson and Buckley

1.    Coun. Duff opened the meeting and welcomed everyone present.

2   . |---------- ( introducedthe council officers present and explained the
      two-fold purpose of the meeting.
        a) to make local people aware of the help available through the Task
           Team.
        b) to discuss issues of local concern and a possible residents assoc.

3#                ~~| gave a brief explanation of the Task Team role and encouraged
       any questions.

4.    The ensuing discussion covered collective concerns about the late date
      of the meeting, the fact that so few people had turned up and lack of
      councillors present.
      Main points of concern expressed were:-

         Issues had been raised with the club since 1966 to no avail, and
         this had made local people apathetic.

         Fear of large crowds - suggestion not to use Leppings Lane entrance
         at all and better crowd control needed in general.

         Urinating in gardens and passages - could the club provide portaloos
         at Penistone Road and Catch Bar Lane.

         Alcohol should be provided at the ground to avoid late arrival of
         fans from pubs further away.

         People should come before commercial intrests of the club.

5.     It was agreed to organise another meeting in late September and invite
       the club, police, health and safety people and possibly Football
       Supporters Association members to this meeting.

       It was also agreed that the officers and these reps, from the residents
       would meet to plan the September meeting in the near future.
 N otes from Coffee Evening with Leppings Lane Triangle Residents
-'at Hillsborough Library on 6.9.89
Present were?_____________
                               Leppings Lane
                               Bickerton Road
                              Shenstone Road
                              Fielding Road
                                   Eskdale Close
            ______________________ Fielding Road
                              Eskdale Road
                              Fielding Road

                                  Hillsborugn Task Team Social Worker
                                       1!       tt   tt    tl     It

                                  Principal Community Worker
                                  Family & Community Services Division 2


|                (opened the meeting by welcoming everyone and explaining
che background to the meeting. The council officers then introduced them­
selves.

The purpose of the meeting was:

            1. For local residents to meet each other and the Hillsboraugh
               Task Team in an informal way.

            2. To try and establish whether there were common problems
               and issues experienced by residents oi the Leppings Lane
               Triangle because of the fact they live so close to the
               football ground.

               To b e ^   to make plans for a public meeting in September/
            3. T
               October* to vmlch the   club,   polioe, health ahd saiety people
               etc., would be invited to acaress some d       the laentulea
               issues.


 A lively discussion followed but eventually a number ot points were agreed
 upon to be raised at the public meeting.


 These points were: ,
             1. Away fans should not be cnanelled through the narrow streets
                surrounding the ground, but should enter from Penistone Road
                and then round the outside of the ground and into the West
                Stand.
             2. Semi-Finals should no longer be held at Sheffield Wednesday
                ground.
             3. Both football clubs (Sheffield Wednesday and Sheffield
                United) move out of built up areas altogether and share
                a ground.

             A. When matches do     take place the barriers should be
                in place sooner, to prevent extra parking and fans walking
                through the side streets.
            5t Residents should be provided with stickers for their cars.,
               to enable free unhindered access in and out of their street/
               residents only parking areas in the side streets.
Notes from Coffee-Evening 6.9*89 cont.




                 6. Stewards might man barriers in the street earlier in the day
                     and then be manned by the Police
                 7. Rubbish - thought by residents to be a major problem and "a
                    number 0fsolutions were offered.

                         a) The club might sponsor large metal litter bins around
                            the outside of the ground and surrounding streets.
                            This may be extended to .sponsorship by pubs and shops.
                         b) The club should employ people to clear up immediately
                            after the game.
                         c) Extra road sweepers should be brought'in by the Council
                            after the match.
                 8.   Toilets - again a significant problem. Residents queried the
                      possibility of temporary toilets being brought in,although
                      it was noted that there are no public toilets available for
                      local residents anyway.
                 9.   Parking - some suggestions have been mentioned (points 4 & 5)
                      others were -
                         a) that more car parKing spaces are provided by the club,
                           e.g. by purchasing the piece of ground in the triangle
                           between Herries Rd. and Penistone Rd.
                        b) that fans are encouraged’to park on the outskirts, and then’
                           be bussed in. (As for Christmas shopping).
                        c) Supertrain- residents were concerned that tne combined
                           effect of the Supertram and extra people attending a
                           match would have serious consequences on the Leppings
                           Lane triangle.




                It was agreed that the Council Officers would extend invitations on
                behalf of the residents to the police, including the community police
                the club, local councillors,   and M.P., Health and Safety dept.
                Recreation dept, and Clive Betts/Howard Knight to attend the public
                meeting and to address residents concerns and suggestions. It was
                also agreed that the venue for the meeting should be Hillsborough
                School, Parkside Rd. This would be'booKed by council officers on
                benalf of residents.
                           [offered to help draw up a leaflet/poster advertising tne
                meeting. These leaflets/posters ana-Dien to be given to every resident
                of tne triangle and also placed in some local shops, post offices etc.


                The date and time of the public meeting to be end Sept/ beginning October.




                       8/9/89.
MINUTES OF PUBLIC MEETING HELD
TUESDAY,     10th OCTOBER,        1989 at 7.00   p.m.

IN E SK D A L E C O M M U N I T Y CENTRE


Present

          Councillor Helen Jackson              (Chair)
          Councillor G. Burrows
          Councillor G. Matthews
          David Blunkett, M.P.
          90 residents (approx)
          Chief Superintendent John Nesbitt (South Yorkshire Police)
          Superintendent D. Sleath (South Yorkshire Police)
          Graham Mackrell (Secretary, Sheffield Wednesday F.C.)
          Frances Woodhead (Solicitor, Sheffield City Council)

In attendance:

           Constable Morledge (Community Constable)
           Constable Tune       (Community Constable)
                       Team Leader, Hillsborough Task Team
          ________________, social worker, Hillsborough Task Team
          ■|                 [ social worker, Hillsborough Task Team
           Representative of Football Supporters Association

Apologies:           • None


Councillor Jackson opened the meeting by welcoming those in attendance.
She expressly thanked the people of Sheffield and those of the Hillsborough
area for the way they had responded on the 15th of April.

1.1       Councillor Jackson then introduced the Platform group and asked for
           updates on the start of the football season from the Police,
           Sheffield Wednesday F.C. and the Local Authority.

1.2       Superintendent Sleath explained that letters have gone to all local
           residents from the Police. These letters thank people for their
           assistance and explained the plans that have been put into effect
           by them following the publication of Lord Justice Taylor's
           Interim Report. The Police are still determining strategies for
           dealing with large numbers of fails without tickets. They have
           also seDarated home and away fans for the first few matches and so
           home fans have been diverted away from LepDings Lane. SuDerintendent
          Sleath reported to the meeting that notices had gone out to all
           Police officers, instructing them not to park in streets near to the
          ground. Alternative parking was made available on South Yorkshire
           Passenger Transport land nearby. Stewards had also been offered
           this facility.

1.3       Mr Mackrell then thanked the residents for their support during
          wnat was an especially difficult time for the club. He told the
          meeting that the Sheffield Wednesday F.C. was very conscious of
           their part in tne community. In relation to parking, Sheffield
          Wednesday F.C. were making available space at Middlewood Road for
          use by stewards. The terraces at Leppings Lane are unlikely to be
3

           Traders Association, Sheffield Wednesday F.C. and the Local
           Authority combine to provide more litter bins and street
           cleaning services.

2.5        Arrangements for the Match on,. 29th November

           Mr Mackrell acknowledged this would be an emotional match for
           everyone concerned. 4,000 tickets have been allocated to the
           Liverpool fans. There will be publicity encouraging people to be
           there as early as possible and explaining to them the plans for
           that day. This publicity would be done in conjunction with
           Liverpool F.C. , the Police and Sheffield Wednesday F.C.

3.         Any Other Business

3.1        Noise

           A resident from Vere Road complained about the level of noise of
           records and music coming from the gynmasium. Mr Mackrell agreed
           to have this matter investigated and will discuss this with his
           sports hall Manager. He was aware that there were also technical
           problems with the P.A. system. >

3.2        Councillors' Surgery

           Councillor George Matthews offered to re-start his councillor's
           surgery at Eskdale Community Centre as an ongoing way of
           addressing some of the community's concerns.

3.3        Future Meetings

           It was unanimously agreed that the meeting had been of great value
           and that similar meetings should be held in the future. Mr Mackrell
           offered the residents the use of the Riverside Suite at Sheffield
           Wednesday F.C. as the venue for their next meeting early in the
           New Year. Mr Mackrell, Councillor Jackson, and Superintendent
           Sleath all agreed to attend. Superintendent Sleath reported that
           he would like residents to contact him at any time if they have
           complaints about policing in the area.

Councillor Jackson closed the meeting at Q.00 p.m., thanked all those
present for attending and the Hillsborough Task Team for assisting residents
to arrange this meeting.




18.10.39
2

        re-opened this season and this matter is being actively discussed
        with the Police and other interested parties.

1.4     David Blunkett, M.P., and Frances Woodhead thencommentedthat they
         were mainly in attendance to listen to local people's views and
         comments.

Discussion-then centred around Agenda items.

2.1     Barriers/Access

        A variety of points were raised from the floor. The feeling of the
        meeting was that the barriers were wanted by residents and that they
        should be put in place earlier than at present. In response to
        this, Superintendent Sleath stated that the barriers would be in
        place from midday onwards. They would be policed by Special
        Constables from 12 until the regular police came on duty. The
        barriers would continue to be policed while the match was on and
        until the end of the game.

2.2    Portable Toilets

        There were a number of comments from the floor on the extent and
        nature of the problem which has led them to request more toilet
        facilities for spectators. Mr Mackrell stated that he would take
        this matter up with the Local Authority. It was agreed that the
        siting of such temporary porta-loos or permanent brick toilets
        would be a matter for further discussion and needed to be taken
        up with Health and Consumer Services. Councillor George Matthews
        suggested that the cost of'these facilities should be met by the
        Sheffield Wednesday F.C.

2.3    Street Access

        Residents highlighted various difficulties and problems experienced
        by them when gaining access to their homes once the barriers were
        in place. Various suggestions to remedy the matter were put
        forward, such as residents parking and/or stickers. The Police
        response was that these solutions may be inappropriate as
        enforcement of such measures could be a problem. It was agreed
        that Police and residents would monitor the situation further now
        that the barriers were to be in place earlier. Superintendent
        Sleath stated that any residents who had particular problems about
        access to their street or felt they had been dealt with in an
        unsympathetic way by Police officers, should take the officer's
        number and contact him at Hammerton Road Police Station. He would
        then ensure that the matter was investigated and dealt with.

2.4     Litter

        The feeling of the meeting was that litter was a great problem and
        that it should be the responsibility of Sheffield Wednesday F.C.
        and the Local Authority to deal with this matter. Mr Mackrell
        made the point that other local businesses, as well as the Sheffield
        Wednesday F.C. benefittedfrom the influx of supporters and that
        litter was often generated from items purchased in these snops or
        from take-awavs. The suggestion was then put forward that the Local
           PUBLIC    MEETI NG

           R IV E R S I D E SUITE

           TUESDAY,     23rd JANUARY,         IQO'O at 7.]5      p .m .


           Chairperson:         C o u n c i l l o r Helen   Jackson


          A_G_E     N D A


          Opening Remarks from Chairperson.
1.        Apologies.

2.        Minutes of previous meeting (to check that they
           are an accurate record).
3.        Matters arising from minutes of previous meeting:.
4.        Litter.
5.        Porta-Loos.
6.        Parking/Barriers/Street Access.
7.        Noise.
8.        Residents Group. Is there a needfor aresidents'
                 group to be formalJy set up? If so,
                 nominations for a committee to be requested
                 from meeting.

C).       Notification of Councillor's Surgery to be            held in
          Eskdale Community Centre.
10.       Any Other Business.




17.1.Q0
                                                                          i
22.12.80     REVIEW OF THE LOCAL RESIDENTS' GROUP
             PW, RMcS, AR

HISTORY

1st Public Meeting

Eskdale Community Centre, 2.8.89. Chairperson Peter Duff.     Poorly
attended, all notices not given out.

2nd Public Meeting

Eskdale Community Centre, 10.10.80. Very well attended 80+ people
approximately.   Local M.P., Councillors, Police, Sheffield Council and
Sheffield Wednesday F.C. present.

3rd Public Meeting

Proposed 23rd January, 1990 to be held at the Riverside Suite, Sheffield
Wednesday ground.

BACKGROUND

The organisation of the meetings and the involvement of local, known
community minded residents was prompted by F & CS Community work
Principal and the Hillsborough Task Team.

ISSUES

Detailed in the minutes of the meeting 10.10.89 (attached).

INVOLVEMENT OF THE LOCAL COMMUNITY

Five local community residents involved directly in undertaking tasks,
between ten and twelve residents at various times have come to meetings
to help formulate tasks and make decisions. The residents did not wish
to form themselves into a residents' association and their focus has been
on the setting up of the public meetings and pursuing the issues that
were raised at them.

Informally, much support has been given to the various participants in
helping them overcome difficulties that they experienced as a result of
being involved in the events of the 15th. Task Team members have no
undue worries regarding the longer term mental health of these residents
as a result of their experiences on the 15th. The group, in tackling the
issues raised at the public meetings, do lack confidence and see the
support of the Task Team as being essential in unlocking various doors
and gettings things done. A large amount of effort has gone into
supporting this group generally and as individuals. Attempts have been
made already and will continue to help the group identify its own
strengths, take on tasks itself and formulate a plan for its own
future.
2


CONCLUSION

The group has been given support by the Task Team and has known this
support would be limited by the "life" of the Task Team. The residents
have not yet completed the tasks that were taken on following the
meeting of the 10.10.89, and have not formulated a plan for their
future or discovered other sources of support. These three tasks remain
the specific ones required to either bring the group to a conslusion
or secure the group other support, with a longer plan for its future.
It must be accepted that as the effects of the Hillsborough disaster
recede the Task Team still has a role in attempting to bring the
activities of this group to a satisfactory conclusion.




22.12.89
     iiMUE FOR THE NEXT LOCAL RESIDENTS'                                 C O U N C I L L O R ’S SURGERY

                      MEETING IS:-

                                                                         Councillor George Matthews v;
        Riverside Suite, 3.V/.F.C.
                                                                         nolc a surgery
                             OM
      Tuesday, 22rc January, lno0                                        Tne third Wednescay eacn non

                                                                         From 7.00 - 3.00 o.n.


                                                                         in Eskcale Community Centre
At the last neetins in October,
zhese ooints were discussed:-
                                                                     *
                                                                         Tne first surgery wil] be
                                                                         ;’.elc on
          B A R RI E P.s . ::o : s        e   .

      * ** ro n ^ i   ^ooo   s r*‘    '    « ^ y p n 'o n *■ ~ “


             '*•">•'70                    (
                                          z
                                     “nr *■ YC'-I**' ’.‘'•"■'*.*5’
~e    'nc/.*T..
B R I E F I N G O F S T A F F W H O W I L L BE I N V O L V E D IN P R O V I D I N G S U P P O R T
S E R V I C E S F O R P E O P L E WHO A R E I N V O L V E D IN T H E S H E F F I E L D W E D N E S D A Y
V LIVERPOOL FOOTBALL MATCH

Introduction

Thank you for volunteering your services for the evening and coming to this
briefing meeting. This hand-out is intended to serve as a general guide
for the arrangements and work that may take place on the 29th.

Background

A large crowd is expected to attend the game and there will be a substantial
number of S.Y'. Police, ground staff and stewards employed. There will also
be ambulance staff. A crowd of approximately 25,000 is expected. Of these,
4,000 will be Liverpool supporters. This is the number of tickets that have
been issued to Liverpool. Contingency plans exist should more than th^s
number arrive at the ground. Sheffield Wednesday supporters will enter{ the
ground from the Penistone Road turnstiles. Liverpool fans will be brought
down Leppings Lane, either on foot or in coaches;    these will deposit the
fans in the road-space opposite the Leppings Lane gates. The coaches will
then drive off to park on Halifax R o a d . , At the end of the match, the
Liverpool fans will be escorted back to the waiting coaches.

Within     the G r o u n d

Sheffield Wednesday fans will occupy the Kop, South and North Stands.
Liverpool fans will occupy the West Stand, above the Leppings Lane terraces.
This seated area is reached by stairs at either end of the West Stand - see
plan of the ground.

T asks

For many reasons, it is difficult to predict with real certainty the amount
of work that will need to be done or give real definition to the tasks that
social workers might be required to perform. However, the evocative and
emotional nature of the event, because of the various reminders, will cause
some people distress which they may not be able to manage unassisted. Staff
involved will have to make a judgement about when it is appropriate to
intervene when they themselves are observing a group or individual. A request
for assistance may come from other sources; the Police or a steward may have
seen or have had contact with someone who needs help. Situations such as
these will be passed to the social workers who are available.

Flowers      and W r e a t h s

The p r e s e n t S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e for the g r o u n d d oe s not c o v e r
the Leppings Lane terraces. People who wish to lay flowers on the terrace
on the evening will not be allowed to do so. Arrangements are being made
for trestle tables to be laid at the rear of the West Stand on which flowers
can be laid. These flowers will be placed on the terrace at the end of the
match and later taken to the memorial at the junction of Wadsley Lane and
Middlewood Road. A small hand-out has been prepared, to be given to anyone
who brings flowers, explaining what will happen to any flowers that are left.
Social workers will be situated at the trestle tables and will need to
explain to supporters what the situation is and assist anyone who is
seriously distressed. It is anticipated that in this role and situation
social workers may be most needed.
2

Further Referral
When social workers have contact with a distressed supporter it may be
appropriate to ask if the person would give their name and address so
they can be offered help in the area in which they live.

Eskdale Community          C en tr e

Eskdale Community Centre is available as a base for workers who are being
held in reserve and as a place where distressed people can be taken if they
So noJ wish to remain in the ground or leave with friends. If spectators
do leave the ground, they will need to have retained their tickets in order
to be able to return. The transfer of distressed spectators to Eskdale
nerhaps should only be considered as a last resort as it may detach P ^ P 1®
from the group ?hej came to the ground with. Refreshments will be available
at the Centre.

Access to the Centre will be through a barrier on Leppings Lane which will
be opened by a Police Officer who has been briefed to allow escorted fans
through.

Co-ordination

Named officers from the Police and F & CS will act as co-ordinators of the
evening's services. The Police and ground staff will be briefed as to the
role of social workers. The Police do not see it as part of their role
comfort anyone seriously distressed and will therefore request assistance
should this occur.

    Security   of S taff

    Thi«? area has been given consideration and it is not part of our role to
    be involved in crowd control or be at risk should such a situation be
    identified. As the evening progresses, the reaction of the crowd wil
    monitored and if it appears that staff are at risk then services will have
    to be withdrawn.




    21.11.89
                                                                                        i




     \\>      Qri   •'

                                                  v > ^
                                            ©




                                                                                                   School

                                                                                 MX
                                                                                            ?Xn r i t h
                    .PARK5f
     '«®S




                         HltiLSBOItpjUGfi
>o Sq7^   a   .

                     'tstigftough
                             u a )/




                                                                                 yJ
                                                                  #//
                                                                  A      >\
                                                                          \\     IIIi
                                                      _   —   — — 11    houndV
                                                ^ ^   t h e s 3^'lp^7^/77j

                     'unn/n




                         £
Appendix 1:

Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.
Hillsborough Ground.
                position of   Vo l u n t e e r s   and social workers within the ground




                         INSIDE - Co-ordinator -                           T«Jk .

       Position on
       ground plan

            ©            Flowers




            ©            Gate *B'




            ©            L West Stand



            ©            R West Stand



            ©            First Aid Room


                         South Stand




                                                             i
                                                                                                  @ uaJ*
    VVJL.                                          V   tq          -K )




    lop^v   Jaa^v
                                                                                          WVA-.
(
    POSITION OF VOLUNTEERS AND SOCIAL WORKERS OUTSIDE THE GROUND


              OUTSIDE - Co-ordinator -


Position on
ground plan


©             Memorial Stone




©             Gates




©             Leppings Lane



              Helpline               Volunteers to be decided (2)
              Sheffield 734655

              Eskdale
              Community Centre
Appendix 1:

Sheffield W ednesday Football Club.
Hillsborough Ground.
          POSITION OF VOLUNTEERS AND SOCIAL WORKERS WITHIN THE GROUND


                  INSIDE - Co-ordinator -

Position on
ground plan

   (1)            Flowers




   (2 )           Gate 'B1




   (^)
    3             L West Stand


   (4 )           R West Stand


   (5^)           First Aid Room


   (6)            South Stand
    POSITION OF VOLUNTEERS AND SOCIAL WORKERS OUTSIDE THE GROUND


              OUTSIDE - Co-ordinator -


Position on
ground plan


              Memorial Stone




©             Gates



              Leppings Lane



              Helpline               Volunteers to be decided (2)
              Sheffield 734666

              Eskdale
              Community Centre
Appendix 1:

Sheffield YVednesdav Football Club.
Hillsborough Ground.
     HILLSBOROUGH TASK TEAM - EXTRA INFORMATION FOR VOLUNTEERS

1.   Food and R e f r e s h m e n t - will be available on your arrival at the Library
     and during the evening at Eskdale Community centre. At the end of the evening,
     the Library will be open for volunteers who wish to discuss the work they
     undertook.

2.   Admission Passes -Retainyour admission    passes to the ground (if you will
      be working within— theground) this willenable you  toleave andre-enter
      the ground if required.

3.   Press Coverage

     (i)      The press will not be allowed access to the Community Centre.

     (ii)     The Task Team have decided not to give press interviews during the
              evening.                *
                                                              A
     (iii)    Would all volunteers please refrain from giving interviews during
              the evening.

4.   Communication
                If
     If you are/with someone on. m a group, agree who will act, if it is necessary,
     to pass information to one of the Co-ordinators. Ensure that you inform a
     co-ordinator of any incident that you are concerned about.

5.   Co-ordinators

     Inside the Ground                    Paul Walton and Dan Perks
     (Rear of West Stand)

     Outside the Ground                   Russell McSweeney and John Pilling
     (Eskdale)

     Telephone numbers

     Sheffield Helpline                   734666
              Mobile Telephones           0860 434799             Paul
                                          0860 845225             Russc-ll
                                          0860 815148             Angela

     Please return Armbands at the end of the evening to the Library or a member
     of the Task Team.

     Once again, thank you for your assistance.


     Reminder about evaluation meeting for Sheffield social workers and volunteers
     on either Monday 5th or* Tuesday 6th at 2.00 p.m., Hillsborough Library.

     HTT.PW.MH
     29.11.89
HILLSBOROUGH TASK TEAM - EXTRA INFORMATION FOR VOLUNTEERS

Food and R e f r e s h m e n t - will be available on your arrival at the Library
and during the evening at Eskdale Community centre. At the end of the evening,
fche Library will be open for volunteers who wish to discuss the work they
undertook.

Admission Passes - Retain your admission passes to the ground (if you will
be working within- the ground) this will enable you to leave and re-enter
the ground if required.

Press Coverage

(i)     The press will not be allowed access to the Community Centre.

(ii)    The Task Team have decided not to give press interviews during the
         evening.
                                                        A
(iii)   Would all volunteers please refrain from giving Interviews during
         the evening.

Communication

If you are/with someone o r . in a group, agree who will act, if it is necessary,
to pass information to one of the Co-ordinators. Ensure that you inform a
co-ordinator of any incident that you are concerned about.

Co-ordinators

Inside the Ground                                    and
(Rear of West Stand)

Outside the Ground                                         and
(Eskdale)

Telephone numbers

Sheffield Helpline                    734666
         Mobile Telephones            0860 434799
                                       0860 845225
                                       0860 815148

Please return Armbands at the end of the evening to the Library or a member
of the Task Team.

Once again, thank you for your assistance.

Reminder about evaluation meeting for Sheffield social workers and volunteers
on either Monday 5th or Tuesday 6th at 2.00 p.m., Hillsborough Library.
     HILLSBOROUGH TASK TEAM - EXTRA INFORMATION FOR VOLUNTEERS

1.   Food and R e f r e s h m e n t - will be available on your arrival at the Library
     and during the evening at Eskdale Community centre. At the end of the evening,
     fche Library-will be open for volunteers who wish to discuss the work they
     undertook.

2.   Admission Passes - Retain your admission passes to the ground (if you will
      be working withiriTthe ground) this will enable you to leave and re-enter
      the ground if required.

3.   Press Coverage

     (i)        The press will not be allowed access to the Community Centre.

     (ii)       The Task Team have decided not to give press interviews during the
                 evening.               *

     (iii)      Would all volunteers please refrain from giving interviews during
                 the evening.

4.   Communication
                  i
                  r
                  '
     If you are^-Vith someone o r . in a group, agree who will act, if it is necessary,
     to pass information to one of the Co-ordinators. Ensure that you inform a
     co-ordinator of any incident that you are concerned about.

5.   Co-ordinators

     Inside the Ground                                    and
     (Rear of West Stand)

     Outside the Ground                                         and
     (Eskdale)

6.   Telephone numbers

     Sheffield Helpline                     734666
              Mobile Telephones             0860 434799
                                            0860 845225
                                            0860 815148

7.   Please return Armbands at the end of the evening to the Library or a member
     of the Task Team.

     Once again, thank you for your assistance.


     Reminder about evaluation meeting for Sheffield social workers and volunteers
     on either Monday 5th or* Tuesday 6th at 2.00 p.m., Hillsborough Library.


     29.11.89
