                HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAM M E COMMITTEE                                    197

$ Health and Consumer Services Performance Review 1988/89
  The D irector of H ealth and Consumer Services submitted a report on the level of performance
achieved by the B ereavem ent and Support Services and Public H ealth Divisions and Consumer
Services and South Yorkshire Trading Standards Units of his D epartm ent against service targets
which were agreed by this Committee on 20th September, 1988 (page 535 of the printed minutes).

          : That the D irector of H ealth and Consumer Services be requested to prepare a report for
re s o lv e d
a future meeting of this Committee on the rabies contingency plan on the lines now discussed.

9 Delegation of Powers to Institute Legal Proceedings
   The D irector of H ealth and Consumer Services and the Acting H ead of Administration and Legal
D epartm ent submitted a joint report on a proposal to seek a delegation of authority to enable the
D irector of H ealth and Consumer Services, the Assistant D irector, (Consum er Services) and the
Assistant D irector (Public Health) to authorise the institution of legal proceedings on behalf of the
Council.

r e s o l v e d : That (a) pursuant to Section 101 of the Local Governm ent Act, 1972 and all other
enabling provisions (i) the decision to institute legal proceedings under the Enactm ent (including
any statutory instruments made thereunder) specified in Schedule I of the report now submitted be
discharged by the Assistant D irector (Consumer Services) or in his absence, by the Principal Officer
(Consum er Services) and (ii) the decision to institute legal proceedings under the Enactment
(including any statutory instruments made thereunder) specified in Schedule 2 of the report now
submitted be discharged by the D irector of Health and Consumer Services and the Assistant
D irector (Public H ealth Division); and

  (b)    the D irector of Health and Consumer Services be requested to include with his quarterly
m onitoring report to this Com mittee, trends in prosecutions carried out by his Departm ent.

10 W orking Party on the Review and Development of the Council’s Organisation and Management
(Policy)
  The D irectors of H ealth and Consumer Services and Recreation and Amenities submitted a joint
report, which was also to be considered by the Working Party on the Review and Developm ent of
the Council’s Organisation and M anagement (Policy) and the Leisure Services Programme
Com mittee, on a proposal to make perm anent the present tem porary arrangements for the
m anagem ent of the City’s Cemeteries and Crematoria.
           : That, so far as this Committee is concerned and subject to the concurrence of the Leisure
re s o lv e d
Services Programme Committee, approval be given to the proposals now reported to permanently
allocate (a) the “ Client” responsibility for managing the Cemeteries and Crem atoria Service to the
Health and Consumer Services D epartm ent, (b) the employees engaged on the grounds
maintenance and grave digging functions in the capacity of “C ontractor” to remain the
responsibility of the Recreation D epartm ent and (c) the function of “ A gent” , so far as grounds
maintenance and grave digging are concerned, to be the responsibility of the Recreation
D epartm ent pending a formal decision by the City Council and the conclusion of a service
agreem ent between Health and Consumer Services and Recreation Departm ents and that such
decision be conveyed to the W orking Party on the Review and Developm ent of the Council’s
Organisation and M anagem ent (Policy).

11 Purchase of Specialist Equipm ent—South Yorkshire Trading Standards Unit
          : That the Project R eport Form CPS, now submitted by the D irector of Health and
re s o lv e d
Consumer Services and indicating a spending of £30,000 in 1989/90, in respect of the upgrading and
replacement of testing equipment at the South Yorkshire Trading Standards U nit, be approved for
submission to the Finance Sub-Committee of the Policy C om m ittee.

12 W ater Bill 1988
Charges, Metering and Disconnection Issues
  The D irector of Social Services submitted a report concerning the possible consequences of the
G overnm ent’s proposals to privatise the w ater services industry and in particular the likely effect for
low income consumers with regard to water affordability, possible under-consumption and the
consequent threats to public health.
198             HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

r e s o l v e d : That (a) the Directors of H ealth and Consumer Services and Social Services be
requested to jointly review and m onitor arrangements for assisting people whose w ater supply is
disconnected for debt, or who are in danger of having their supply disconnected, with a view to
safeguarding (i) public health and the personal health and welfare of the people affected and (ii)
persuading the W ater Companies to set up affordable repaym ent arrangements for consumers who
get into debt; and

  (b)    the D irector of Health and Consumer Services be requested to submit a report to a future
meeting of this Committee on the pilot water metering trials being carried out in various areas of the
country.

13 Siting of Environmental Monitoring Equipment on Private Land
          : That, in the circumstances outlined in the report of the D irector of H ealth and
re s o lv e d
Consumer Services now submitted, (a) the Acting H ead of Adm inistration and Legal D epartm ent
be requested to prepare a suitable agreem ent setting out the various liabilities and responsibilities
relating to the siting of environmental monitoring equipment on private land; and (b) authority be
delegated to the D irector of Health and Consumer Services to sign such agreem ent on behalf of the
City Council.

14 Exclusion of the Public and Press
          : That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before discussion takes place on
re s o lv e d
the remaining items of business on the grounds that, if the public and press were present, there
would be a disclosure to them of exempt information described in paragraph 7 of Schedule 12A to
the Local Governm ent Act, 1972, as amended by the Local Governm ent (Access to Information)
Act, 1985, relating to the financial or business affairs of other persons.

15 Environmental Services U nit—Pest Control—Standby Arrangements
         : That, in the circumstances outlined in the report now submitted by the D irector of
re s o lv e d
H ealth and Consumer Services (a) retrospective approval be given to the standby arrangements
specified in Part 3.2 of such report for the period prior to the renewal of the Pest Control Contract
now specified; and (b) the D irector of H ealth and Consumer Services be requested to review the
terms of the standby arrangements in preparation for the renewal of the pest control contract now
reported.

16 Environmental Health Adviser to Trent Regional Health Authority
         : That approval be given to the payment of an honorarium as set out in the report of the
re s o lv e d
Director of Health and Consumer Services now submitted, to the Trent Regional H ealth Authority
Secondee in recognition of the higher level of duties undertaken by him during the period of his
secondment.

17 Site Licence to use Land as a Camping Site for Tents
  The Director of H ealth and Consumer Services submitted a report on an application which had
been received for a licence to use land within the City boundary as a camping site.
          : That a site licence for land to be used as a camping site for tents be issued to the
re s o lv e d
applicant now nam ed, subject to the conditions outlined in the appendix to the report now
submitted and incorporating the amendment to the Fire Notice on the lines now discussed.

18 Hillsborough Disaster
   The D irector of H ealth and Consumer Services submitted a report on the action taken by
employees of the B ereavem ent and Support Services and Public H ealth Divisions of his D epartm ent
in response to the Hillsborough Disaster.
r e s o l v e d : That (a) the deepest gratitude and appreciation of the City Council be conveyed to those
employees of the Bereavem ent and Support Services Division who worked for long hours in the
Reception and Public Mortuary; at the Medico Legal Centre following the Hillsborough Disaster;

  (b)    the Officers involved in the Public H ealth Division’s response to the Hillsborough Disaster be
thanked by the City Council for their willingness to assist and for the high standard of
professionalism dem onstrated under distressing and difficult conditions; and
          HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAM M E COMMITTEE                                199

   (c)   the need for additional resources to the cash limited activity budget of the Medico Legal
C entre, H.M . C oroner and the Public H ealth Division now reported be noted and referred for
consideration by the Finance Sub-Committee of the Policy Committee.
200                         EDUCATION PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

                                     Meeting held 21st June, 1989

P resen t— Councillors Jones (Chair), Mrs. Barton, R. Barton, Chadwick, Crowder, Duff, Mrs.
Fleming, Gow, Griffiths, Hussain, Mrs. Knight, Lamb, Mrs. P. Midgley, Mrs. M ulhearn, Mrs.
Nicholson, Owen, Mrs. Shepherd, Mrs. E. Smith, Thompson, Walayat, W alker, Watson and
W oodcock; Mr. P. Abell, Mr. J. R. Fisher, Mr. A. H. Jennings, Mrs. A. R. Logan, Ms. M.
M cDonald, Mr. V. M. M ercer, Mrs. M. Neill, Mr. S. G. Walker and Mrs. A. Watson.

1 Minutes
  It was reported that the minutes of the meetings of the Education Programme Committee held on
17th, 18th and 24th May, 1989, were confirmed by the City Council at its meeting held on 7th June,
1989, with the exception of item 8(12) of the minutes of the meeting of 18th May, 1989, relating to
an ex-gratia payment.

2 Representation
r e s o l v e d : That (a) Councillor Mrs. H. Jackson be appointed to serve as a m em ber of the Post-16
Sub-Committee;
  (b) Councillor Crom ar be appointed to serve as (i) a m em ber of the D epartm ental Joint
Consultative Committee for Staff and (ii) the City Council’s representative on the Managing
Council of the Sheffield and District Afro-Caribbean Community Association;
  (c) Mr. J. Janiszewki be appointed to serve on the Governing Body of Brunswick N.F. and M.
School in place of Mr. Morrell;
  (d) Councillor Mrs. P. Midgley be appointed to serve as a m em ber of the School G overnors’
W orking Party; and
  (e) Councillor Mrs. Fleming be appointed to serve as a m em ber of the Schools Sub-Committee.

3. Longley N.F. and M. School—Selection of Tenderers
r e s o l v e d : That, as recom m ended in the report now submitted by the D irector of Design and
Building Services (a) tenders in respect of the erection of a proposed kitchen and dining room at
Longley N.F. and M. School be invited from the following contractors —
Apple Contractors (Northern) Ltd.                  Sheffield Works D epartm ent
J. Lee & Sons (Builders)                           Watfords of Wombwell Limited
E. Manley & Co. Ltd.
  and (b) authority be given for the tender documents to be issued to the Contractors now
m entioned, in advance of the confirmation of these minutes by the City Council, subject to the
outcome of any further enquiries which may be necessary by the Chief Safety Adviser as respects
Safety Policies and detailed Safe Working Systems for the project.

4 Council of Local Education Authorities—Annual Conference
r e s o l v e d : That the following motions be approved for submission and consideration at the Annual
Conference of the Council of Local Education Authorities to be held at the University College of
Swansea from 19th-21st July, 1989.
Teachers
  This Conference (a) notes that as a result of Governm ent Policy towards teachers, many parts of
the Country are now facing a chronic shortage of teachers in general and of specialist teachers in
areas such as sciences and foreign languages in particular;
  (b) notes the licensed teachers’ scheme but has no confidence on the ability of th at scheme to
solve the underlying problem or to provide the right quality of teaching in the classroom; and
   (c) calls upon the Governm ent to take urgent action to restore teacher morale both by
re-establishing a worthwhile career structure based upon equitable salary levels and by being seen
and heard to appreciate the valuable contribution and commitment teachers are making to society.
Student Loans
  This Conference condemns proposals to introduce student loans which far from increasing
take-up of higher education will ensure we continue to have one of the very worst staying-on ratios
of any of our industrial competitors.
