3



                 S H E F F I E L D    CITY       C O U N C I L


                    MEETING OF THE GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL
            (MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME)

                            held 2nd October, 1989

          PRESENT:   Councillors Moscrop (Deputy Chair), Ms. Fiore, Hussain,
                     Lamb, Mrs. Mulheam, Mrs. Nelson, Mrs. E. Smith, Mrs.
                     Walton and White.



    (1)   FILM CERTIFICATION
          RESOLVED: That the requests now reported of the Senior Film Officer
          for permission to exhibit the following films under the conditions
          relating to Category "12" be granted:-

          Film                              Present Category

          "Rebel Without A Cause"                "PG"
          "Stand and Deliver"                    "15"
          "Young Frankenstein''                  "15"

    (2)   TRACK BETTING LICENCE
                    The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
          submitted a report on an application for a track betting licence
          submitted by Mr. Graham Mackrell on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday
          Football Club pic, in respect of the Hillsborough Stadium. Mr.
          Mackrell attended the meeting with his Solicitor to support the
          application. The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
          reported that he had received no objections to the application.
          RESOLVED: That the application now sutmitted be granted.

    (3)   SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
                    The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
          submitted a report on a number of issues relating to the safety of
          sports grounds which required members' attention. The report
          enclosed minutes of the meetings of the Safety of Sports Grounds
          Advisory Group held on 24th August and 14th September, 1989 and a
          letter from the Engineering Consultants for the Sheffield United
          Football Club Limited indicating that barriers on the Spion Kop and
          Bramall Lane terraces at the Bramall Lane Sports Ground had now been
          tested and proved to be satisfactory. The Acting Head of
          Administration and Legal Department also reported verbally on a
          proposal of Sheffield United Football Club Limited to permit
          Sheffield Eagles Rugby Club to hold matches at Bramall Lane Sports
          Ground, stating that the Football Club had given an undertaking that
          no alcohol would be on sale in the Ground when it was open for rugby
          matches. He added that there was also a possibility of rugby being
          proposed at the Hillsborough Sports Ground although the existing
          safety certificates for the ground did not provide for the holding
          of rugby matches.
          RESOLVED: That (a) the contents of the report now sutmitted be
          noted;
                    (b) no objection be raised for the holding of rugby
          matches at the Bramall Lane Sports Ground;
                    (c) the question of the possible use of the Hillsborough
          Sports Ground for rugby football matches be referred for
          consideration by the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group;
Meeting of the General Purposes Panel (Municipal            Page 2
Enterprise and General Services Programme) 2.10.89


          (d) if necessary, the safety certificate issued in respect
of the Hillsborough Sports Ground be amended to permit the playing
of rugby; and
          (e) the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
be requested to make arrangements for the Panel to visit and inspect
the Don Valley Athletics Stadium, now under construction, on
Thursday, 26th October, 1989, at 10.30 a.m.

AMUSEMENTS WITH PRIZES
          The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
reported verbally on an application for the grant of permits for
amusements with prizes under the Lotteries and Amusements Act 1976
and the Gaming Act 1968, in respect of premises at the Old Palace
Cinema, Manchester Road, Stocksbridge.
RESOLVED: That the applications now submitted be granted.

THEATRE LICENSING
           The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
submitted a report on an application for the grant of a provisional
theatre licence in respect of the Lyceum Development, Tudor Way,
Sheffield.
RESOLVED: That (a) approval in principle be given to the proposed
granting of a theatre licence in respect of the Lyceum Development,
Tudor Way, on the satisfactory completion of the building works; and
           (b) should a theatre licence be granted, it is not the
Council's intention to impose a condition precluding the sale of
intoxicants, subject to the Council's approval of the areas where
intoxicating liquor may be sold and/or consumed in the premises.

EXCLUSION OF THE PUBLIC AND PRESS
RESOLVED: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting
during the consideration of the retaining items of business on the
grounds that, in view of the nature of the business to be
transacted, if the public and press were present, there would be a
disclosure to them of exempt information as described in paragraphs
7 and 12 of Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act 1972, as
amended by the Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985,
relating to the financial or business affairs of other persons and
legal matters and advice.

HACKNEY CARRIAGE AND PRIVATE HIRE LICENSING
Meeting of the General Purposes Panel (Municipal            Page 3
Enterprise and General Services Programme) 2.10.89



Application for Permission to Install Television Set




                                                       JL
