          ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                                     219

    Palais be excluded from the meeting before further discussion takes place on the grounds that, in
    view of the nature of the business to be transacted, if the public and press were present there
    would be a disclosure to them of exempt information described in paragraphs 12 and 13 of the
    Local Government Act 1972, as amended by the Local Government (Access to Information) Act
    1985, relating to (A) legal matters and advice and (B) proposed actions under any enactment by
    the Authority.
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration reported orally giving legal advice on various
    aspects of the application relative to The Palais, London Road.
      At this point in the proceedings the meeting was re-opened to the public and press.
      Resolved: That the application to vary the opening hours of The Palais, London Road, be
    granted so as to permit opening until 3.00 a.m. on Friday night/Saturday morning and Saturday
    night/Sunday morning for a trial period to expire at the same date as the existing Public
    Entertainments Licence, subject to there being no admission to members of the public after 1.00
    a.m. on those occasions to which the variation applies and if the variation is not used on a regular
    basis, to the South Yorkshire Police being informed of those occasions when it is intended to use
    the variation.
    Rebels Night Club, Dixon Lane
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on an application in respect
    of Rebels, Dixon Lane, to vary the Public Entertainments Licence in respect of the premises and
    extend the licensed hours from 2.00 a.m. to 4.00 a.m. on Saturday night/Sunday morning each
    week.
      The Sub-Committee heard a submission from a representative of the South Yorkshire Police
    who expressed concerns about the potential for disorder resulting from (a) the likelihood of
    increased consumption of intoxicants, (b) the possible unavailability of public transport and (c)
    the pressure on Police resources should the Public Entertainments Licence be extended.
    However, he stated that if it was decided to grant a variation to the licence, then the Police
    Authority would prefer that all extensions be concluded at the same time. The applicant
    addressed the Sub-Committee and stated that Rebels was a specialist “rock music” club and there
    would be no admissions to the premises after 1.00 a.m..
       Resolved: That the public and press, the applicant, the Officer of the South Yorkshire Police
    and Officers of the City Council involved in the application relating to Rebels, Dixon Lane, be
    excluded from the meeting before further discussion takes place on the grounds that, in view of
    the nature of the business to be transacted', if the public and press were present there would be a
    disclosure to them of exempt information described in paragraphs 12 and 13 of the Local
    Government Act 1972, as amended by the Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985
    relating to (i) legal matters and advice and (ii) proposed actions under any enactment by the
    Authority.
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration reported orally giving legal advice on various
    aspects of the application relative to Rebels, Dixon Lane.
      At this point in the proceedings the meeting was re-opened to the public and press.
       Resolved: That the application to vary the opening hours of Rebels, Dixon Lane, be granted so
    as to permit opening until 3.00 a.m. on Saturday night/Sunday morning for a trial period to expire
    at the same date as the existing Public Entertainments Licence, subject to there being no
    admission to members of the public after 1.00 a.m. on those occasions to which the variation
    applies and if the variation is not used on a regular basis, to the South Yorkshire Police being
    informed of those occasions when it is intended to use the variation.


     Meeting of the Licensing Sub-Committee held 18th May, 1993. Present— Councillors Mrs.
    Midgley (Chair), D. Jones, Mrs. E. Smith and Webster.
★    ( 1 ) APPLICATION FOR AN OCCASIONAL OUTDOOR PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT LICENCE
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report containing details of an
    application he had received from Sheffield For Health Limited for the grant of an Occasional
    (Outdoor) Public Entertainment Licence for a pop concert proposed to be held at the Don Valley
    Stadium on Sunday, 6th June, 1993 between the hours of 1.00 p.m. to 10.30 p.m.
220       ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

      Resolved: That (a) delegated authority be given to the City Solicitor and Head of
    Administration to grant an Occasional (Outdoor) Public Entertainment Licence, in respect of a
    pop concert at the Don Valley Stadium on Sunday, 6th June, 1993 subject to (i) such terms and
    conditions as he may consider necessary and reasonable, (ii) the satisfaction of the relevant
    inspecting authorities and (iii) a time restriction of 1.00 p.m. to 10.30 p.m. which may be altered
    by the Police Ground Commander for reasons of public safety;
      (b) approval be given for the variation from the Green Guide Standard so as to allow 43,000
    persons through the turnstiles at the Stadium;
      (c) the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested to report back to this
    Sub-Committee details of the outcome of holding this event;
       (d) the thanks of this Sub-Committee be conveyed to the officers involved in the processing of
    this application; and
      (e) this Sub-Committee welcomes the use of the Don Valley Stadium as a venue for this pop
    concert and future pop concerts.
★    (2) SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club—Spion Kop—Redevelopment
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action he had taken, in
    consultation with the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group, in approving a proposal
    submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to
    redevelop the Spion Kop standing terrace at the Hillsborough Stadium into a seated stand.
      Resolved: That (a) confirmation be given to the action of the City Solicitor and Head of
    Administration in approving the proposal now reported and detailed in plan numbers 13484/5B,
    7C, 9A , 11A, 12D, 13A, 14C, 15B, 16B, 17A, 18A, 19A, 20D, 21A, 22,23C, 24A, 25A, 28A, 29,
    30, 31A, 32A, 33A, 34A, 35A, 36B, 37C, 38C, 39A, 40A, 41 and 43 submitted by Messrs.
    Eastwood and Partners on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, to redevelop the Spion
    Kop standing terrace at the Hillsborough Stadium into a seated stand;
      (b) this Sub-Committee (i) acknowledges the move to seat the Spion Kop for public safety
    reasons and (ii) notes the feelings of those people who see the move to all-seater stadia as a sad
    end to the tradition of standing at football games; and
      (c) all works be completed to the satisfaction of the Council prior to the first home fixture of the
    1993/94 Football Season.
    North West Comer Redevelopment
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action he had taken, in
    consultation with the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group, in approving a proposal
    submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to
    redevelop the North West Corner Standing Terrace at the Hillsborough Stadium.
      Resolved: That (a) confirmation be given to the action of the City Solicitor and Head of
    Administration in approving the proposal now reported and detailed in plan numbers 16264/10A,
    11,12,13 and 14 submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday
    Football Club, to redevelop the North West Comer Standing Terrace at the Hillsborough
    Stadium;
       (b) due to the proximity of away supporters housed in the West Stand, the Club be required to
    consult on a match by match basis, with the South Yorkshire Police to determine appropriate
    stewarding and policing levels for this area; and
      (c) the area be not brought into use for spectators until approved by the Council.
    Redevelopment on Penistone Road
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action he had taken, in
    consultation with the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group, in approving a proposal
    submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to
    redevelop part of the Penistone Road elevation of the Hillsborough Stadium.
          ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                                    221

      Resolved: That (a) confirmation be given to the action of the City Solicitor and Head of
    Administration in approving the proposal now reported and detailed in plan numbers 16264/10A,
    11,12,13 and 14 submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday
    Football Club, to redevelop part of the Penistone Road elevation of the Hillsborough Stadium;
    and
      (b) all works be completed to the satisfaction of the Council prior to the first home fixture of
    the 1993/94 Football Season.
    Extension o f North Stand Enclosure for Persons Confined to Wheelchairs
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action he had taken, in
    consultation with the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group in approving a proposal
    submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to
    extend the North Stand enclosure for persons confined to wheelchairs at the Hillsborough
    Stadium.
      Resolved: That (a) confirmation be given to the action of the City Solicitor and Head of
    Administration in approving the proposal now reported and detailed in plan number 16277/1A
    submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, to
    extend the North Stand enclosure for persons confined to wheelchairs at the Hillsborough
    Stadium;
      b) all works including the provision of additional facilities be completed to the satisfaction of
    the Council prior to the first home fixture of the 1993/94 Football Season; and
      (c) the report now submitted be referred for information to the Equality Services
    Sub-Committee of the Policy Committee.
★ (3) SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
  Sheffield Sports Stadium (Owlerton) —Betting Office
     The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report (a) on action he had taken,
  in consultation with the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group, in approving a proposal
  submitted by the management of Sheffield Sports Stadium (Owlerton) to redevelop a room
  situated under the Panarama Room at the Owlerton Stadium into an on-track betting facility and
  (b) stating that in making this application the stadium management had failed to comply with
  Safety of Sports Grounds Licensing procedure.
      Resolved: That (i) confirmation be given to the action of the City Solicitor and Head of
    Administration in approving the proposal now reported to redevelop a room situated under the
    Panarama Room at Sheffield Sports Stadium (Owlerton) into an on-track betting facility; and
      (ii) the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested to write to the management of
    Sheffield Sports Stadium (Owlerton) to re-appraise them of the Safety of Sports Grounds
    Licensing procedure.


     Meeting of the Licensing Sub-Committee held 27th May, 1993. Present— Councillors Mrs.
    Midgley (Chair), Dawson, Harthman, D. Jones, Mrs. Leek, Mrs. E. Smith, Mrs. Walton,
    Webster and Wigfield.
★   ( 1 ) PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT LICENSING-CHARITABLE AND EDUCATIONAL ENTERTAINMENTS
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report (a) stating that under the
    provisions of the Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 there was a specific
    power enabling local authorities to remit fees in whole or in part in respect of the licensing of
    occasional public entertainments of an educational, charitable or other like purpose and (b)
    seeking clarification on the policy which the City Council would elect to adopt with regard to such
    entertainments.
      Resolved: That (i) authority be given for the City Solicitor and Head of Administration to
    remit only the first £100 or the first 10%, whichever is the greater, of the costs of processing
    occasional public entertainment licences in respect of entertainment of a charitable, educational
    or other like purpose, provided that it has been demonstrated by the applicant that there will be
    no significant commercial gain from the entertainment/event and that the whole of the net
    proceeds will be forwarded to a registered charity, or an educational institution; and
222       ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

      (ii) the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested to carefully monitor the policy
    and refer any cases in which there may be exceptional circumstances to this Sub-Committee.
★    (2) PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENTS AND THEATRE LICENSING
    Isabellas, Eyre Street
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on an application for the
    renewal of a Public Entertainments Licence in respect of Isabellas, Eyre Street which indicated
    that the hours applied for were from 10.00 a.m. to 2.00 a.m. each week and that should the
    Sub-Committee be minded to grant the application, the consent permitting the premises to
    remain open until 3.00 a.m. on Friday night/Saturday morning and Saturday night/Sunday
    morning would remain in force until the 16th October, 1993.
      The premises were inspected on the 24th May, 1993, when a number of defects were found by
    an Officer from the Directorate of Environmental Services and Standards and he addressed the
    Sub-Committee and expressed concerns particularly about the ventilation system, the state of the
    carpeting and faulty toilet taps. It was reported that the South Yorkshire Fire and Rescue Service
    had identified faults with three emergency lighting bulbs and these had since been replaced.
      The applicant’s Solicitor addressed the Sub-Committee and stated that due to a neglect of
    procedures, there had been a number of items which required attention, most of which had now
    been rectified.
      Resolved: That the public and press, the applicant, the Solicitor and Officers of the City
    Council involved in the application relating to Isabellas, Eyre Street, be excluded from the
    meeting before further discussion takes place on the grounds that, in view of the nature of the
    business to be transacted, if the public and press were present there would be a disclosure to them
    of exempt information described in paragraphs 12 and 13 of the Local Government Act 1972, as
    amended by the Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985 relating to (a) legal matters
    and advice and (b) proposed actions under any enactment by the Authority.
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration reported orally giving legal advice on various
    aspects of the application relative to Isabellas.
      At this point in the proceedings the meeting was re-opened to the public and press.
      Resolved: That (i) subject to the completion of the oustanding works now reported to the
    satisfaction of the Officers of the relevant inspecting Authorities, authority be given for the City
    Solicitor and Head of Administration to grant a public entertainments licence to Isabellas
    Nightclub, Eyre Street, for a period of three months only with effect from the expiry of the
    previous licence by reason of the state of the premises on inspection on the relevant date; and
      (ii) if the outstanding works to the Nightclub have not been completed satisfactorily on further
    inspection of the premises by the relevant Authorities, then the City Solicitor and Head of
    Administration be requested to refer the application to this Sub-Committee during June, 1993.
    The Embassy, 57 Mansfield Road
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on an application for the
    renewal of a Public Entertainments Licence in respect of the Embassy, 57 Mansfield Road which
    indicated that the hours applied for were from 10.00 a.m. until 12.30 a.m. the following morning
    on Monday to Friday of each week, 10.00 a.m. Saturday until 2.00 a.m. the following morning
    and 10.00 a.m. until 10.30 p.m. on Sundays. The premises were inspected on the 19th May, 1993
    and were found to be in a satisfactory condition. However, it was revealed that at that time the
    inspection record required by the Licence conditions had not been maintained by the applicant
    and the requirement to complete a log book on a daily basis was explained to him. Additionally,
    the applicant had been formally cautioned following an incident in November, 1992, when a fire
    door was found to be locked whilst a public entertainment was taking place.
      The applicant addressed the Sub-Committee and stated that he had not realised the importance
    of maintaining a daily log book but since this had been pointed out to him, both he and his newly
    appointed General Manager would ensure that the inspection record was maintained. In
    addition, he had arranged for his General Manager to attend the Council-run course on health
    and safety issues relating to public entertainment venues.
