           HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                                        309

★ (4) PUBLIC ENTERTAINM ENT
     The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on (a) an application
  for the grant of a public entertainment licence in respect of the Sheffield Superbowl, Wadsley
  Bridge; and (b) applications for the renewal of theatre and public entertainment licences for the
  City Hall. He also reported verbally on an application for the renewal of the public entertainment
  licence issued in respect of the Locarno Nightclub, London Road.
      Resolved: That (i) the application now submitted for the issue of a public entertainment licence
   in respect of the Sheffield Superbowl, Wadsley Bridge, be granted for a period of six months.
    (ii) the action taken by the Head of Administration and Legal Department, in consultation
  with the Chair of this Panel, in authorising, under the authority given by the Panel at its meeting
  held on 7th June, 1990, the issue of theatre and public entertainment licences in respect of the
  City Hall for the period ending 31st August, 1990, be noted; and
    (iii) the application now reported for the renewal of a public entertainment licence in respect of
  the Locarno Nightclub, London Road, be granted, for a period of six months.
★ (5) LOTTERIES AND AMUSEMENTS A C T , 1976
    With reference to the decision made by the former General Purposes Panel of the Municipal
  Enterprise and General Services Programme Committee at its meeting held on 5th February,
  1990 (page 1221 of the printed minutes), the Head of Administration and Legal Department
  reported further on an application for small lottery registration on behalf of the Children’s
  Leukaemia Appeal. He reported that the Appeal had now been registered with the Charity
  Commission.
     Resolved: That the application now submitted be granted.
  ( 6 ) HACKNEY C A RR IA G E (T A X l) LICENSING
    The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on the licensing of
  hackney carriages (taxis) in Sheffield. The report enclosed a report of University of Leeds
  Industrial Services Limited on a survey of the quality of taxi services in Sheffield undertaken on
  behalf of the Sheffield Taxi Trade Association. The report also drew attention to the resolution
  passed by the General Purposes Panel of the Municipal Enterprise and General Services
  Programme Committee at its meeting held on 30th April, 1990 (page 21 of the printed minutes)
  that not more than five new hackney carriage licences be issued, whereupon and without
  prejudice to any future decisions to be made by the Panel, the City Council (a) is of the opinion
  that there is no significant unmet demand for taxi services in Sheffield and (b) holds the view that,
  subject to legal requirements, it is unlikely that any applications for additional hackney carriage
  vehicle licences submitted to the Council within the next 12 months will be successful.
    Resolved: That the report now submitted and the resolution of the General Purposes Panel of
  the Municipal Enterprise and General Services Programme Committee of 30th April, 1990, be
  noted.
★ (7) SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
  Safety o f Sports Grounds Advisory Group
    The minutes of a meeting of the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group held on 21st May,
  1990, were received and noted.
  Association of Metropolitan Authorities
     The Panel received a letter from the Association of Metropolitan Authorities on matters
  arising from a seminar convened by the Association at Wembley on 15th May, 1990, on the
  implementation of the report of Lord Justice Taylor on the Hillsborough Disaster.
     Resolved: That the Head of Administration and Legal Department, in consultation with the
  Chair of this Panel, be requested to draft an appropriate reply to the Association of Metropolitan
  Authorities.
  Don Valley Arena
    The Panel received a report of the Director of Land and Planning submitted to the Planning
  and Transportation Programme Committee at its meeting held on 21st June, 1990 (pages 201/202
  of the printed minutes) on the Don Valley Arena Project. The Head of Administration and Legal
  Department reported that no application had yet been made to the Council for a licence under
  the Safety of Sports Grounds Acts.
    The Panel noted the information reported.
310          HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

♦2 Consumer and Regulatory Service Sub-Committee
reso lv ed: That, except so far as they relate to matters delegated to the Consumer and Regulatory
Services Sub-Committee, the following minutes be approved—
     Meeting of the Consumer and Regulatory Services Sub-Committee held 27th June, 1990.
   Present— Councillors Mrs. Askham (Chair), Butler, Damms, Mrs. Fleming, Hartley, Lawson,
   Mrs. Midgley, Webster and Ms. Whitty.
   ( 1 ) RESULTS O F LEG A L PROCEEDINGS
     The Sub-Committee received a report of the Director of Health and Consumer Services
   detailing the following results of legal proceedings instituted in relation to offences under the
   Statutes indicated—
   Statute                                 Results of Proceedings
   Consumer Protection Act, 1987           Defendant fined £200 and ordered to pay £240 costs.
   Road Traffic Act, 1988                  Defendant given an absolute discharge.
  Road Traffic Act, 1988                   Defendant fined £250 and ordered to pay £175 costs.
  Road Traffic Act, 1988                   Defendant fined £75.
  Road Traffic Act, 1988                   Defendant fined £150 and ordered to pay £155 costs.
  Trade Descriptions Act, 1968             Defendant fined £100 and ordered to pay £162.47 costs.
  (2) QU ARTERLY R EPO RT OF TH E PUBLIC ANALYST
    The Sub-Committee received and noted a report submitted by the Public Analyst on food
  samples tested during the quarter ended 31st March, 1990.
♦ (3) REPLIES FROM CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
     The Director of Health and Consumer Services reported verbally that arising from decisions of
  this Sub-Committee to write to Central Government about various issues, responses had been
  received from (a) the Minister of Transport who had stated that (i) he was looking to private
  industry to develop a tamper-resistent odometer rather than a national scheme to prevent
  fraudulent clocking of car mileage recorders and (ii) negotiations were currently taking place to
  devise a system where motorists would be informed about cars which had been “written o ff’ by
  insurance companies;
    (b) the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry regarding discussions currently taking place
  with the European Community Consumer Protection Service in an endeavour to introduce a
  cooling off period for consumers considering purchasing Timeshares; and
    (c) the Secretary of State for Energy in connection with the recent report to this
  Sub-Committee on savings which could be made in energy consumption if consumers were more
  aware of the comparative energy efficiency of domestic electrical products (page 1406 of the
  printed minutes).
    Resolved: That the Director of Health and Consumer Services be requested to obtain copies of
  the reports arising from the various Central Government negotiations now discussed and report
  back to a future meeting of this Sub-Committee.
♦ (4) HOLID AY INFORMATION
    The Director of Health and Consumer Services submitted a report stating that there had been
  considerable interest from consumers visiting his Consumer Advice Unit in order to read hotel
  and apartment gazetteers to obtain unbiased advice on the location and amenities of hotels and
  apartments before booking holidays. He stated that (a) comparisons between holiday brochure
  descriptions and the gazetteers revealed that many resorts were correctly described but he gave
  examples where inaccuracies did exist and (b) there was public concern about sewage outfalls on
  British beaches and information on this could be sought from the Marine Conservation Society’s
  Good Beach Guide.
    Resolved: That the Consumer Advice Section extends its holiday information system to
  include the Marine Conservation Society’s Good Beach Guide now discussed and thus enable
  consumers to make their own judgement regarding the quality of the bathing water and
  cleanliness of British beaches.
