            HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                                         483

      At this stage in the proceedings, the public and press were re-admitted to the meeting.
★ (4) SEX ESTABLISHMENT LICENSING
    The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on an application for
  the waiving of the requirement for a sex establishment licence in respect of premises at 755
  Attercliffe Road pending legal proceedings.
      Resolved: That consideration of the application now submitted be deferred to a future meeting
    to enable the applicant to attend before the Panel.
    ( n o t e : The public and press were excluded from the meeting while the Panel was making a
    decision on the above item.)
★ (5) GAM ING M ACHINE PERMITS
    With reference to the decision made by the former General Purposes Panel of the Municipal
  Enterprise and General Services Programme Committee at its meeting held on 5th February,
  1990 (page 1221 of the printed minutes) to relax the Council’s policy in relation to the
  consideration of applications for gaming machine permits and, for a trial period of six months, to
  consider each case on its merits, the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a
  report reviewing the situation regarding such applications.
      Resolved: That (a) applications for permits under Section 16 and Schedule 3 of the Lotteries
    and Amusements Act, 1976 or Section 34 and Schedule 2 of the Gaming Act, 1968 will not be
    granted or renewed in the case of premises open to the public which are not exempt under (i)
    Paragraph 3 of Schedule 3 to the Lotteries and Amusements Act, 1976 or (ii) Paragraph 4 of
    Schedule 9 to the Gaming Act, 1968 where the use of machines providing amusement with prizes
    would be incidental to the main business for which the premises are used as for example, in the
    case of cafes, fish and chip shops and restaurants, etc.; and
      (b)    any permit granted or renewed under Section 34 of the Gaming Act, 1968 in respect of
    premises other than amusement arcades shall contain a condition limiting to one the number of
    machines which may be made available for gaming on the premises concerned.
★   ( 6 ) AMUSEMENT A RCA D E PERMITS
      The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported verbally on three applications for
    amusement arcade permits. The applicants in the cases relating to premises at 228 Abbeydale
    Road and Unit OS/4 Upper Level Food and Leisure Hall, Meadowhall Shopping Centre,
    attended the meeting to support their applications.
     Resolved: That (a) the applications now submitted in respect of premises at 228 Abbeydale
    Road and 23/25 London Road be granted for a period of three years; and
      (b)    consideration of the application now submitted in respect of Unit OS/4 Upper Level Food
    and Leisure Hall, Meadowhall Shopping Centre, be deferred pending the Panel’s visiting the
    premises on a day to be arranged.
★ (7) CITY HALL
     With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its meeting held on 7th June, 1990, to
  authorise the Head of Administration and Legal Department, in consultation with the Chair, to
  issue theatre and public entertainment licences, valid until 31st August, 1990, in respect of the
  City Hall, the Director of Arts submitted a report on action taken to improve the condition of the
  roof, the seating and the electrical wiring and on a programme for the rewiring of the building.
  The report indicated that the building had full insurance cover. Representatives of the South
  Yorkshire County Fire Service, the Chief Safety Adviser, the Director of Health and Consumer
  Services, the Director of Design and Building Services and the Head of Administration and Legal
  Department attended the meeting to address the Panel.
      Resolved: That (a) the written and verbal reports now submitted be noted;
       (b) theatre and public entertainment licences be isued in respect of the City Hall for a period of
    six months from 1st September, 1990; and
       (c) the officers of the various Departments concerned be requested to report back on progress
    in the matter to this Panel at its meeting to be held on 5th October, 1990 and to keep the Panel
    informed of any future developments.
484         HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

    ( n o t e : The public and press were excluded from the meeting while the Panel was making a
    decision on this item.)
★   ( 8 ) PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT LICENSING
       The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report outlining the situation
    regarding certain outstanding applications for the grant or renewal of public entertainment
    licences or variations to such licences. The meeting was attended by representatives of the
    applicants and their Solicitor in respect of Cairo Jax Nightclub and the applicant in respect of the
    Riverside Suite at the Hillsborough Sports Ground (Sheffield Wednesday).
       Resolved: That (a) on the assurance now given by the applicant and the Chief Fire Officer of
    the reasonable safety of the premises a public entertainment licence at a capacity level of 1,200
    persons be issued in respect of Cairo Jax Nightclub for a period of six months subject to
    compliance with the requirements set out in paragraph 6 of the letter from the South Yorkshire
    County Fire Service, now submitted and dated 21st June, 1990, pending the construction of a
    stairway as referred to in paragraph 5 of the letter;
      (b) a public entertainment licence be issued in respect of the Riverside Suite, Hillsborough
    Sports Ground, for a period of six months and the licensee be warned regarding the need to
    observe food hygiene and health and safety requirements;
      (c) a public entertainment licence be issued in respect of the Royal Victoria Crest Hotel,
    Victoria Station Approach, for a period of one year;
      (d) a public entertainment licence be issued in respect of the Ice Arena, Queens Road, for a
    period of six months; and
      (e) consideration of the application now submitted in respect of Kiki’s Nightclub, Charter
    Row, for a variation of the public entertainment licence be deferred to a future meeting.
    ( n o t e : 1. The public and press were excluded from the meeting while the Panel was making
    decisions on the above items; and
      2. An application to vary the public entertainment licence issued in respect of Stocksbridge
    Sports Centre, Moorland Drive, Stocksbridge, was withdrawn by the applicant.)
★ (9) SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
  Safety o f Sports Grounds Advisory Group
    The minutes of a meeting of the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group held on 21st May,
  1990, were received and noted.
    Hillsborough Sports Ground (Sheffield Wednesday)
    South Stand Fire Protection and Exits
       The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on action taken in
    consultation with the Chair of the Panel to approve a proposal submitted by Consulting
    Engineers on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to improve the fire protection and
    exits from the South Stand at the Hillsborough Sports Ground. The report enclosed copies of
    letters from the Consulting Engineers dated 22nd December, 1989 and 8th and 14th May and
    28th June, 1990 and from the South Yorkshire County Fire Service dated 16th February, 15th,
    22nd and 24th May and 21st June, 1990 and memoranda from the Building Surveyor dated 22nd
    June, 1990 and from the Director of Health and Consumer Services dated 25th May, 1990.
       Resolved: That confirmation be given to the action taken by the Head of Administration and
    Legal Department in consultation with the Chair of this Panel in approving the proposal detailed
    in the letters now submitted of the Consulting Engineers to improve the fire protection and exits
    at the South Stand at Hillsborough Sports Ground, subject to compliance with the comments of
    the South Yorkshire County Fire Service, the Building Surveyor and the Director of Health and
    Consumer Services now submitted, the relevant works to be completed before the start of the
    new Football Season.
    North Stand Ramps
      The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on action taken by the
    Head of Administration and Legal Department in consultation with the Chair of the Panel in
    approving a proposal submitted by Consulting Engineers on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday
    Football Club to install handrailing on the spiral exit routes from the North Stand at the
                HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                                          485

.g a    Hillsborough Sports Ground. The report enclosed copies of letters from the Consulting
        Engineers dated 23rd April, 1990, from the South Yorkshire County Fire Service dated 1st May,
        1990 and from the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service dated 2nd May, 1990 and
Lion    memoranda from the Director of Health and Consumer Services dated 10th May, 1990 and from
lent    the Building Surveyor dated 17th May and 6th June, 1990.
 the      Resolved: That (a) confirmation be given to the action taken by the Head of Administration
 the    and Legal Department in consultation with the Chair of this Panel in approving the proposal to
        install handrails to the North Stand ramps at Hillsborough Sports Ground as detailed by the
r of    Consulting Engineers in their letter of 23rd April, 1990 and plans numbers 100267/19 and 20;
200        (b) the facts that the ramps will have varying gradients along their lengths and that they will, in
: to    places, exceed the recommended maximum gradient of 1 in 10 given in paragraph 88 of the Guide
lire    to Safety of Sports Grounds be noted;
 if a
          (c) this Panel considers that in this case it is appropriate to depart from the standard given in
        the Guide to Safety of Sports Grounds; and
ugh
1 to      (d) all relevant works be required to be completed before the start of the new Football Season.
        New (Temporary) Police Control Room Facility
■tel,     The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on action taken in
        consultation with the Chair of the Panel in approving in principle the replacement of the Police
        Control Room at Hillsborough Sports Ground. The report enclosed a copy of a letter from
,ir a   Consulting Engineers on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club dated 16th May, 1990.
          Resolved: That (a) confirmation be given to the action taken by the Head of Administration
rter
        and Legal Department in consultation with the Chair of this Panel in giving approval in principle
        to the proposal for the provision of a temporary Police Control Room facility at Hillsborough
ing     Sports Ground as detailed by the Consulting Engineers in their letter dated 16th May, 1990 and
        the drawings referred to therein;
dge       (b) the proposed Control Room be required to be built and brought into operation to the
        satisfaction of the Council and in accordance with the technical requirements of the Building
        Surveyor in consultation with the South Yorkshire Police, by 30th September, 1990; and
          (c) the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club be required to provide a new permanent Police
lay,    Control Room facility to the satisfaction of the Council in consultation with the South Yorkshire
        Police before the beginning of the 1992/93 Football Season.
        South Stand Roof
           With reference to the decision made by the former General Purposes Panel of the Municipal
 • in   Enterprise and General Services Programme Committee at its meeting held on 2nd February,
 ing    1987 (page 1180 of the printed minutes), the Head of Administration and Legal Department
ind     submitted a report on the half-yearly inspection of the South Stand roof at Hillsborough Sports
l; of   Ground and on a request by the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club for an extension of the
and     five-year time limit imposed by the Panel for the replacement of the roof. The report enclosed
>th,    copies of letters from Consulting Engineers on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
?nd     dated 5th July, 1990 and from Sheffield Wednesday Football Club dated 18th May, 1990, the
        Consulting Engineers’ half-yearly report dated May, 1990 and a memorandum from the Building
a.nd    Surveyor dated 4th May, 1990.
 led      Resolved: That (a) Sheffield Wednesday Football Club be required to undertake the work
xits    detailed in the Consulting Engineers’ letter of 5th July, 1990 before the start of the new Football
3 of    Season;
ind
 the       (b) the Consulting Engineers and the Building Surveyor be required to continue to undertake
        joint inspections of the South Stand roof at half-yearly intervals with additional inspections after
        heavy snowfalls or strong winds;
the       (c) the time limit imposed by the General Purposes Panel at its meeting held on 2nd February,
1 in    1987 for the replacement of the South Stand roof be extended from five years to five years and
day     three months which means that replacement of the roof must now take place by the end of May,
the     1992.
486          HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

    Sheffield Sports Stadium, (Owlerton)
    Greyhound Terrace
      The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on a proposal
    submitted by Consulting Engineers on behalf of Owlerton Sports Stadium Limited for the
    development of the Greyhound Terrace and bar at the Sheffield Sports Stadium. The report
    enclosed copies of a letter from the Consulting Engineers dated 9th April, 1990 and a
    memorandum from the Building Surveyor dated 23rd July, 1990.
      Resolved: That (a) approval be given to the proposal for the development of the Greyhound
    Terrace and bar at the Sheffield Sports Stadium as detailed in the letter from the Consulting
    Engineers dated 9th April, 1990 and Plan No. 12269/1A referred to therein subject to compliance
    with the comments of the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group as detailed in Section 3 of
    the report;
      (b) the Head of Administration and Legal Department be authorised, on the completion of the
    works and the receipt of an application from Owlerton Sports Stadium Limited, to amend the
    General Safety Certificate and the Prohibition Notice issued in respect of the Sheffield Sports
    Stadium; and
      (c) the Head of Administration and Legal Department be requested to report back to this
    Panel giving details of the action taken after such amendments have been made.


     Meeting of the Licensing Panel held 15th August, 1990. Present— Councillors Butler (Chair),
    Mrs. Askham and Damms. Also in attendance: Councillor George.
★     ( 1 ) SAFETY O F SPORTS GROUNDS
    Applications for the renewal o f Safety Certificates
       The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on applications for the
    renewal of the General Safety Certificates issued in respect of Hillsborough Sports Ground
    (Sheffield Wednesday) and Bramall Lane Sports Ground (Sheffield United). The report enclosed
    copies of (a) the relevant applications (b) the recommendations contained in the final report of
    Lord Justice Taylor on the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster, (c) submissions on crowd capacity
    restrictions from the South Yorkshire County Fire Service and Messrs. Eastwood and Partners,
    Consulting Engineers, (d) copies of draft General Safety Certificates in respect of the two Sports
    Grounds and (e) a copy of a letter dated 9th August, 1990, from Sheffield United Football Club.
      Resolved: That the Head of Administration and Legal Department (i) be authorised to issue
    General Safety Certificates in respect of Hillsborough Sports Ground and Bramall Lane Sports
    Ground in accordance with the draft Certificates now submitted, with the minor amendments
    now outlined relating to variations in the figures quoted for crowd capacities; and
      (ii) be requested to report back on the costs involved in dealing with applications for the grant
    or renewal of General Safety Certificates in respect of the designated football stadia.
    ( n o t e : Consideration of the proposed issue of a new General Safety Certificate in respect of
    Sheffield Sports Stadium (Owlerton) was deferred pending the submission of a further report.)
    Hillsborough Sports Ground—Evacuation o f West Stand
      Pursuant to the request made by the former General Purposes Panel of the Municipal
    Enterprise and General Services Programme Committee at its meeting held on 22nd December,
    1989 (page 1086 of the printed minutes), the Head of Administration and Legal Department
    submitted a report enclosing a letter from the South Yorkshire Police giving details of the
    monitoring carried out since 1st January, 1990, of the times taken by the public to evacuate the
    West Stand at the Hillsborough Sports Ground (Sheffield Wednesday) and a letter from the
    Football Club expressing satisfaction with the provision for evacuating the Stand.
      Resolved: That (a) the contents of the report and the attached letters now submitted be noted;
    and
       (b)  the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club be requested to continue to monitor the evacuation
    of the West Stand.
                      HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                                      487

              Hillsborough Sports Ground—North Stand Emergency Exits
                 The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on action which he had
oposal        taken in consultation with the Chair of the Panel to approve a proposal submitted by Messrs.
or the        Eastwood and Partners, Consulting Engineers, to improve the emergency egress of spectators
report        from the North Stand at the Hillsborough Sports Ground (Sheffield Wednesday). The report
and a         enclosed letters from the Consulting Engineers dated 24th May, 1990 and from the South
              Yorkshire County Fire Service dated 1st May and 20th June, 1990 and memoranda from the
              Building Surveyor dated 18th May and 6th June, 1990.
hound
suiting         Resolved: That confirmation be given to the action taken by the Head of Administration and
              Legal Department in consultation with the Chair of this Panel in approving the scheme detailed
liance
n 3 of        by the Consulting Engineers in their letter dated 24th May, 1990 and plans numbers 12267/17A,
              18A and 30, for the provision of exits and stepping in the North Stand wall to improve forward
              egress from the Stand in the event of an emergency, on the understanding that all work connected
of the        with the scheme will be completed as soon as possible and in any event prior to 30th September,
id the        1990.
sports
          ★    (2) SEX ESTABLISHMENT LICENSING
                 With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its meeting held on 3rd August, 1990, to
o this        defer consideration of an application for the waiving of the requirement for a sex shop licence in
              respect of premises at 755 Attercliffe Road pending legal proceedings, the Panel gave further
              consideration to the report of the Head of Administration and Legal Department in the matter.
              The Solicitor acting for the applicant attended the meeting to support the application. The report
hair),        noted four undertakings previously given by the applicant in respect of any waiver which might be
              issued by the Panel and the Head of Administration and Legal Department verbally
              recommended the addition of the following at the end of Undertaking No. 4— “or if the
              application for a judicial review is refused.”

>r the          At this stage in the proceedings, the Panel—
ound            Resolved: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before a decision is made on
losed         the application now under consideration on the grounds that, in view of the nature of the business
irt of        to be transacted, if the public and press were present there would be a disclosure to them of
 acity        exempt information as described in paragraphs 7 and 12 of the Local Government Act, 1972, as
ners,         amended, relating to the financial or business affairs of other persons and legal matters and
 iorts        advice.
 lub.
                The Panel then gave consideration to the application for a waiver in respect of
ssue
iorts           Resolved: That the application now submitted be refused.
ents
          4 Food Policy Review Panel
          r e s o l v e d : That the following minutes be approved—
 rant
               Meeting of the Food Policy Review Panel held 6th September, 1990. Present— Councillors
              Mrs. Midgley (Chair), Mrs. Shepherd and Mrs. E. Smith.
 t of
              ( 1 ) NUTRITIONAL CLAIMS
•t.)
                The Director of Health and Consumer Services submitted a report outlining (a) the United
              Kingdom Regulations governing the labelling of food and (b) the European Community
ipal          proposals for a Directive on Nutritional Labelling for Foodstuffs which would ensure that by 1993
oer,          no Member State had rules which formed a technical barrier to trade in foodstuffs and would
ient          enable consumers to make an informed choice of food to suit their individual nutritional needs.
 the
 the            Resolved: That (i) the contents of the report now submitted be noted; and
 the             (ii) the Director of Health and Consumer Services be requested to (A) submit a further report
              to this Panel when the European Community Directive now discussed has been made and (B)
              make representations on the lines now discussed to the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and
 ed;          Food on the labelling of the sugar content of foodstuffs.
              (2) TUCKSHOP DEMONSTRATION PROJECT
 ion            The Director of Health and Consumer Services submitted a report on progress made on a
              tuckshop project which was to be piloted in three Sheffield schools, namely Parkhouse Secondary
488         HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

  School and Firshill and Mansell Middle Schools, which had been picked at random from the 34             6
  who had volunteered. The Director stated that the project, which aimed to demonstrate that it
  was possible to provide health promoting, profitable school tuckshops, was to be launched on the        ha
  18th September, 1990 and negotiations were under way with South Yorkshire Transport for                 Co
  sponsorship of the event by the provision of an open top bus to publicise the event and travel          an
  from school to school on the day of the launch.                                                         ini
    Resolved: That (a) support be given to the Health Promotion Campaign in schools now                   pu
  reported; and                                                                                           RE
     (b) the Director of Health and Consumer Services be requested to (i) submit a progress report        su!
  to the next meeting of this Panel, with a full evaluation report being submitted on completion of
  the project and (ii) express the concern of the Panel to the local press regarding the negative         7
  headlines given to publicise the positive aims now reported for the provision of healthy food in        Th
  school tuckshops.
                                                                                                          th i
  (3) EVALUATION OF HEALTHY EATING W EEK                                                                  th;
    The Director of Health and Consumer Services submitted a report evaluating the healthy                Dc
  eating week which was organised jointly by Vulcan Catering, the Health Promotion and Research
                                                                                                          the
  Unit of the Health and Consumer Services Department and catering students from Sheffield City           Po
  Polytechnic and held in the Town Hall canteen between the 26th and 30th March, 1990.                    ma
      Resolved: That (a) the contents of the report now submitted be noted; and                           ma

    (b) the model of the “Healthy Eating Week” now discussed be endorsed as an effective health          RE-1
  promotion campaign and support be given for a second “Healthy Eating Week” to be held at the           Cl;
  Manor Lane canteen and organised jointly by Vulcan Catering, the Health Promotion and
  Research Unit of the Health and Consumer Services Department and catering students from                 Wc
                                                                                                              '
  Castle College.
                                                                                                         rec
  (4) EVALUATION O F “ TRAFFIC LIG H T” MENU LABELLING SYSTEM IN TH E VULCAN STAFF DINING ROOM           uni
     The Director of Health and Consumer Services submitted a report on the results of a survey
                                                                                                         RE--
  carried out in the Town Hall canteen to investigate whether the “traffic light” menu labelling
  project, a system of classifying dishes into three healthy eating categories, was effective and
                                                                                                           (
  seeking suggestions for any improvements which could be adopted. The Director stated that              rek
  although canteen users were in favour of having some form of nutritional labelling of the dishes       am
  available, there was less support for the traffic light system in its present form and it was
  considered that a new, more informative system be developed.                                                (
                                                                                                         ap.
      Resolved: That (a) the results of the survey now reported be noted;
    (b) the Director of Health and Consumer Services be requested to liaise with the Catering            8 I
  Officer regarding the implementation of the conclusions contained within the survey report; and           i
                                                                                                         inft
    (c) any resultant labelling system arising from (b) above be introduced in all catering outlets in   allc
  the City Council.                                                                                      Au
  (5) PROGRESS REPORTS
    The Panel received reports on progress made by various Departments on the implementation             9 /
  of food policy initiatives since its last meeting on the 29th March, 1990 and arising therefrom it     RES
  was—                                                                                                   the
                                                                                                         atu
    Resolved: That (a) the progress now reported by various Departments on the implementation            be ■
  of food policy initiatives be noted;
    (b) the submission of targets and progress reports be requested from those Departments who           10
  have not yet presented reports to this Panel; and                                                        T
                                                                                                         con
    (c) the Chief Purchasing Officer be requested to submit a report to the next meeting of this         199
  Panel on food commodities purchased in respect of individual Council Departments on the lines
  now discussed.                                                                                         11
                                                                                                           T
5 Blackburn Meadows Liaison Committee                                                                    day
  The Committee received and noted the minutes of a meeting of the Blackburn Meadows Liaison             test
Committee held on 13th July, 1990.                                                                       Nat
