                                                                                                                                                                                                                         mmm
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               :

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         w

                                                                       8
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ifiitiii*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         '-v
                                       JllPiPtSli                                                                                                                         llilftlll     ISillllSlli

          H
                            SSSSS&i                                                                                <jpai?#ltlte,
                                                                                                              p iS P ^W ^                                                     #}*$?¥
                                                                                                              ■■   ;■ ■■
                                                        S-fFP
                                                                            ?ll#fi#P988                                           silitfif
                                                                                                                                   » i« »
                                                                        ssiisiai*
IIP*                                                                                                                       ■■M         S *
                                                                                                                                                     feiiSS*I®
                                                                                                                                                                        •tiilillls
                                                                                                                                                                         ilitili
                                                                                                                                                                                          ffSj« « * « *
                                                            •M li®          sm^iti                                                                                                                       iSSSSIl
              1ISHif?MM                                                                                                                                                 IsSMW s|##S#.;?S'£f|:^#i
                                      1111                   I'SSlif t i^ S !                                                     mum
                                                            itilfMll^li                                                                                                                       mmm
W0MM                                                                                                                       WSISII&Ulm                  isMM
                                                                                              MmmmutMmrnmmi.
                                             WM&XMi msm

MmmmzM                                                      MM$0MM
                                                            |##§s9g
                                                                               St^tSSMS              SStS
                                                                                                        L1rJ®i§§                 IW          illli
                                                      IM M                            fMilflil !10§§?ii& i» ^                             SliliJll
                                                               «»                                   §1
                                                       • IS § Ii                                                                SWIS



                                      t^J#!#!
                                                                                                                      «^Ss§i
                                                                                                                                          BW
                            mm§Mmm                                                                       Stilllliii                 MMMS^mm



                                                                                                                                  it#si®&
                                                                                                                                 f*MMS#t#
                                                                                                                                      tillM Si
                      mmm                                                                                                  itlSSl      $MMii

                   mMmmMMBWmmMrn
                   sMffffSlS                                                                                                      |M
                                       S?s8'S'?5'-Sgtes
                                                      tei                                                                                          c#tip®»
                          |S$fej4*tS
                  iifS S lM it                       ||§£g                                                                                SgSJgg
                                                                                                                                                Sfl'iSSSw

                                                                                                  tiMSIISiitifilfcs


                   ®«i           IMIKWil                                                                               i^s^&sis
                                         i»                                                                  tt#i®P#|iiS ^ l * * * * !
                                      MiMMM fl
                     &gS|r|l                                                                                                    §sA#SS>
                     fiN £lll£till&                         mmm                                               tllftSiltll   lfilll®l§8PlsS
                                                                                                                     iStti
                                                                                                                         ll®18I§il#t§                i&tw
                   flNMCPK                                                                                                 s^iiif^n^fPii
                     tllplplstlilitwf                                                                                                       *§tl®H8
                       :l«§ig                                                                                                   3®g«
                                                                                                                                   »l
                                                                                                                                    'l
                                                                                                                            iS*MKt;#M
                                                                                                                                      fi
                                                                                                                                     -al'^’‘8®s85#'j
                                                                               wmimmm                                                                            PSSI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SiB0.
                                                 SS||%#}:&f'          lil»      §11111 Sfl#il,#l&        mmmmmmmmmm iMMMM
                                                                                 MfifMmfi        mmim m m m m
                                                            SWsSS         sSM%ifltiffll
                                                                              §l3fsS^¥i§5                     £#?»!      MMgiMmi
                                                                iiwiISX^i^^SSW;                                                                                                                            a$si®B*s§
                                                                                                8tSlMii$fW86                                                            llliSSt®       fg S S IS ifi
                                                                                                    mss
                                                                                                                       s®;i?l
                                                                 §fiM
                                                                    0i^lll?f!’
                                                                     }0                            sliSlI*'                                                              1M#
                                                                                                                                                            ?HiWIPIIwS3S*W^8
                                                                                                                                                                   B m m H H H
                                                                                            ' m $ .^ i
                                                                                                           illfc                                             W
                                                                                                                                                             t&m
                                                                                                                                                               £
                                                                                                                            Silll      llilsllli
                                                                                                              Jlfe,I•“•
                                                                                                                      “*i*^j^^*lj'Wmm0m.
                                                                                                                                                                                       MiBMeZf>fcs
                                                                           *siaa»
                                                                                                                                        J§lt>:                                        »»S®®gg
                                      « ii|Iii                                                                                                                                                                                 w i
                                                                                                                            s » lf5sSS‘f 4
                                                                                                                                    ilssiiil
                           gfggfyii;
                           H H H l i                                                                                                         ■llSiSi
                                                                                                     W $t9flKSf^^Utt^KSK9)KK9                                                          S#1®S?S®®#1^
                                                                                                             m m m ^B   iififiiiitiMiSifft                                                      S>S#I#
                                                                                                                               if
                                      i»«iMii«aaiis                                                                          .* .
                                                                                                                            vSSfA                                                    pM«J«ipi^^®Pi||
                                                                                                                                                              M stlillM ilfill
                                                            esgtf
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ff$|fMl»|^g

*a#3|sS
                                       IM®SiSsSjfgSM
                                            fl
                                                                      simp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              itevi-3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sj3XSfe:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              fl?5#i>
City of Sheffield        Metropolitan District


                                                                                      Family & C o m m u n ity Services
                                                                                      D e p a rtm e n t
                                                                                      M r N V K A Y. M A
                                                                                      Director o f S ocial Services
                                                                                      Hillsborough "Ta-SK i V a r A
                                                                                      h'lllshcrc.'^S Library
                                                                                                . M id o le w o o d Road
                                                                                      Sheffield S o 4H .-0


Y o u r re fe re n c e          O u r reference                                      D a te 1   3tn'September 1989




 Dear



 I aa writing to invite you to a Training cay in Sneffieid on 6/10/89,
 tne focus of wnich will be preparation for tne Coroner's Court Inquest
 on tne Hillsborough ceceasec.
 The Inquest will be held in Sheffield sometime next year but no date
 has been set. Further information regarding tne Training day is attached
 to tnis letter.
 I believe from our database information that you are currently working
 with tne                  family, bereaved following Hillsborough and I
 would therefore like to offer you a place cn tne course.
 If you are unable t    ittena tne Training cay I 'would be grateful if yc
 could let me know as soon as possible because places are limited anc
 I have been unable to offer places to every social worker    wording witn
 a bereaved family.
 I am nappy to document some of the salient and relevant issues dis jssea
 durin g the cay and send them to people who are unable to attend the
 frainins cav. Please indicate if you would like a copy or this documentat] .cn.
 If you require further information about tne Inquest Training day, please
 do not hesitate to contact me.
 I look forward to meeting you on the 6tn October.




 Yours sincerely




 social worker
 Hillsborcush Task Te;




                                All c o m m u n ic a tio n s to be addressed "Director o f Social S e rvice s”
                                                                               ....
CORONERS INQUEST TRAINING DAY


The Sheffield Task Team have arranged a Training Day to prepare
professionals currently working with families bereaved following
the Hillsborough Tragedy.

                      The training day will be held

                                    at

           THE LODGE MOOR HOSPITAL CONFERENCE CENTRE, SHEFFIELD

                                    ON

                         FRIDAY 6th OCTOBER 1989

                             9 am for Coffee

Please complete the slip at the bottom of the page indicating your
intention to attend the Training Day.

There will be no charge for attending the course, but travelling and
subsistence expenses regretfully cannot be met by the Sheffield Local
Authority.

A reasonably priced lunch is available in the hospital dining room
tea and coffee during the day will be provided free of charge.




Send to:                    The Hillsborough Task Team, Hillsborough
            Library, Middlewood Road, Sheffield 6




I will/will not be attending the Training Day on 6 October 1989-




NB:   PLEASE INDICATE ALL NAMES OF WORKERS IF PART OF A SPECIAL TEAM
CORONER'S INQUEST TRAINING DAY

                               Friday 6th October 1989
                               9.30 am -     4.45 Pra
                               Loase Moor Hospital, Conference Centre, SHEFFIELD
V 0 T .U 0 I



G .00 am                       Registration     (coffee on arrival)
9.50 am                        Welcome anc introduction
                                            J Pilling, Assistant Director (‘
                                                                           .Operational Services

10.00 - 10.45                  Introduction to work of theCoroner's Court
                               Options following the D.P.P.'s report
                                             Mr Potter, Coroner S Yorks East District

10.45 - 11.30                  The Kings Cross experience
                                -            Arisen Walker Smith, C o - o r c m a t o r Kings Cress ie=m
                                —            Sophie Tarasenko, Chair of families Action Group

11.30 -                i1.45   COFFEE
 1 1.45        -       12.00   Kings Cress
                                             Questions and discussion

 12.00 - 12.45                 Optional legal strategies
                                             Solicitor from Liverpool Steering Committee

 12.45 - 1.45                   LUNCH


 -1.45 - 2.30                  The Zeebrugge experience and         dealing with tne anniversary
                                             David Wilkinson Area Manager Swale Social Services

 2.30 - 2.45                    Questions    and discussion

 2.15          - 3.00           COFFEE
                   /   r\ r\    Snail srouo sessions
 J a’
    •W:sJ “            ^U
                                (Reactions to the day, practical arrangements for the
                                future i
 a.30          - 4.45           Feedback (plenary session
                                Finish (Chair's summary and conclusion)
  A D M IN IS TR A TIV E ARRANGEMENTS

  RECEPTION


 Initial reception will be at the main entrance to the Regional
 Conference Centre, unless otherwise specified in the Course Programme.

  ACCOMMODATION


 Residents will be accommodated in the single bedrooms available at the
 Conference Centre.  Soap and a hand towel will be provided.  There are
 no electric wall sockets for electric shavers in the bedrooms but two
 pin electric razor sockets are provided in the bathrooms.

 The lecture rooms and common rooms are in the Conference Centre
 itself, as are facilities for light refreshments. However, the dining
 room and WRVS shop are in the hospital complex a short distance from
 the Conference Centre so coats and umbrellas will be needed in
 inclement weather.

 There is a car park adjacent to the Centre but no garage accommodation
 1ft nvn11ahlp.

 MEALS


 Times of meals for course members are as follows:-

Breakfast          -            a.00 a.m. to 8.45 a.m.
Lunch              -            As Course programme
Dinner             -            5 . 4 5 p .m>


Course members are asked to use the lip tray service and show their
meal vouchers, which will be provided, to the cashier in the dining
room.  Anyone requiring a special diet should speak with the Catering
Manager or his assistant if their needs are not met by the selection
of foods along the canteen counter.  Adjacent to the dining room is a
small lounge for those who wish to smoke while having their tea and
coffee after a meal.

MAIL

Mail should be addressed:-

c/o Regional Conference Centre
Lodge Moor Hospital
Redmires Road
SHEFFIELD
S10 4LH

Outgoing    mail can be handed in to the Conference Centre General
Office. ^   It will be posted at 4.00 p.m. Alternatively, there are post
boxes at     the entrance to the hospital grounds and in the hospital
reception    area.
ASSISTANCE PR IO R TO THE COURSE

Should you require any assistance prior to the commencement of the
course, please do not hesitate to telephone the member of the tutorial
staff who has responsibility for the Course.   He/she can be contacted
at the address and telephone number given on the first page of the
programme.

EARLY ARRIVALS PRIO R TO THE COURSE

If a course member is unable to arrive at the Centre in time for the
start of the first day of the Course, he/she must contact the
appropriate  member  of   the  tutorial   staff to   discuss whether
arrangements can be made for them to arrive thenight before.

TELEPHONE CALLS AND E N Q U IR IE S DURING THE COURSE

When telephoning course members between 8.30 a.m. and 5.00 p.m., ring
Sheffield (0/42) 307321/2.   Messages and mail will be placed on the
notice board in the Conference Centre.     After theConference   Centre
General Office has closed at 5.00 p.m., ring Sheffield 630835.     This
is a coin box situated in the entrance to the Conference Centre.

TRANSPORT

The Regional Conference Centre does not provide transport for those
attending courses.

PUBLIC TRANSPORT

The No. 60 Little Nipper bus can be caught at the Central Bus Station,
Pond Street or just outside the main exit of the Midland Railway
Station.   (If the bus indicator does not say 'Lodge Moor*,check with
the driver).     The other bus service to Lodge Moor is theNo.51 which
stops at the Crucible Theatre, Arundel Gate.

N.B. The No.     60 Little Nipper does not run on Sundays.

The minimum travelling time will be about forty minutes.

CAR TRAVELLERS    - THROUGH THE C IT Y CENTRE

The route for car travellers from West Street in the City Centre is
towards Glossop, via Giossop Road, Fulwood Road and Manchester Road.
At Crosspool (a petrol station on the left marks the approach to the
Crosspool turning), turn left ott the A57 and follow the hospital
signs along Sandygate Road and Redmires Road to the Lodge Moor
Hospital.  The hospital is about five miles from the City Centre.
         JR      Ci
         O       x» 5
         X




pomoj
?hjl
         V
         C

         Sir
                      o


                          /z
              RS I
              9> O
              -t ^
               » 2
sw yyv


              X ~i
               2. *
              r> f
               N

                                      n




                                          9 id 9 y ? j r»a 2
                               n      I
                               frs
                               2.    >&

                               8 1
CAR TRAVELLERS - FROM THE M l MOTORWAY

Course members approaching Sheffield on the Motorway should leave the
Ml at Junction 33, which is signposted "Sheffield (Centre) and
Catcliffe". On leaving the Motorway, take the road marked Sheffield
 (Centre) which is the direct link with the City Centre, about 5ft miles
from the Motorway.     Keep on this road until reaching Park Square,
which is a large roundabout in the City Centre, in the markets area.
On leaving the roundabout, follow the signs to the A57 (Glossop),
about 1ft miles from Park Square, still following the A5'7 towards
Glossop, you will get to University Square which is marked by a
roundabout and blocks of high rise flats.       Proceed straight ahead,
still on the A57 through the next three sets of traffic lights.
(Following this road you will pass the Children's and Weston Park
Hospitals).   At the fourth set of traffic lights the A57 forks right.
Take the right fork, following the signs to Lodge Moor which is a
further distance of 2ft miles.  At the top of the hill, take the first
left turning after the petrol station,' again following the Lodge Moor
signs.   Follow the signs to Sandygate Road and until reaching Lodge
Moor Hospital.

SHOPS

The WRVS shop in the hospital is open daily (except at weekends) from
10.00 a.m. to 4.30 p.m. for such items as sweets and toilet articles.

Within half a mile is a row of shops including a post office, chemist,
newsagent and supermarket.

A selection of local and national newspapers is provided daily at the
Conference Centre.




     EXPENSES

Travelling and subsistence expenses should be claimed under whatever
procedure is in force in your employing Authority. ?Course Members if
resident, may also claim the Incidental Expenses allowance as defined
in the current Health Notice.i
IN CASE OF IL L N E S S

Anyone feeling ill during a course should notify the tutorial staff.
At other times, please consult the notice in your room.

WHEN LEAVING

If a taxi is ordered, it should be directed to the Regional Conference
Centre, Lodge Moor Hospital P le a s e le a v e bedroom k e y s a n d m e al
v o u c h e rs   In   your   bedroom   w h e re   you   w ill   have   fo u n d   them   on   your
a r r iv a l.

It would be helpful if you could pack your belongings before 9.00 a.m.
on the last day of the course to enable the domestic staff to prepare
the room for the next course.   Your Luggage can be kept locked in the
sitting room until your final departure.

SECURITY

Course Members are strongly advised to lock their bedrooms whenever
they are not occupied, and people who occupy ground floor rooms should
close the windows before leaving the room.

Neither the Trent Regional Health Authority, its servants or agents
can be held responsible for any damage to, or loss of, the property or
effects of Course Members howsoever arising.
                      INQUEST TRAINING DAY - 6.10.89


SPEAKERS


John Pilling          Assistant Director
                      Sheffield Family & Community     1
                      Services Dept.

D.A.N. Perks          Divisional Officer, Division 2
                      Sheffield Family & Community
                      Services Dept.

Aileen Walker-Smith   Co-ordinator, Kings Cross

Sophie Tarasenko      Chair, Families Action Group
                      Kings Cross

David Wilkinson       Area Manager, Swale S.S.D.       (
                      Divisional County Offices,
                      Avenue of Remembrance
                      Sittingbourne, Kent, MEI0 4DD

Doug Fraser           Solicitor, Liverpool Steering
2


                INQUEST TRAINING DAY - 6.10.89

Attenders


Social Worker   Address                              Tel.No.   Family


                Amber Valley S.S.                              Clark
                Long Close, Cemetery Lane,
                Ripley, Derby, DE 3HY

                Bleak House, Catherine Street                  Ball
                St Alban's, Herts. AL3 5BS

                Chester Social Services                        Rogers
                49 Northgate St, Chester.
                CHI 2TW

                c/o Social Services Dept.                      Wafer
                Royal Liverpool Children's
                Hospital, Alderhay, Eaton Rd
                Liverpool, LI 2AP

                Medical Social Work Dept.                      Jones
                Royal Preston Hospital,
                Sharoe Green Lane, Fulwood,
                Preston, Lancs.

                Warrington Social Services                     Ashcroft
                Priestley House, Sankey Street,
                Warrington, WA1 1PA

                Social Services Dept. Cromwell                 Wild
                House, High Street, Chapel-en-
                Le-Frith, via Stockport,
                Cheshire

                Social Services Dept., 200 Birkrig             Sefton
                Digmoor, Skelmersdale, Lancs.

                John Briggs House, Gerrard St                  Howard
                Widnes, WA8 6BE

                C.P.N. Hatton Heath, Runcorn

                Bury Social Services, 1A Lord St               Glover
                Radcliffe, Greater Manchester,
                M26 OBA

                                                               Godwin
                Gloucs.,

                                                               Edwards
                                Wirral
3


                     INQUEST TRAINING DAY - 6.10.89

Afefeeadeps

Social   Worker     Address                             Tel.No.       Family

                    Cheshire S.S. Dept., Coronation                   Hennessey
                    Road, Ellesmere Port, Merseyside

                    St Helens S.S. Dept., East Area                   Hawley
                    Office, Newton Town Hall, Market
                    Street, Newton, St. Helens

                    Preston North Social Services                     Barron
                    1 Albert Road, Fulwood, Preston,
                    Lancs.

                    Sheffield S.S.D. Division 2,        0742 734873
                    Meade House, Middlewood Road,
                    Sheffield, 6.

                    Alderhay Hospital, Eaton Road,                    Harrison
                    Liverpool

                    District G., Liverpool S.S.D.                     McGrath
                    80 Wavertree Road, Liverpool

Terry Sefton        Hillsborough Family Support Group

William Pemberton   Hillsborough Family Support Group

                    Training Officer, Liverpool
                      INQUEST TRAINING DAY - 6.10.89


Unable   to Attend

Social Worker        Address                              Tel. No.   Family


                     Skelmersdale Social Services                    Rimmer
                     200 Birkrig, Digmoor, Skelmersdale

Trevor Hicks         Hillsborough Family Support Group
5


                 INQUEST TRAINING DAY - 6.10.89


Social Worker   Address                            Tel. No.       Family


                Liverpool Hillsborough Team        051 263 5366
                Stanley Park, 1 Anfield Road
                Liverpool A.

                "         "        "       "       051 263 5366   Copoc
                                                                  Hammond

                "         "        "       "       051 263 5366   Tootle
                                                                  Glover

                "         "        "           "   051 263 5366   Harrison
6

                 INQUEST TRAINING DAY - 6.10. 89


Social Worker   Address                       Tel. No.   Family


                                                         ,
                                                         ______ ,
                Sefton Helpline
                Marbent
                14 Marine Terrace                                 1   -
                Waterloo
                Liverpool, L22 5PR

                                                         Bennett
                                                         Devonside
                                                         Brady
                                                         Joynes

                                                         Collins
                                                         Jones - Gary

                                                         Hamilton
                                                         Nicol - Lee

                                                         Horn
                                                         Williams
                                                         Robinson
                                                         Steele
7


                      INQUEST TRAINING DAY - 6.10.89


Social Worker   Address                           Tel. No.   Family


                Knowsley Helpline                 i
                Staff House no. 1
                The Connaughtons
                Tarbuck Road
                Huyton
                Merseyside L36 5XW

                «            tt        tt



                 tt           tt        tt



                »t                it        tt
8


                INQUEST TRAINING DAY    - 6.10.89

Social Worker    Address                        Tel. No.   Family


                 Wirral Support Team
                 Birkenhead Town Hall
                 Brandon Street
                 Birkenhead
                 Merseyside

                 tt        tt
                                                           Traynor
 9

                 INQUEST TRAINING DAY - 6.10.89

 Social Worker    Address                         Tel. No.   Family

                  Social Services Dept.                      Murray
                  P.O. Box 203
                  Floor 2
                  Unity House
                  Stanley
                  Stoke on Trent.




1 1 .1 0 . 8 9
CORONER *S INQUEST TRAINING DAY

                             Friday 6th October 1939

                             9.30 an -       4.45 pn
                             Lodce Koor Hospital, Conference Centre, SHEFFIELD



0 , 0 0     -rj,             Registration, (coffee or. arrival)
a.50 aa                      V.'elccne and introduction                              . -
                                         j Piiiinz, Assistant Director COperational Services

       on    - 10 45         introduction to work of the Coroner's Court
‘                *           Options following the.3.P.P.*s report
                             _           Mp Potter, Coroner S Yorks East D i s t n c -

,n     L-     _    11.20     The Kings Cress experience
                                         Aileen Walker Smith, Co-ordinator Kings Cress Teas
                                         Sochie Tarasenko, Chair of Families Action Group



    I • “ '■= - ;2
                 fc- ^0
                      • wv   :
                             ■ 'in^s
                                  —» Cress
                             _           Questions and discussion
       .o
         INQU E S T TRAINING DAY DOMESTIC  ARRANGEMENTS
         o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o-o




SMOKING

Smoking      is not p e r m i t t e d      in the main           hall.
There     is a s m o k i n g lounge            and n o n - s m o k i n g   lounge s i t u a t e d on
the c o r r i d o r    immediately         f a c i n g the main hall.
                                   *

COFFEE
C o f f e e will      be served        in the n o n - s m o k i n g lounge at             11..30

TOILETS
These     are s i t uated on           the c o r r i d o r    to the right of the main
hall.

DINING      ROOM
Thi s    is situated         in the main            hospital       b u i l d i n g directly
opposite       the C o n f e r e n c e    Centre.          Enter     through       the outer
door,     near     the c o n s u l t a n t s    car    park,      then     turn left       along
the corr idor.          The d i n i n g     room      is then      also on       the    left.

SMALL GROUP SESSIONS
Group     rooms       are label l e d       and are s i t u a t e d        on   the main       corridor
and     the short       c o r ridor      immediately          facing       the C o n f e r e n c e   room.




REMINDER


Will     conference members               pi'      ;e return       to their seats            promptly
for     the b e g i n n i n g of each            »>ssion.
       INQUEST       TRAINING        DAY        :      Vi'    ;"v-f

MAME    AUTHORITY                                            TEL{NUMBER



        L iverpool      H i l l s b o r o u g h Team




        Se f t o n T e a m




        Kttowsley Tea m




        Wirral     Team



        Sheffield Team




       Stoke     S.S.D




                                                                      '■ 's   -
.■                       r       -INQUEST        TRAINING           DAY     1              .
           /
N A M«•E
       v/*
       » .*7                    AUTHORITY                                                      TELEiNUMBER
                                *                                   k
     A
J c4m          Pilling          A s s i s t a n t Dir e c t o r ,       Sheffield
 /
■I'.A.n '. Perks                Divisional         O f f icer,      Sheffield

Aileen Walker-Smith             Co-ordinator,           K ings Cross

Sophie Tarasenko                Chair, F a m i l i e s A c t i o n G r o u p
                                Kings Cross

David Wilkins                   A r e a M a n ager,     S w a l e S.S.D

Doug Fraser                     Solicitor
                                Liverpool Steering Committee

                                Social      Worker,       A m b e r Valley S.S.D

                                S ocial     Worker,       H erts        S.S.D

                                Social      Worker,       C h e s t e r S .S.D

                                S ocial     Worker,       Alderhey          Hospital

                                S ocial     Worker,       Royal          Preston*Hosp,

                                Social      Worker,       Warrington            S.S.D

                                Social      Worker,       Stockport          S.S.D

                                T eam Leader,         Skelmersdale              S.S.D

                                S ocial     Worker,       S k e l m e r s d a l e S.S.D

                                Social      Worker,       Runcorn          S.S.D

                                C.P.N     Hat t o n Heath,          Runc o r n

                                S ocial     Worker,       Bury      S.S.D

                                Social      Work er,      C i r e n c e s t e r S.S.D

                                Co-ordinator,           Ellesmere           Port S.S.D

                                Social      Worker,       Ellesmere          Port S.S.]

                                Team Leader,          St.Helens,           S.S.D

                                Social     Worker,        Pres t o n S .S.D

                                Social     Worker,        Sheffield         S.S.D

Trevor Hicks                    Hillsborough          Family        S u p p o r t Group

Terry          Sefton           Hillsborough          Family        S u p p o r t Group
       i * f   •+

William             Pemberton   Hillsborough          Family        S u p p o r t Group

                                Social     Work er,       R J d e r h e y H o s pital

                                T r a i n i n g Officer,       L i v erpool        S.S.D
                                Social     Worker,        Liverpool         S.S.D
                          INQUEST                   TRAINING                 DAY

6 /1 0 / 8 9


         A                                                                                B



Sophie Taresenko
W i l l i a m Pem b e r t o n

D o u g Fraser




Terry        Sefton




D a v i d Wilk i n s
i              Hlcks •'2£££?8&t
T r e v o r gick.                ^                               .   ^ a O   -m
                                                                                  ■
                                                                                      e

                         : itfb a > ^ W d £ & < y s s v lP ~ V & u j * -


                        ;(v4     ^ xjv ^s s 2>jlsj-     SSO.
CORONER'S COURTS - RECOMMENDED READING



Jervis - Office and duties of coroners

Appeals.   Price.

Jacksons - Machinery of Justice - p 194 - 196

Smith & Keenan.     English Law.      P 103

All these include Coroner's Courts and are in C.A.S.


Arts & Social Sciences

Halsburys Laws of England

Stones Manual, 4-2172, Coroners Act 1988



Crown Court Library                737511     Ext. 205

Admin & Legal                  734020

L&w Library - Ann Rogers




Z5TUT7W
                     INQUEST     TRAINING       DAY

                            6 October 1989




                                CONTENTS


                                                      Page

Introduction                                            1


The Inquest                                             2


Optional Legal Strategies                               6


Provision of Deceased Personal Detail
to the Bereaved                                        13


Zeebrugge                                   .          17


Summary and Recommendations                           22


Addresses/Telephone numbers                           26
                                   1

INTRODUCTION


The information contained in the following pages has been summarised
from the Inquest Training Day held at Lodge Moor Hospital, Sheffield
on the 6th October, 1989.

The day was chaired by John Pilling, Assistant Director, Sheffield
Family & Community Services Department.    In his opening address, he
acknowledged the reason for our need .to come together on'such-a’Training
Day and therefore asked for one minute’s silence as a mark of respect to
all those who died at Hillsborough on the 15th April, 1989.

The talks of each of the main contributors have been reproduced and
therefore some duplication of facts and points will be found. The major
recommendations however have been summarised at the end of this document.

It must also be noted that some of the information is general to
disasters and some specific to particular ones, e.g. Zeebrugge and King's
Cross. The information on inquests is also general, as at this stage it
is not possible to say exactly what the scenario will be for the
Hillsborough Inquests. It is, however, hoped to run a further Training
Day once the date and details of the Inquests are known.




Hillsborough Task Team
Sheffield

February, 1990
                                     2

MR. K. D. POTTER - Coroner, South Yorkshire East District

Mr Potter began by indicating that he would be unable to comment
Specifically on the Hillsborough disaster. He stressed that he had
no connection with the incident and that as such his knowledge of
what had happened on the day of the disaster was the same as (no greater
than) any intelligent individual who read newspapers and watched television.

Mr Potter then talked about the history of the Coroner’s Court and how
it has evolvedinto its present form with specific reference to the
inquisitorial, as opposed to accusat6rial, nature of the Court. For
the purpose of this paper, it is not necessary to go into detail
about the the history of the Coroner's Court. Suffice it to say that
over the years, many of the previous responsibilities of the Coroner
have been shed, until the Coroner of the present day is involved almost
totally with the investigation of death, though some vestigial
interests such as treasure trove still remain.

The Coroner today is an independent officer appointed by the Local
Authority. He/she is independent of Central or Local Government and
must be qualified either medically and/or legally. The Home Secretary
offers support and advice to the Coroner but he has no control over
him/her. A Coroner is appointed for life or until voluntary retirement
and cannot be dismissed, except for a grave breech of behaviour.

Circumstances requiring an Inquest

Certain types of death cannot be disposed of without an inquest.
These comprise criminal cases (murder, manslaughter and infanticide);
suicides; road, rail, aviation, domestic and other accidents;
industrial accidents and diseases; deaths in prison or police custody;
deaths where negligent medical treatment is alleged; deaths from
neglect and any other case where the Coroner feels that a public
hearing would be beneficial.

Certain of these cases must be held with a Jury (see Section on Jury).

Adjournment of Inquests

In some cases , it is necessary for a Coroner to open an inquest and
then adjourn it. This would be the case if the death was an obvious
criminal one, in order to allow time for criminal proceedings to take
place. An adjournment also is necessary if the Director of Public
Prosecutions is asked to examine the circumstances surrounding a
death in order to make a decision whether or not to prosecute. This
has been the case with the Hillsborough disaster.

Functions of the Coroner's Court

The Court has two functions in relation to a death:

(1)    To establish the medical cause of death;
(2)    To enquire into the circumstances and cause of a death if the
       death is violent or unnatural.

The Coroner has the power to order a post mortem if he feels it
necessary. As all accidents are reportable to the Coroner, a major
incident involving a number of deaths, as in the case of Hillsborough,
would be referred to a Coroner, and post mortems would be required to
establish the cause of death in each case.
                                    3

Reporting of Deaths

The majority of reports of a death are made by the Police, but in
some cases, a doctor or the Registrar will notify the Coroner of a
death in his/her jurisdiction.

Jurisdiction

The Coroner to whom an inquest would be referred depends on where the
body of the deceased is found. In the case of the 95 people who died
at Hillsborough, it will be necessary for the Inquest to be held in
Sheffield under the jurisdiction of the Sheffield Coroner.

The Jury at an Inquest

There are four circumstances where a Coroner must summon a jury.
These are:-

(a)       that the death occurred in prison.
(b)       that the death occurred while the deceased was in Police
          custody.
(c)       that the death was caused by an accident, poisoning, or
          disease, notice of which is required to be given under any
          act to a Government department.
(d)       that the death occurred in circumstances where the continuance
          or possible recurrence of which is prejudicial to the health
          and safety of the public or any section of the public.

Under category (a) therefore the Hillsborough Inquests will have a Jury.

Qualifications of Jurors

The same rules and qualifications apply to Jurors summoned to attend a
Coroner's Inquest as those who might be summoned to attend a Crown Court.

Number of Jurors

The Coroner shall summon no less than seven and no more than eleven
Jurors.

Verdict

A unanimous verdict must be sought; the majority can be accepted
with no greater minority than two, but the Coroner is only obliged
to accept a unanimous verdict. If the minority is greater than two
then the Jury is discharged and a further Inquest must follow with
a fresh Jury,. In order to reach the verdict, the Jury must retire
from the Court and consider their verdict in private, without either
Coroner or anyone else present.

The Jury can visit the scene of an incident where the death occured
if it helps them to reach a verdict. Dr Popper may decide to take
the Jury to Hillsborough to look over the scene of the incident.

After summing up, the Coroner or Jury must consider what verdict is
to be returned.
The List of possible verdicts includes:

              Natural causes
              Industrial disease
             Dependence on drugs/non/dependent abuse of drugs
              Suicide
              Accident/Misadventure
            ' Sentence of death
              Lawful killing
              Open verdict
              Unlawful killing
              Stillbirth
             Want of attention at birth
              Attempted/Self induced abortion

Further explanations of these verdicts can be found in Jervis - Book
on Coroner's 16.12.

Mr Potter gave further details on an unlawful killing verdict and
noted that it covers murder, manslaughter, infanticide, and causing
death by reckless driving. A gross negligence manslaughter verdict
requires proof beyond reasonable doubt of gross negligence - going
beyond a mere matter of compensation and showing such disregard for
the life and safety of others as to amount to a Crime against the
State and conduct deserving punishment.

Witnesses

All witnesses at an Inquest are under oath, but the rules of evidence
are not applied as strictly as they are in other Courts. For example,
witnesses in a Coroner's Court have three privileges:

(1)         Against Self incrimination
{2)         Privacy between their lawyer and themselves
(3)         Public interest immunity.

Any person who satisfies the Coroner that he falls within one of the
following categories of person is entitled to examine witnesses at an
Inquest, either in person, by counsel or a solicitor:

(a)         Parent, child, spouse and any personal representative of
             the deceased;
(b)         any beneficiary under a policy of insurance issued on the
             life of the deceased;
(c)         the insurer who issued such a policy of insurance;
(d)         any person whose act or omission or that of his agent or servant
             may in the opinion of the Coroner have caused, or contributed
             to, the death of the deceased;
(e)         any person appointed by a trades union to which the deceased
             at the time of his death belonged, if the death of the deceased
             may have been caused by an injury received in the course of
             his employment or by an industrial disease;
(f)         an inspector appointed by, or a representative of, an enforcing
             authority, or any person appointed by a government department
             to attend the Inquest;
(g)         the chief officer of police:
(h)         any other person who in the opinion of the Coroner is aproperly
             interested person.
             Jervis 13.2
                                   5

The evidence given by witnesses at an Inquest is usually oral, but
documentary evidence can also be used, including photographs. Written
statements made earlier by witnesses can also be used.

A witness must first be examined by a Coroner, after the conclusion
of which any properly interested party may examine the witness. The
witnesses' own representatives should examine him/her last of all.
An important point to note here is that Legal Aid is not yet available
for representation in Coroner's Court.

Joinder of Inquests

Where an incident involving many deaths occurs it is common for the
Inquests to be held concurrently. It is the right of each person to
have his/her own seperate inquest even where as at a multiple inquest
the cause of death may be the same in many cases.

The Hillsborough Inquests

If the Director of Public Prosecutions decides not to bring charges
the Coroner's Court can commence and will take place with a Jury and
witnesses.

IF however the D.P.P. decides to bring a charge of manslaughter then
Section 16 of the Coroner's Act 1988 requires the Coroner to adjourn
the Inquest until after the conclusion of the relevant criminal
proceedings.

The findings of the Inquest as to the cause of death must not be
inconsistent with the outcome of any relevant criminal proceedings,
i.e. IF the ensuing verdict is a conviction of manslaughter then the
Inquest Jury must return a verdict of unlawful killing, but if there
had been an aquittal then presumably only a verdict of Accidental
Death or Misadventure or an Open Verdict would be allowed.

IF no charges are preferred, then in due course the Coroner's Inquest
will be resumed and verdicts returned. Should there be a verdict of
Unlawful Killing the Coroner could refer all the papers to the D.P.P.
for further consideration.




7.2.90
                                        6




     Optional Legal Strategies

     Doug Fraser - Solicitor from Liverpool Steering Committee


     Mr Doug Fraser is a partner in the Liverpool firm of Silverman and
     Livermore, which was contacted within the first week of the disaster.
     He is also a member of the Liverpool Steering Committee. Within that
     first week, Liverpool’s local Law Society thought about forming a
     Steering Committee. This Committee was duly elected at an open meeting
     at the Law Society in Liverpool. Six lawyers were elected and they
     have gone on to represent over 130 firms of solicitors around the
     country who are acting for the bereaved and injured. They call them­
     selves the Hillsborough Solicitors Group. The Steering Committee see
     their priorities as falling into five main areas. These are:-

     (i)      The Inquiry. To represent relatives en bloc. The Home
               Office had given approval for this to happen and paid for
               this representation.

     (ii)     Inquests. To represent relatives en bloc once again. This
               had worked well at the Inquiry and seems an appropriate way
               of handling the Inquests.

     (iii)     Trust Fund. To have some legal input to the Fund.

     (iv)      Civil claims. To represent families in any claims they
               might wish to make for compensation.

     (v)      Information. The Committee publishes regular bulletins
               which are sent out to various firms of solicitors which
               make up the Hillsborough Solicitors Group. These solicitors
               are then able to take from the Bulletins relevant information
               to pass on to their clients.

     Having given a background description about the Steering Committee, Mr
     Fraser went on to describe how his talk would give a flavour of other
     legal matters, including the Inquests themselves, and he divided this
     part of his talk into eight sections

     1.       Effects of the Disaster on families.
     2.       Timetable of events.
     3.       Criminal Proceedings.
     4.       Public Inquiry.
     5.       Civil Claims for damages.
     6.       Distribution of Trust Funds.
     7.       Inquests.
     8.       Questions and Answers.


1.   Effects of the Disaster

     It is recognised that the physical damage incurred as a result of an
     accident or disaster is easier to see and assess then emotional and
     psychological damage. The lawyers have to try and assess the emotional
     damage in financial terms for compensation. This, by necessity, will
     take some time,as it needs to be at least a year after the event before
     the full extent of the damage is known, i.e. is it permanent; has it
     passed and if so how long did it last for? One area that the Steering
                                       7


     Committee is looking at is the Press and the effect it had in terms
     of psychological damage.

2.   Timetable of Legal Events

     (i)       The original timetable of events would have been as follows:-

               (a)   Public Inquiry and the publication of its findings in
                     two parts.

               (b)   Inquests. They had been due to start in January, 1990
                     and would have had a very high profile.

               (c)   Civil Claims.

               (d)   Steering Committee would then have invited the Director
                     of Public Prosecutions to look at all the papers and
                     evidence available with a view to a question of criminal
                     proceedings.

     However, asPeter Wright, Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police, sent
     a copy ofLord Justice Taylor’s report to D.P.P., the timetable of events
     has had to be revised.

     (ii)      The revised timetable is as follows

               (a)   Public Inquiry.

               (b)    D.P.P. must now consider Lord Justice Taylor’s Report
                     and evidence being gathered by West Midlands Police.
                     If no charges or minor charges are brought then the
                     original timetable would come back into effect, with
                     either the Inquests or the Civil Cases coming first.
                     However, if the D.P.P. recommends Prosecution then
                     those charges must be heard before either the Inquests
                     or the Civil Cases.

     If there are serious prosecutions, i.e. manslaughter, then solicitors
     would expect every procedural opportunity and device to be used that
     would prolong and delay the event. Those prosecuted will almost
     certainly seek an oral committal before Magistrates, and seek to have
     itthrown out. Then there would be a full blown Crown Court trial. All
     thiswould extend the timescale by some months, meaning that the Inquests
     would be severely delayed.

3.   Criminal Proceedings

     Since the Zeebrugge disaster, it has been possible to charge a corporate
     body with manslaughter. This is because manslaughter can carry a fine as
     a sentence, whereas the sentence for murder is life imprisonment.
     Currently, the West Midlands Police are investigating various agencies
     and bodies in a corporate sense, and individuals within these organisations.
     These include the South Yorkshire Police; Sheffield Wednesday Football
     Club and the Football Association; Sheffield City Council; the
     engineeering company who designed the barriers in the pens, and the fans
     in their broadest sense are under consideration. There may also be others
     who are being investigated. The charges that could be brought range
     from manslaughter to minor breaches of rules and regulations.
                                       8



4.   Public Inquiry

     The injured and bereaved were represented at the Public Inquiry by way
     of bloc representation. The Liverpool Steering Committee therefore had
     a team of lawyers at the Inquiry. This bloc representation took the
     form of:-

     (a)        A Q.C.
     (b)        A junior barrister.
     (c)       Input from the six lawyers*representing the Steering Committee.

     At the Inquiry, the various solicitors in the Hillsborough Solicitors
     Group gave information obtained from their clients to the six lawyers
     representing the Steering Committee. They then acted as filters of this
     information, i.e. as information came in, it was sifted and then
     presented to the barristers.

     There was a massive amount ofevidence  to be dealt with at  the Public
     Inquiry and it made sense to have bloc representation inorder   to avoid
     a situation whereby over 150 solicitors were acting on behalf of
     individual clients.

     The Steering Committee believe that bloc representation should also be
     used at the Inquest. Doug Fraser has already discussed this with the
     Coroner, Dr Popper, who also agrees that it is an appropriate way to
     represent the bereaved at the Inquest.

5.   Civil Claims

     In Doug Fraser’s opinion, the system of compensating the victims of
     disaster in this country is woefully inadequate, but it can only be
     changed by Parliament.

     In relation to civil claims, the Liverpool Steering Committee met the
     insurers of the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and the Police in
     July, 1989. The insurers denied liability so writs were issued by the
     Committee and statements'of claims served.

     Since this time, the Police insurers have in fact agreed to pay in full
     claims for killed, injured or those suffering from shock as a result
     of their experience at the match. Seven hundred (700) claims have been
     dealt with. Liability has not however been accepted and the insurers
     have not agreed to compensateany other category of people affected by the
     disaster. The Steering Committee are seeking to extend the category of
     compensation to include those who saw the events unfold on the television'
     and were severely affected by what they saw. Test cases have been selected
     from this group of people, including relatives of the deceased and
     injured, and will, be put before the insurers in June, 1990.

     The Steering Committee believe that the victims of disaster who suffer
     from post traumatic stress disorder should be adequately compensated
     and they are seeking to push back the barriers of compensation to include
     this group of people.

     It is also the opinion of the Steering Committee that someone was
     responsible for the disaster at Hillsborough, that it was not ’’just one
     of those things’’, which the denial of liability might suggest.
                                         9


     In relation to payments made to individuals from the Trust Fund, it is
     important to note that civil claims are not affected by Trust Fund
     payments. It is therefore possible for people to be given money by the
     Trust Fund and claim against insurers. The main difference to note is
     that money paid to children in Civil Claims will be invested by the
     Court who have absolute authority to do this.

6.   The Trust Fund

     The Trust Fund was set up with the intention of making financial payments
     to people affected by the disaster from donations given by the general
     public as an expression of sympathy.

     At the present time (January, 1990) the total amount of money received
     into the Trust Fund is £11.5 million.    The Trustees have paid out
     approximately £6 million to the bereaved and £2 million to the seriously
     injured. Seven hundred and fifty (750) claims have been received and
     four hundred (400) have been dealt with.

     The Fund is administered by a group of Trustees who are experienced
     lawyers and accountants. Individual levels of need have been, and
     continue to be, assessed by a group of doctors and lawyers who contribute
     to the decision as to who should get what.

     The Liverpool Steering Committee have no active part in the decisions of
     the Trust Fund, but they are in a position to offer financial advice to
     families, many of whom will receive substantial amounts of money. Never
     having had vast amounts of money before, they will benefit from professional
     advice on investing the money for their children, etc.

7.   The Inquest

     At the time of writing (January, 1^90), the date of the Inquest remains
     unknown.

     (1)      Where the Inquest comes in the. timetable of events.
     (2)      What the "opposition" are going to do.

     Both of these will influence the type of profile that the Inquest has and
     therefore the nature of the Inquest.

     Listed below are possible scenarios that will dictate the nature of the
     Inquest.

     HIGH PROFILE                               LOW PROFILE

     IF the D.P.P. decides not to make          IF the D.P.P. decides to prosecute
     criminal charges the Inquest will          and brings minor charges, the
     be used to try to bring a verdict          Coroner may decide to defer the
     of unlawful killing and will               Inquest, in which case the
     therefore be high profile,                 Inquest will not be held until
     involving many witnesses and               after the Criminal proceedings
     substantial representation from            and will therefore be low
     Solicitors.                                profile.
                                  10


HIGH PROFILE                               LOW PROFILE

IF the D.P.P. decides to make              IF the D.P.P. decides to bring
minor criminal charges, the                major charges, e.g. manslaughter,
Coroner may decide to go ahead             the Coroner must defer the
with the Inquest. A verdict of             Inquests until after the
unlawful'killing by the Inquest            criminal proceedings and again
jury could still be sought and             the Inquest will be low profile.
the Police and the Club decide
to have representation at the
Inquest, thus making it high
profile.

It is the Coroner’s reponsibility to each individual family to investigate
into the cause of death of a relative; the main questions being where,
when and how the person met his/her death. Every family is entitled to
have representation at the Inquest. The majority of families will be
legally represented by the Steering Committee Solicitors.

Doug Fraser has had a number of discussions with the Coroner, Dr Popper,
and will remain in contact with him to discuss issues arising regarding
the Inquest.

Dr Popper is likely to hold the Inquest in two parts. The first part will
be a generic inquiry into the events of 15th April, 1989. This may be
done in a relatively short time because Dr Popper will have the information
from the public inquiry available to him.

The second part will be the actual Inquests. Dr Popper is keen to have
95 separate inquests, one for each bereaved family, to give them as much
information as possible about the way in which the relative met his/her
death.

In fact, many of the families have already had access to post-mortem
reports, because the Coroner has released them to solicitors if the families
have requested them.

At Dr Popper’s request, the West Midlands Police are currently preparing
95 files, one on each of the deceased. Solicitors so far do not have
access to these files.  (See question iv).

Timetable of Inquest

In Doug Fraser’s opinion, Dr Popper is likely to structure the order of
the inquests around the Pathologists who examined the bodies. This means
that the order may appear to be random.

Logistics of the Inquest

According to the Steering Committee, the Medico Legal Centre is not big
enough to hold the Hillsborough Inquests even if they are low profile.

The bereaved families have already told their solicitors that they would
like certain facilities made available to them, and these include:-

(1)      A private room to get away from the attention of the media and
         where they can sit quietly if things get too difficult.
                                 11


(2)       Separate facilities for the client to talk to the lawyer in
          private, should they so wish.

Finally, Doug Fraser stressed that individual families should make sure
that their lawyers spend sufficient time with them before and throughout
the Inquest.




26.1.90
                                          12
              Questions   &   Answers - Doug Fraser


Q.'   (i)     _____________|of Knowsley Borough Council asked if T.V. companies
              were being considered for liability, as some people had suffered
              shock through watching the event on T.V.

A.            "The Steering Committee looked at T.V. companies and newspapers',
              but you have the option to turn off your T.V. set. The Steering
              Committee decided to concentrate on one or two people to blame.
              If we receive specific instructions from clients, as individual
              solicitors, to look at other issues like T.V. we will do so-."

Q.    (ii)                of Gloucestershire Social Serviced commented that
              as the Steering Committee had said they were not going to have
              anything to do with the national press, could some sort of
              statement be made that would help to deflect some of the press
              interest.

A.            "The Steering Committee have a press officer. We are not
              prepared to give lerigthy interviews to the media. We would be
              prepared to give a press statement, but these are often not
              published. Television is different; it has an air of
              respectability. We will talk to the T.V. if our clients want
              it, but not to the press."

Q.    (iii)   ________________ |of Sefton wondered how clients would get on
              at the Inquests if the Inquests were managed in an adversarial
              fashion and those clients were represented by solicitors who
              were outside the umbrella of the Steering Committee.

A.            "The Steering Committee would like to think that those
              solicitors who had the best interests of their client at least
              would come under the Steering Committee umbrella, but if a
              particular solicitor did not want to be represented under the
              Steering Committee then Dr Popper would be informed of this."

              David Wilkins replied "One family at the Zeebrugge inquest
              was represented by a very eminent Q.C. outside the bloc
              representation. He did a lot to probe into the area of
              corporate responsibility. A solicitor working on his own
              can do some good work."

Q.    (iv)    ___________ of Sefton commented that in relation to files
              held by the West Midlands Police on the 95 deceased, social
              workers had already had access to these files and been able
              to pass on relevant information to the families.

A.            "I know that social workers have seen the files, but lawyers
              haven’t. With respect it’s not the same as a lawyer seeing it
              and explaining the legal implications. The main thing is that
              families are entitled to the information and should get it."

Q.    (v)     __________ |of Warrington asked if it was still possible for
              people to make claims to the Trust Fund.

A.            "The Steering Committee can only deal, with those people who
              come forward. People should be encouraged to come forward.
              People see the Trust Fund for people who were bereaved or
              seriously injured and would rather claim against Insurers.
              The Trustees decide who gets paid, not lawyers.’’
                                  13



THE PROVISION OF THE DECEASED’S PERSONAL DETAILS TO THE BEREAVED

Sophie Tarassenko - Chairman, Kings Cross Action Group

                    - Team Leader, Kings Cross Support Group


Following a disaster, a significant number of bereaved want, need,
detailed information concerning - i n t h e words of one of the bereaved
following King’s Cross - "exactly what happened to the person they
loved: how, where, how quickly they died."

Following King’s Cross this was done in private consultations with
Public Inquiry lawyers representing victims. These took place during
the Inquest.

Following Clapham Junction this was done by Individual Inquest for each
family.

This information, and the manner of its transmission, can be of very
great importance in the process of coming to terms with grief. The
following points have emerged.

1   .    it must be remembered that not every bereaved wants this
          information, but every bereaved person should be offered it
          without having to request it. Naturally, if the bereaved
          person does not want the information it does not have to be
          given.

2.       The' information when given should be both full and frank
          and not edited (much less distorted) with kindly intent to
          be less hurtful to the feelings of the bereaved.

3   .    Timing is important. Experience indicates that the need to
          know arises after months rather than weeks (with one exception,
          see para. 4 below). It is often prompted by the media coverage
          of the public inquiry. In some cases, the need to know arises
          after a year or more has elapsed. Therefore, the bereaved
          should be told both that they can have access to the information
          at an Individual Inquest (see para. 5 below) and that a proper
          documentary record of that Inquest will be available to them.

4   .    The exception is seeing the body. Whereas the great majority
          will not be strong enough to want or need the detailed information
          with which we are here concerned for at least several weeks it
          appears that the strongest member of a family has often wanted
          to see the body in the immediate aftermath. Out of a wish to
          avoid injury to feelings such a request has on occasions been
          discouraged or refused. This has sometimes given rise to long-
          lasting anger. Every deceased should be offered the opportunity
          to see the body without having to request it. This should be
          done with skilled support before, during and after the viewing.
          The bereaved should also be told that they can have access to
          any photographs taken of the body. Even where these offers are
          not taken up the fact of their having been made is important.
                                   14



5.        Returning to the provision of detailed information, the best
           approach seems to be by individual Coroner’s Inquests
           expressly focused on these details, held several months
           after the disaster, and where the bereaved are represented
           by one of the team representing the victims in the public
           inquiry if there is one.

6.        This approach leans heavily on the Clapham Junction experience,
          which appeared to work very well. Apart from ensuring that
           there is formal structure for addressing the question this
           approach has the following advantages

           (a)   it treats each deceased individually.

           (b)   where both Coroner and public inquiry lawyer are involved
                  it doubly ensures that all information will be brought
                 out.

           (c)   since the inquests will be consecutive, bereaved will be
                 brought together in a way which affords a natural
                  (rather than contrived) opportunity for sharing their
                 grief, which can, for some, be valuable.

          (d)    there is, or should be, transcripted record so that where
                 bereaved do not attend, given that the detailed information
                 will be elicited in just as exacting a way, there will be
                 a proper record in case they should one day feel the need
                 to know (see para. 3 above).

7.        Some further matters should be noted.

8.        Where there is no public inquiry, the bereaved should still have
           legal representation for the Inquest. Experience indicates a
           compelling case for a lawyer to be at their side to de-mystify
           the procedure and explain everything in layman’s terms.

9.        It should be emphasised that the Individual Inquests would be
           limited to this purpose. In the usual case they would all then
           be adjourned to deal with the other statutory obligations of an
           Inquest in such form as the Coroner deems appropriate.

10*       At the Individual Inquest a room should be set aside for private
           consultation. Sometimes, this detailed information is best
           transmitted initially in private.

11.       If Recommendation 151 of the Fennel Report becomes law (the
           duplication involved in holding both a public inquiry and a
          coroner’s inquest should be avoided), the Inquiry Inspector
          should hold Individual Inquiries.




30.1.90
Questions and Answers
-                    \ "and Sophie Tarasenko




 Bill Pemberton, a member of the H.F.S.G., asked whether or not
'the claims for liability were settled before the Inquest or
 afterwards.

Sophie Tarasenko replied that most of them were not settled
yet. Writs had not been issued before the Inquest and liability
had not been admitted to date (6.10.89).

Bill Pemberton then queried whether or not the Inquest result
would have any bearing on liability claims.

Sophie Tarasenko said that the Inquest result would only have
a bearing on Criminal proceedings, not civil liability.

Doug Fraser said that although in theory it doesn’t, the
result of the Inquest does have a bearing on civil liability.

   __________J social worker, Sefton, asked whether there were
any families at King’s Cross who were not represented or did
not want to attend the Inquest.

___________________ - Yes. Several families were not present
initially, because some members of families had tried to
dissuade those who wanted to attend the Inquest from doing so.
Not all families were represented initially, but by the second
day, all the families were represented because there was a lot
of anger about the way the families were being treated. Eventually,
one lawyer represented all the families.

David Wilkinson stressed the role of the caring profession,
which had to be to help people to do what they want to do.
This can be problematic becauae of conflict with other family
members. Social workers themselves will need strength and
support around the Inquest to support the families.

\          [ Runcorn Social Services, asked whether families
had information about their relatives’ death prior to the
Inquest.

Sophie Tarasenko - The King’s Cross families had a death
certificate but had to wait ten months for this. They had
post mortem details indicating carbon monoxide levels prior
to the inquest, but no details of where their relative was
in the station and how long they may have survived for. At
King’s Cross, this was important because where they were
affected how they died.

j          Sefton, asked if the families do not want to attend
the Inquest, will it do them a disservice.

Doug fraser indicated it won’t make any difference in legal
terms, but may in psychological terms.
Sophie Tarasenko recommended individual inquests with
transcripts of the dialogue between the lawyer representing
the family and the Coroner. Details of how, where, when
their relative died are a necessity so that families can
look at them if and when they are ready.

David Wilkinson - At Zeebrugge, the individual lawyers got
the transcripts to hold for families for the future. He
indicated that it may be two years before a family might
want to see the information and that it could be useful for
social workers to have the information available to them
for counselling purposes.

           , social worker, Alder Hey Unit, asked if the
individual time spent with the lawyers answered the questions
that the families wanted. '

Sophie Tarasenko - Yes. With the Inquiry and Police reports,
it was possible to establish the whereabouts of people. The
lawyer showed them a map of where their relative was and also
showed them the fuller pathologist report, which answered
all their questions.

Bill Pemberton asked whether the alcohol levels in blood were
taken into account.

Sophie Tarasenko - No. The only blood levels measured were
carbon monoxide and cyanide and the general state of the body,
whether the person was fit and healthy, overweight or
whatever.
                                    17



David Wilkinson - Area Manager, Swale Social Services

Involved in the Herald of Free Enterprise disaster at Zeebrugge


In the Herald of Free- Enterprise disaster, 193 people died and there were
346 survivors. Potentially, every one of the survivors with relatives,
and bereaved relatives, could have attended the Inquest and been
represented. This could have an intimidating impact on 'carers' and as
much preparation as possible is important.

The Inquest was the first time the families came together again since
the tragedy as they were scattered around the country. The Inquiry
had had little impact on families, many of whom were still in a state of
shock. Therefore, the Inquest was their first opportunity to take in
what actually happened.

Preparing Families

It is very important to share as much information with families as early
as possible before the inquest. Some only heard the details of what
happened to. their loved ones for the first time in the Inquest. (This also
applies to survivors and their families). So, they need to have heard the
description of the body and the circumstances (e.g. where and when) of
death before they go to the Court. At Zeebrugge, a body's appearance had
been changed by chemicals in the water. The family had not known this and
the 'wrong' description they heard gave rise to false ’’hope' and great
distress - an unforgivable mistake. Social workers therefore need to do
their homework on all the reports available - although you can never
eliminate all risks.

Survivors

Survivors will also be present at the Inquest in large numbers as
interested parties, or many may be called as witnesses. They and their
families must not be forgotten and considered to be the "lucky ones".
They too will need the offer of care and support.

The Inquest

Number of People

At Dover, in addition to the Coroner, his/her officers, and the jury,
there were lawyers for groups of families, individual families, survivors,
crew, company and Police. With all these groups and individuals and their
legal representatives, the Court fills up very easily. All of these are
potentially in need of some sort of support at some stage of the hearing.

The local Coroner's Court was inadequate, so the Inquest was held in
the ballroom of the Town Hall.

Scheduling of Individual Inquests

Families were told, beforehand on which day they could expect to have their
individual inquest heard. There were problems however when (as can happen
in the case of a full-scale adversarial affair) arguments over points of
law arose causing adjournments for advice or rulings. If this happens, it
can mean delays of minutes, hours or days. There is no way of avoiding
                                    18



this and it does need to be anticipated by carers - what do you do when
families have travelled for their particular inquest and have to wait?

Needs of Families

Exhibits,, such as models or drawings, can be valuable so that families
can identify precisely where their loved one died. At Dover, it was
important for carers to be with them as it was at this point that people
could put different pieces of stories together, perhaps for the first
time.

Some families may wish/need to sit through the complete hearing, which
at Dover lasted 3J weeks. Consideration needs to be given to how such
families may be provided for. Even families who are there throughout
will not hear and take in all of what is said, and may need to go back
over the information at a later date. Social workers need to take this
into account.

Conflicting Needs

What lawyers need to do in order to establish blame, and what the families
need to hear can often be very   different. Ultimately, the end result may
come together, but the process of gettingthere may involve conflicts of
needs.

Similarly, a very upsetting aspect of the inquest can be if bodies are
identified as numbers, e.g. during pathologists' evidence. This makes
things easier for the pathologists but it is extremely distressing for
relatives. Thought and attention need to be given to this before coming
to the hearing.

Some family members may be called to give evidence as well as to hear it,
which can be doubly difficult.Thought has to be given to   caring for
these people as witnesses and observers.

Private Rooms

In Dover, there was inadequate provision for rooms where people could
speak with their lawyers and carers in private or just take 'time out'
- protected from the public and press.   It is important for people to
have this. Families may also need a base in Sheffield, separate from the
hearing venue, where they can go.

The need for accommodation also has to be considered.

Role of Social Workers

David Wilkinson felt that the inquest was more difficult than the 'impact'
phase, with carers having to sit and listen, calmly and quietly, watching
what is happening in all quarters for long stretches of time. There was
therefore a need for adequate numbers of carers, but there has to be a
limit.

They always had present in Court three members of the Herald Assistance
Unit who were not connected with the individual family, as well as any
particular carer that a family may wish to have with them.
                                    19



In advance, they tried to establish what would be the role of the Herald
Assistance Unit during the Inquest. This included:

(i)       To support families and individuals through the Inquest and
          afterwards.   (Families may not wish to leave immediately after
        • the Inquest, but stay and talk to other families); and to
          provide 'time out' facilities within or near Inquest setting.

          This involved negotiating w.ith families and individual carers
          what support they required. This ranged from meeting people
          at the station and taking them to the Unit, to holding their
          hand and comforting them when giving or hearing evidence. It
          is about responding to what the individual needs - including
          them not wanting you!  (But still being available just in case).

(ii)      To respond to requests of assistance form anyone in the Inquest
          setting.

          This means that social workers have conflicting roles working
          with bereaved families and survivors as well as with the
          'culprits' and 'villains'. In Dover, this particularly meant
          the crew (in Sheffield, it could mean Police, club employees,
          stewards, council employees, etc.). Some of these may be
          facing charges. They will be under extreme pressure at the
          Inquest (Witnesses can refuse to answer questions which may
          incriminate them - in Dover, no-one refused to answer questions).
          They are people who made mistakes and who deserve care and
          support if they require it. A person needs to be allocated to
          this group.

          This can be hard for the vereaved relatives to understand, and
          carers may be subjected to their anger for helping the 'culprits'.

Other Participants

All witnesses should be offered support:

Pathologists often appear blase and callous, but the one iri Dover was hurt
by the experience and was changed as a result. Who cares for them?

Who cares for the Coroner? They could not get near theirs in Dover, but
he did write a lto about it and may have had some influence on others.
(Although not ideal, the Zeebrugge inquest was^handled sensitively).

The jurors may require support after the Inquest.

Press

Another aspect of the social worker's role relates to the press. They will
be there and will focus on the most distressed people. The job of the
carers is to protect people when required. It is useful for local carers
to know the building well - e.g. knowledge of rooms, corridors and exits,
and making an ally of the janitor - in order to enable people to avoid
the press as much as possible.
                                    20


 Visiting Ground

 David felt that many people will also want to visit the place where
 their loved ones died when they come for the Inquest. This may be
 difficult to organise, so that it is dealt with sympathetically, and
 have the press kept away. Negotiations would need to be made with the
 football club to discuss this.

 Caring for the carers

 The Inquest will also be a very stressful experience for the carers.
 Despite preparation they cannot predict what will happen, and will be
 trying to support people they have never met in some cases, not knowing
 how they will react or what they will require of them. As has been said
 they may be treated in a hostile manner when they try to help the 'villains'.
 Thought has to be given to caring for the carers.

Also, it is only natural that during the course of events there may be
some things which happen or are said which are funny. Nobody can be
serious for weeks. This can feel difficult and awkward in the circumstances,
but despite the pain around we are all human and have to laugh.

After the Inquest

Reports

Families should be able to have access to verbatim reports of the Inquest
hearing, although a family who does not wish to attend may want the social
worker to tell it to them in his/her own words. If a family is not in
attendance, the social worker needs to pay special attention to what is
being said, or make sure the lawyer knows that you want that information,
so that _if at a later date the family ask you for it, you have it. This
service has to be made available for when the family feel they need it,
even if it means the social worker taking notes and storing them.

Jurors

In Dover, a de-briefing service for jurors was offered for after the
Inquest. The Coroner agreed to this and wrote to jurors but they did not
take it up.




2.2.90
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS - DAVID WILKINSON


Does the Inquest help the healing process?

Getting the information is very important and can help some families
move forward.

Getting the death certificate, having identification positively proven,
knowing how a person died, etc. are things that people may take away
from an Inquest which may allow them to move on. For others, it is a
resurrection of the feelings, particularly for survivors who have to
re-live the events.

How do you prepare people for the Inquest?

In Dover, they were not in a good position to prepare people. They went
into it cold - most had not previously been to an Inquest, or to a
Training Day. They did not know what to expect, and in any case, it was
not like an ordinary inquest - more 'theatrical' with large numbers of
lawyers and press.

When verdicts were given, the foreman of the jury had to readout 'Unlawful
killing' 192 times, and three crew members had to listen to it - how do
you prepare for that?

Number of workers in Court?

This has to be gauged in accordance with what is reasonable for the
families.   You must not swamp the Court with carers.

In Dover, they had permission from   the Coroner to come and go as required.
He would call on them if he felt a   witness needed assistance.

How did you liaise with other agencies?

There weren't any other agencies as such. The large number of people
scattered all over the country made it difficult to ensure that all had
support agencies involved. For those people outside the immediate vicinity,
it was very difficult as people forget very quickly and did 'not understand
the families' needs, leaving them extremely isolated.

The Dover team visited 80% of the families 'away' from the area, used
lawyers and contacted local branches of CRUSE and Social Services
Departments.

(a)       Was there provision for accommodation for families wishing to
          stay over?

(b)       Is there a role for the clergy or medics at the Inquest?

(a)       Families did wish to stay in Dover and Zeebrugge.   Whenever
          this was needed Townsend Thoresen paid the bill.

(b)       People should be allowed to have whatever support system they
          require, so clergy should certainly be available for those who
          wish to have them.
                                              22


SUMMARY   AND R E C O M M E N D A T I O N S


These recommendations have been summarised from the text of the various
contributors to the day.

In the afternoon, the participants were divided into groups to look at
reactions to the day and to plan for the future. Their contribution is
also included in the following summary.


General Observations

1.        In all the build up of the Inquests, it is vital to remember
           that the most important people there are the families.

2.        The verdicts for the families are not just a formality to be
           gone through. The outcome for them will be important.

3.        It was thought important to note that Sheffield's feelings
           around the time of the Inquest may be quite different to
           those of Liverpool.

4.        The study day was useful as a way for people to meet; exchange
           views, ideas and information.

5.        A refresher study day to be held, once the date of the Inquests
           is known.

Social Workers

1.        Social workers need to help famililes be as informed and
           prepared as possible before the Inquest re circumstances of
           death and description of body. To do this, the social workers
           need to do their homework and be as well prepared as possible.

2.        Social workers could arrange locally to attend a Coroner's
           Court for a day to help them in their work with families.

3.        There may be conflicts within families about whether or not
           to attend the Inquest. The role of carers is to help people
           do what they want to do.

4.        Numbers of carers needs to be gauged carefully. Thereneed
          to be adequate numbers, but there has to be a limit - should
          not swamp the Court.

5.        Social workers should provide a rota cover for the Inquests.
           The role of the social worker at  the Inquest could  be
           discussed by all the authorities  who would provide  cover
           for this rota.

6. .      The Inquest is not a place for counselling, but for support
           and clarification of what is going on.

7.        Social workers should negotiate their role/relationship with
          people, responding to what they want.
                                     23


8.         Survivors also need care and support. They are not the
           "lucky ones. "

9.         All those involved in the Inquests may need some support
            at some time. (Families, survivors, witnesses, jurors,
            Coroner, Sheffield Wednesday F.C. and council staff.)

10.        There would be a need to support the Police and other agencies
            during the Inquest. The question was raised as to whether the
            social work support for the various agencies should come from
            a different group of social workers than those working with
            the bereaved.

11.        Witnesses may be cross-examined very severely.   They will need
            support.

12.        Carers need to be supported'and cared for during and after
            the Inquests, and need to prepare themselves for it.

13.        Sheffield Team should be kept informed of which social workers
            and families are likely to be attending the Inquest.

14.        Social workers from teams other than core teams often feel
            isolated and lacking in information. Could they be linked
            or adopted by core teams?

15.        Co-ordinators of core teams should take responsibility for
            disseminating information to isolated workers.

16.        As some teams may not be in existence at the time of the
            Inquests, it was considered necessary that managers needed to
            take this into account when closing teams, to ensure a
            continuation of a smooth flow of information and to help
            reduce administrative problems.

Families

1.         It was acknowledged that families need to be aware of what
            information is available to them and the importance of having
            access to this information before the Inquests. They should
            be offered the information without needing to request it.

2.         Post mortem reports are available from the Coroner.
            Families should be offered the opportunity to see these before
            tne Inquest.

3.         West Midlands Police have files on each of the deceased.
           Social workers can contact the West Midlands Police for
            information contained in the files which can then be passed
           on to families.

4.         Information should not be edited or distorted in an attempt
           to protect the feelings of the bereaved.

5.         All bereaved should have legal representation and if possible
           someone to sit with them to de-mystify and explain the
           procedure.
                                     24




6.          Families should make sure lawyers give them sufficient time
            before and during the Inquest. It is important for people
            to get to know their lawyer before the proceedings.

7.          There should be 95 separate inquests to give as much
            information as possible to bereaved families.

8   .       The Sheffield Medico-Legal Centre will not be big enough
            for the Inquests even if low profile.

9.          Whether or not the bereaved attend,a transcript record of
            the Inquest should be made and kept, so that information is
            not lost to the family and can be referred to at a later
            date.

10.         A schedule of individual inquests helps families. Carers
            need to try to be prepared for the delays in the schedule.

11      .   Families may wish to attend the whole Inquest.   They need to
            be catered for.

12      .   Provide a close-circuit T.V. for families or relatives if
            they feel unable to go into the Court itself.

13.         Telephones should be provided so that families can keep in
            touch with relatives to give information and receive support.

14.         It was stressed how necessary it would be for the deceased
            to be always referred to by name during the Inquest, and never
            by number.


15.         Accommodation may need to be provided for families who need
            or wish to stay in Sheffield.

16.         Private rooms should be provided for relatives to have
            'space' and privacy, and to be able to consult with lawyers.
            A separate room should also be provided for witnesses for
            the same reason.

17.         Families may also need a base, separate from the Inquests.

18.         Bereaved families may wish to visit the ground at the time
            of the Inquest. Negotiations need to be made in advance.

19.         People should be allowed the support they want, e.g. clergy,
            social workers, relatives, friends, etc.
20      .   Families will be assisted by the Coroner being prepared to
            listen to them, and direct information to them as well as to
            lawyers.

Press

1.          Press be excluded from the Coroner's Court itself - maybe
            watch the proceedings via closed-circuit T.V.
The families should be protected from the Press-

Social workers to be given advice/training on dealing with
the press and the media. It helps for them to know the
building and the area.

At the Kings Cross Inquest, the families got together and
nominated a group of four to represent them with the press.
These gave prepared statements to the press while the rest
left by a back door.
     LIST OF U S E F U L A D D R E S S E S   AND T E L E P H O N E NUMBERS


■ Name                           Address                                     Telephone No.

 Mr. B. Pemberton                Hillsborough Family Support Group
 Vice Chair                      211 Hunts Cross Avenue
                                 Woolton
                                 LIVERPOOL, L25 9NB                                      I

 Doug Fraser                     Silverman and Livermore
 Steering Committee              11-13 Victoria Street
 Solicitor                       LIVERPOOL
                                 L2 5QQ

 Assistant Chief                 West Midlands Polcie H.Q.
 Constable Jones                 Lloyd House
                                 BIRMINGHAM
                                 B4 6NQ

Dr. S. Popper                   Medico-Legal Centre
Coroner                         WateryrStreet
                                SHEFFIELD, 3.

Superintendent Taylor           West Midlands Police H.Q.
                                Lloyd House
                                BIRMINGHAM
                                B4 6NQ

Aileen Walker-Smith             c/o London Borough of Camden
Co-ordinator                    Social Services Department
King's Cross                    Willing House
                                356 Grays Inn Road
                                LONDON
                                WC1X 8BH

David Wilkinson                 Area Manager
                                Swale Social Services Dept.
                                Divisional County Offices
                                Avenue of Remembrance
                                SITTINGBOURNE
                                Kent
                                ME10 4DD
                                           27


LIST OF U S EF U L A DD R ES S ES   AND T EL E PH O NE NUMBERS

CORE TEAMS


Hillsborough Centre          Stanley Park
                             1 Anfield Road
                             LIVERPOOL 4

Knowsley Helpline            Staff House No-. 1
                             The Connaughtons
                             Tarbuck Road
                             HUYTON
                             Merseyside
                             L36 5XW                             (

Sefton Helpline              Marbent
                             14 Marine Terrace
                             Waterloo
                             LIVERPOOL
                             L22 5PR

Wirral Support Team          c/o Birkenhead Town Hall
                             Brandon Street
                             BIRKENHEAD
                             Merseyside


Sheffield
Hillsborough Task Team       c/o Hillsborough Library
                             Middlewood Road
                             SHEFFIELD, 6.




John Pilling                 Family & Community Services Department
Assistant Director           Redvers House
                             Union Street
                             SHEFFIELD, 1.                    1 ^ ^
                                                     30 July 1990

Dear A
I hope that this letter finds both you and your mum well. Russella
and I met as arranged and we decided that we should use the following
headings a$ guidelines for our Individual topics:
1)   Task Undertaken
2)   Reason for Undertaking Task
3)   Method of Undertaking Task
4)   Resources Required and Resources Available
5)   Other agencies Involved
6)   Results of Task
7)   Criticisms and Recommendations

The following dates are for your diary - when we three shall meet
again (in thunder, lightening etc . . . ):

     16 August     at Grenoside       - 1.00 pm
     10 September at NGH              - 9.00 am
     24 September (evening meeting at my house) 8,00 pm
We aim to have the report completed in draft form by 1st October,
and finally complete it by 7 October to send to John Pillinghon
8 October,
Looks like we'll be busy.
Yours sincerely




social worKer
HTT reports


Tasks Undertaken
Reasons for undertaking tasks
Method of undertaking
Other agencies involved
                    *n,^£>o^*^j2A   i / /^ o c o a ^ M   o A s e u J L id a b
Results of task
i ogc:nn«; t-n he— lear-nt
Cy          Tf             <x


1)   Coroner’s Training Day
2)   Ground Visits
3)   Matches
4)   South Yorks Police
5)   Tracings -



      HTT


Coroner’s Inquest Training Day


Reasons for undertaking


     Information had come to light from other specially set up
disaster teams (King’s Cross and Zeebrugge) that indicated a need
for social work input at the Inquests,
     At the time of setting up the Hiltt the date of the inquests
was unknown and was to remain so for many months,because of the
involvement of the DPP.
     Other disaster teams had experienced severe problems at the
time of their inquests for a variety of reasons, not least a lack
of information about inquests in general and individual families
rights to specific information in particular. An offer to
disseminate some of this knowledge had been made by              |-
      1 the co-ordinator of the KX team and it was felt that the
best way for her to do this would be via a special training day.
Requirements


Never having set up a training day before it initially seemed a
very daunting task. Obvious needs were....... 1) a Venue
2) Speakers
3) A list of attenders
4) Possible dates


Two possible speakers had agreed to make themselves available but
one could not expect them to conduct half a day of the course each,
so other speakers would have to be found.
Given the negligible amount of knowledge most social workers
seemed to have about inquests (myself included) it seemed pertinent
to consider starting the training day with general information
about Coroners courts.
I set about this task by spending time in the S h effield City
Library reading literature on Coroners and their Courts with the
intention of opening the training day with general information
about inquests. I also contacted the Sheffield Coroner, Dr. Stefan
Popper to inform him of the intention to hold an Inquest Training
Day and to ask his advice about the Hillsborough Inquests. This
resulted in a meeting with Dr. Popper where he explained the nature
of the delay in holding the inquests and also agreed to speak at
the training day. Unfortunately the two possible dates for the day
were both during his annual leave, he agreed to approach his
colleague Dr. Potter, the coroner for East Yorks.
Dr. Potter agreed to speak at the training day but made it clear
that he could only provide general information and nothing specific
about H’boro.
This meant that I had 3 speakers, a fourth would round the day up,
given that it was also my intention to have people split into
groups (initially I did not have any preconceived ideas as to how
the group sessions would be split or what they might be asked to
discuss taut it seemed a good idea to have them and to allow people
some time to evaluate their reaction to the day, make criticisms
and request further information from the speakers if necessary..
A plenary session would also be necesssary at the end of the day
for people to give some feedback on their impressions of the day,
it’s usefulness etc.
The Training day was beginning to take shape in my mind but I still
needed a fourth speaker. I approached ACC Melvyn Jones at WMP. on
Dr. Poppers recommendation, because Mr Jones and his staff would be
presenting the inquests. Mr. Jones felt unable to participate in a
training day at this stage because of the role of the WMP in
investigating the SYP.He did not wish to compromise himself or his
staff by becomrning involved with discussions about the inquests
when it was possible that the SYP would have legal representation
at the inquests.   He did however indicate that at a point in the
future when the dates of the inquests were known he would be more
than willing to discuss them and the ways in which the Task Team
and the WMP could work together to provide a support service for
the families of the deceased.
Mr, Jones suggested that I contact the solicitors representing the
HFS6 to discuss their role as legal representatives to the bereaved
families, I therefore contacted Mr. Doug Fraser the leading
solicitor in the group known as the Liverpool steering Committee
and he agreed to attend the training day as a speaker.
I now had 4 speakers , namely;
1)                     |, co-ordinator Kings Cross
2) David Wilkins , co-ordinator Zeebrugge
3) Mr. Potter , coroner East Yorks
4) Mr Doug Fraser , solicitor Liverpool Steering Committee.

Alongside making arrangements for speakers there existed a problem
in terms of inviting attenders. The main problem being that I did
not have a full list of social workers working with the bereaved
fami 1ies.
                                                                  —         Q o S S        ~T              ^ A / F O         /^W/ )         7/0 M




                                                                      A fc s M   ti   <?/fJ

             S //& F F i G L b

       C   o &      O N     €      .         0 R     .                           P o P f> € & .




 SI yo/Z/cS £b s r                     P/ST.

       Co/Z.0A/<?/<                                                       A ’ &■ foTT£/Z




 <fJV P G A . / N 7 6 / V ( ) * h S T               //9 /X < 3 /€                             Cj Z s t     **,ot./t~s> s           fb ts c e     tfQ
                                                                                                   L L oyo          Mo ds*
 C tjG S 7 ~       ^ ^ f / D U A / y' & S         /O l~ 1 C $                                        (& iA A 4tA /~C ''tf/Q S '\

                                                                                                          (ib-     <TN G




 /?. C ,C ,               Z fc /v e S                                                   Cj S Z T    ^ H fO A /ftv O S         l° O U iC e      HQ
                                                                                              L k e ,y o     M ouse
 C j   -   .A tiQ ^ /v o s             /o L tc e                                                 tS iA M /ASC-S//1 Af

                                                                                                   id ^      <SW<?




 pQOG -             fk /iS £ /Z

£ n ? & & /A /6 -       C o /A A i ) 7 7 i f f     ■S o l~ iC i‘T O & .




 ,3 jc . u         P £ / * / $ < z # ~ ro /J


  HFS.Gr.




 lt £ S i£     /       D i t o N

C o fifF G Z s m re e       Q zm 7 A £ -         o F F ic e g                                                       J V g c / z.      n e s P iT A i.
                     W
                     L
                     W
                                                     -----------------------------
‘S g c . ^ v o t Q

      X •                ^ C J c ^ ^ ^ V C ' b       -      <^<MVS*ST                C*\S»^.N                9fcS%V^>VC.
                         \iesvs>\cr^>.


   %    •                                                                -     Vjt^ v t ^ ^ s s > ^ s            .

  3 .                    solvcw o ^ s            -       vjeg-^w               vedPv^


   V    •                Powvce       -



   s.




  ^                                              ws^£vv<s & ^ r                ,




  -7 ,                                           -   xwe .




  ^                      *\\S>C.          S ^ ^ N V i O U ^




t*oVe.               f V e o a e      w o a r A            y     «   k     m   o     A           ^ W ^ c O a c * r \

                     c m v   se^tvR-'^sR.                9 .Vq   s   & %           v j a n   A   s j t   V   W       ^

                     W o A v i r o S      .
? c ^ o e > c V?)             e<^0M-vsi3^                        c b ^ \   £>\V




£ c , v » * V
                                  v   /.rx   W .   vv^r\   W c u i ^
\ j ( 3 3 ^ * C r J0 0 o   Y^v-


W    o    V
   S o Va   c a   V   o    V S




                      ^                                                                                V^2S2J^          \ W > C

C . \ n Q J v^ V ^              V N s. ^ O ' V ^ N ^ - C ^ ,        „      V    s    O    ^    ^   J   ^       000^_X33Z^SL^      c x



C\NrovJkJ^>               VJ^        ^ 0 ^>T c C.\K n C 5 ^                               V'NSL.


                      ^ r V ^           ^     q   &n > ^        o ^ s u ^ V ^                              ^            Q^ e^ r

            ^     Q)_v C ^ C- Q        y v js y s ^ V C i ,   ^ -Q S O ^ J v ^ , V V i s Q _ J ^   V J ^ S i^ S s . >
? o \'
                                                                                                                                                   ) o



    ^       W         o    ^   js*   <s-* s v ^ V t f * \      ^       ^                                      v
                                                                                              c
                                                                                                                          V   ^   o   3 *-
    Z L -T ^ r Q ^>       ^_>J^is-^i C ^ v .         -V>sfv.           C_<S-*OO^AJ^


^                               <o-»_                                          t.-*- '- ^ v^3^-   .               .
                                                                                                                                             SV^KT0—




O           O              O         O     O     O      O          O       O   O      O   O   O       O   P   «       0   O       O      O     O    -
                                                                           \.




^   v c   \   qjcV   »   o m   \                      (v w ^ j \   V   w s l x n a     . .--"•      0-o ^ n   a a   .v V   mj   J i^


                                   ^ a o - J ^ v V . - ^   oCa_-oj\    ^    o -s a V   sO x j n .
                                                                -        \C S 'T S C S 5 L > S -      V ^ Q .            C > < a > K c A                   CSi S         ^       js t    V w a .

W       '        ^        V 'B -‘S,<5’                                              ^
^ c W v e * : .                   _                                                                             < a « w = W ^




                              ^              S '     v ^ & ^ j .                    -           ^               C s ~ * v -



    \ie>S<K          OJJV-O^-^           ^           V   msi.                                       ^>-5ocfl-SS           ,


 v i^ V V                                                                                                                                  w               <^W l^ _
 -—     ■------------ "                                  !      9              r2           V        t>es5fc'J^ax                  t       W       s   W     ^       (       ^       '   5    W   a   ^
 v ^
 VvCsWi
             x   As^v                                A xsl          V•                  .               .   V    -       ^         C           y       .     <       ^           K        .
    „                                 W \ c O v          ' v V v s o ^              ^           ^                                  ^                             ^

                                                                                                                     -         l   .               V c
    ^ e w d ^ o J r               —           <9^-                                                          v x a a      .^>           •
        «&
"     “T                                      7                                                                         ^       QyJKNKsVxSL^            -
                                         VvSLQ_C^        ^

                      CX                 N^Sko>ia^           ,     Qcs^r     W ^ v ^ - > r t s ^      V o                       ^ > v \ n *q 5 ^        v




       ^ e s j - c ^                               C . ^ N ^ > X C^£DS-               V ^ W N S L ^ S ' e S    ^       H>JN.Q*^AJO^

                                     V o          ^ Q _ S O ^         ^-^C^SLkjvCLS^,


                                                        ^                                 V—                                o   ^   W   w   o   ^   V




                                                        <J_Cs^V/VfN- ^ « _ > v j o ^ c x > ^ ® - ^   ( C w A           Vvcx5is\'

                                                                           C <^rA$nC r A'O s.           O J ^ "*   •
VJS4S- c ^ O J ^ ’^              *




    ^ Q jtz J ^ F Z *       +$                                                                                                                              .


                                     V                                                   •            < ^ W \ k ^                                       V ^ -   ^




v r e a _S kAJC3 ^                   < 5 - = ^ ^ * ^ -



 (^    q   -a j - ^     o        < L U ^ = i *-» V i U f V A j v      " S i S S      '-iSS-Ti
                                    <2JC,                                                                                                              c                                      v/


         V^Q£L. ^                                                                              0>?>Ov^Q-                                                                                                                  ,


         V \ ^ 2 J ^                           VkrQ>^Cv                            v^      S ^ ^ T          vT ^ S lJ           ^                  V 3 ^ N nC      s   X-         ^                                                   ~



                                    .          \ _                          *sr><£>cr^N:                            ^       W       \ r < ^ 3 ^ ^          .
            ^ Q j 3 _ c k


         C » v > ^ V                                    > ~ « » - A J *                        V c                                   ^             ^                                                                                  *V**.

                                                                                           a    ^       ^       J               ' ^ = A                s       ^                                          f c w i V W .



         * W .v ^                                                   -~^V ^
        ^       .           „       .    w     v        ^       <       ,          -                                                         — A^                                     W            =      ^         ^             W

            V ^ b s                                                                              ^                                                                          ~ ~       ~ ~

                                                            .                                   V       Ve>             W                v O ' r ^ ® - ’J ^ L^ '                                                        \ 5 ® m <1>J c
         T ^                        „    \V*-Q^>                            N>QSi-OK                            °                        \




                                                                                                                                                                        j^ t
            \j—OJs/s~rs                                                                                                                                                                                                               V^


                    ^                                                                                                                                                                                             s .         * » .


                    ^                              "        T       t          _       ~        j                   ~       ~   .                                                                                             ^
                \ v & *                                v»v\.                                                        ^                                                                                         :                       .   .




                                                                               (*•<**-                      ^                                                      -   V    V     ^                ^ v r o ^ c O


                    ps                   ^JOlJ^                                                             -^ O S S .                         £ O-XJVfvv, Vk^SJ^                                      X/WoUCiV*


            K _>& -                     V^qSs^*                         S 3^                                                    "S» v - > o ^ ^ » e ^ r - ^ v ,


            lo^>        m   A, ^ K                                                              N^a_s^<^0=a»                        V'O                                                                                       Q \         »


        V ^ r o ^ > J ^ c_>c-v.                                             V o                             c&_x3-*csJ>v3^ ^ & 3 < s~^'-s -~                           ^rCl               ^


         CX^C                                      V c04~^>5r                          c^. Ot3^~‘5-                                                                                                                      '^^XSJcO'T* l




            y   T       [ f     -        J o   a   j M S U ^C u a

                                               .<ry\
                                                —           f- h U s io tZ ^ lA

                                                        u J b       u ^        A'fcVr



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              / \
O   O   O           O               O          O                O           O           O           O           O           9        9         9           9           9          9                O      O             O         O / *~-
  LI ST.ZOEL SOCJ AL. SE R V I C E S „TEOM CODES CURRENTLY HELD ON HERALD SYSTEM
  C D D ^ ^ ^ E E E E L ' f l R E f f ^ ^ ^ = ' ■'   .1   ^ ... ^.v   ..       -


 B/F    B / F _____ _____
 B AR   BARNET LON. BOROUGH
 BE     BEAUCHIEF
 BI     BIRLEY
 BIR    BIRMINGHAM_________
 BO     BROOMHILL
 BR     B R I G H T S I D E .......
 BRO    BROMSGROVE
 BU     BURNGREAVE
 BUR    BURY
 C      C
 CHE    CHESHIRE
 CLW    CLWYD            ..




 KNO KNOWSLEY
 LAN LANCASHIRE
 LEI_ LEICESTERSHIRE
 LIV LIVERPOOL
 LON LONDON _        __
4MAN MANCHESTER - -
 N/K AUTH NOT KNOWN
?NOT NOTTINGHAMSHIRE
 OTH OTHER __________
-SAL ST. ALBANS
 SEF SEFTON _ _        _
- S H E •SHEFFI ELD 'J ..
 STA STAFFORDSHI RE 1 1
 STH ST. HELENS           '
 STO STOKE ON TRENT
 WIG WIGAN ; -■
 WIL WILTSHIRE __
 WIR WIRRAL        : ..
                                            f< r f 6



                   ^ - C     r X           u g ^ v \




                                                                      /C a i^         f     2,5


/ <4 ,             c a                       / U * ^                ^ o c o   ,           ^ 3 7


 e* ^                                          /m d c A "            7& ruJ                     H       ^
 H*y' /

               -~ a        Q - - -f~—              tr-^—       3"        ,
*-#        ^       ^         i                    -           L|_                         5 0           -

                   ^                   frjrt/                 C^rSSL^             '        S' z

2 . 3          ^       ' '         (                  d drr                       ^                 ^

 I    (^                               s        °a
                                                                                                £
                                                                                                                            4a
                                                                                 f
                                                                                                                       U:



                                                              f o       c    f       fc a e fA S      -

                             ™f                                         «- (3 c o e.                        4
                               k7       M 4
                                                                                                   — *-«*      —       —



                                                                                            ^          Ifca-       fflujclu?



/
                     0 A<


              //                ^   ,        C kA T   cjuXo-^Xs.    x   ;


                                    X            Z        4             -        ^
         jS o o ^



                                        £ > J fv C u A ^       X            2    .
                S ' S

                                                                                                   ( 'i) iA



                       f y     i^        -
                                                                                                      ^ l2<v


    ’J        a j j a c d f LxyyK




                                                               3            foJ>b
                     ASUahj ■ " "

                    ~ r fa "   m        d h ro L u r~         r             ^*4*                                   '
 2   c A jO    U       ^              -        2 t


          T   l b                               ftA ,




      ^            a       u   tr e   ,   -JS    "         S        -   < ^ o c^> J   ^   S.
               t               c J f




                                                               1I
          c

PzSLUjf
                       l£*u
   £A

                    (cctoj                     (0


                       )2o o j
                                           •    10
^eecTA^

               l&oJ

                       <j24^




                                           ”2 ( ^    * ^        ( 3 & s iy y ^




ytlo^                                 ±8
                                  London Borough of Gamden
                                                  Social Services Department
Director                                     W illin g House,
                                                       House, 3 5 6 Gray's Inn Road,
                                                                               Roc                                                   Telephone
Ken D ix o n                                            L nnHnn w
                                                        London     n v A
                                                                WC1X     RM
                                                                       8BH.                                                         01-837 3363




Neil Kay                                                                                                     Date     24 May 1989
Director of Social Services
Redvers House                                                                                                Your reference
IPfcion Street
Sheffield                                                                                                    Our reference
SI 2JQ '
                                                                                                             Inquiries to
                                                                                                                     Ext.     292

Dear Mr "Kay,
             (
X understand from the coordinator of the Kings Cross Support Team that your depart­
ment and various local voluntary agencies have combined to provide a rota of
counsellors for the Hillsborough enquiry.

Our support team (which includes representatives of the Dept, of Academic Psychiaty
at the Middlesex Hospital) felt .that they learned a great deal from the Kings
Cross Inquiry and Inquest chaired by Desmond Fennell Q.C. and   if youwant any
presentation or information from them they would be delighted   to help,either
by hosting something in London or coming to Sheffield.

I enclose a leaflet that was used at the Kings Cross enquiry.

Yours sincerely,




                                                           F A M I L Y Si C O M M U N IT Y
                                                           S E R V IC E S D E P A R T M E N T
Ken Dixon     ]~                                                       SHEFFIELD.
Director of Social Services                                        -   1 J U N 1989
                                                            D iR E C T O R
                                                           DEPUTY DIRECTOR
                                                           ASST. DIRECTORS
                                                           S.W.
                                                            ft *•: -
             \                                                                      d '

                                                                                                i
                                                               pv c x ^ -                       i

                                                               /
                                                                        to          -       LA.     I




 This a e o a r t m e m r.as an acce ss to re co rc s policy- An y iniorm ation proviced oy vou will oe avaiiabie :o tn
 subject. You "nubt stats if it is not to oe discloses; it wiii be helpful          vou Give vour reasons, w n e t ^ e r
 suoject can be referred *o vou and if there is a time limit.                           “                 ............... ............
                                                 normal: hundreds of people at or near
                                                 the scene of the tragedy are going
                                                 through shock or trauma and may well
The King's Cross Support Team has been
                                                 continue to do so for months after­
set up by Camden Council's Social
                                                 wards .
Services, with the help of expert
‘■f'uiuKo 1 1ing groups. A team of counsel­      Relatives of those involved will also be
 l o r : ; hn? been put together who are there
                                                 going through a hard time. And those who
io         i\ e confidential counselling and     have suffered bereavement will need a
.support to anyone affected by the King's        great deal of help.
Cross fire.
                                                 Feelings vary from person to person - you
                                                 may feel sad, helpless, angry or even
                                                 numb. Physically, you may be suffering
* Somebody you know mfey have died or            from bad dreams, headaches, sleeplessness
  been injured in the k i n g ’s Cross fire      or even nausea. If you have lost a loved
  on 18th November.                              one, you may be experiencing extreme
                                                 difficulty in coping with what to do next.
* Or you or someone close to you may
  have been an eyeVitness or may have
                                                 It is important for you to remember that
  ju6t missed being at the disaster.*
                            ^   ■ ■ ■   i        this is a perfectly normal response and
* Or may be you were one of the e m e r ­        that help is at hand if you need it. The
  gency services staff working that              counselling service is not just a phone
  night.       \                                 line: counsellors can visit people or
                                                 receive visits in their office and give
* Or you may be a regular user of the
                                                 face-to-face confidential help. They can
  underground and now have negative
                                                 provide practical help for bereaved
  feelings about travelling on the tube.
                                                 families or emotional support for people
         you were effected,lit is impor-         who just need to talk through what
         ^ealise that youfr reaction to          t h e y ’ve experienced.
            "rosfi fire is perfectly
                                                                                                                        KING’Scj”
                                                                                                                          j   t     l   S   A   S   T   t         B




  I
                                                                                                                          Confidential help...
                                                                                                                              §§§                           • M




                                                                                                                                        ...advice
                                                                                                                        01-833 4065                                   1*T




                                                                                                                               KING’S CROS
Pub^i .ih art l>y t h e p u b l i c r e l a t i o n s o f f i c e , London Bor ough o f Camden, E u s t o n Road NWl.
                                   ‘• P r i n t e d by P r i n t k i n g s . J a n u a r y
                                                                                                                              SUPPORT TEA                    isLifil;
