                 KW/l/j/l




SQL   j fahnosioij eh
City of Sheffield
        M etropolitan District

                                   Administration & Legal Department
                                   Roger Pensam, FCIS, M BIM, Solicitor
                                   Head of Department
                                   Town Hall
                                   Sheffield S1 2HH
                                   Telephone 26444
                                   Telex 54243 (Administration & Legal)




                                 with compliments
 T H E   H I L L S B O R O U G H   S T A D I U M   D I S A S T E R

                         15th April, 1989




Recommendations to the Inquiry on behalf of Sheffield City Council
                                        I N T R O D U C T I O N




These re co mm endations          and suggestions hav e been drawn              together from

re pr esentatives w i t h various          interests w i t h i n    Sheffield City Council.



They are su bm itted h a v i n g       taken time to assess           the effect of the

Hi ll s b o r o u g h Disaster,    the Inquiry and the I n t e r i m R e c o m m e n d a t i o n s   of Lord

Justice    Taylor wh ic h are being implemented in                   Sheffield.
C l a rifi cat ion and Codi f i c a t i o n of L e g i s l a t i o n

If the Inquiry is m i n d e d to recommend a m e n d m e n t s of or additions to the
ex is tin g legis la tio n then the opportunity could be taken to codify and
clarify the legislation.

The provisions, which are currently contained in the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975, the Fire Safety and Safety at Places of Sports Act 1987,
various Regulations and statutory guidance could be remodelled to create one
Act and Regulations (with functional statements) requiring certain standards
to be achieved.

Im p r o v e m e n t / P r o h i b i t i o n Notices

The 197 5 legislation (as amended) makes provision for the issue of a
Prohibition Notice to the holder of a certificate.   It is suggested that
consideration should be given to including an intermediate course of action.
The Health and Safety at Work, Etc. Act 1974 makes provision of the issue of
Improvement Notices and Prohibition Notices.   An Improvement Notice requires
the employer to carry out certain works within a given time.   If the
employer fails to comply with the Notice, they are guilty of an offence.

The power to issue Improvement Notices would be a useful intermediate step
where a Prohibition Notice is not appropriate, but where some formal Notice
is required.

Periodic Certificates a n d Inspections

The Popplewell Report recommended (at paragraph 3.68) that there should be
(i) annual renewal of safety certificates issued under the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975; (ii) a duty on the local authority annually to inspect the
premises prior to re-issuing the certificate; and (iii) power for the local
authority to revoke the certificate.

The interim recommendations compliment the first proposal; the second
recommendation was implemented in statutory guidance after the Popplewell
Report; the third recommendation has not been acted upon.

Wi t h regard to the fiifst recommendation, annual c e r ti fic at es focus the
parties' minds o n the w h o l e situation and not on a particu lar a p p l i c a t i o n or
inspection.     It tends to promote an overall r e v i e w of the cir cu ms tan ce s
surro und in g the re-issue of a certificate.

With regard to the second rec om mendation, it is su ggested that pr io r to
r e -i ssu in g the certificate there should be an inspection, but that there
should also be inspections on a half -y ea rly or q u a r t e r l y basis w i t h guidance
given as to timing, e.g., prior to renewal, end of season, start of season,
d u r i n g season (obviously this is less relevant to m u l t i - u s e stadia w h e r e
"seasons" are not as clear cut.)

Vi sits to the grou nd should be carried out w hil st it is empty an d d u r i n g use
but the limitations on "duri ng use" inspections by their very na ture m u s t be
recognised.

Model     Safety Certi fi cat e Conditions

The Popplewell report (paragraph 3.81) suggested that model safety
certificate conditions should be drawn up.  A standardised form of
conditions could form the nucleus of all certificates.   Additional
conditions could be added to cover local conditions.   This would enable some
degree of national u ni for m i t y of a p pl ica ti on of conditions. It w o u l d seem
appropriate, that the Home Office draw up the s t a nda rd condi tio ns as it has
done in respect of byelaws for example.

Resource     Implications - Fees

At present it is suggested in Circular No. 72/1987 that the statutory
inspection should not result in significant resource implications but that
in general inspections are not expected to take more than about two man days
per ground.  This point is made in the context of emphasising the scope of
inspections, together with associated report work and are not intended to be
as detailed or extensive as that often required by the holder of the
certificate.

Clearly, more time is spent on safety of sports grounds than the Home Office
anticipates.  The resource implications involved for local authorities and
their advisers from other services to implement the existing provisions and
the new recommendations must be recognised.

Although the certificating authority is allowed to charge fees for dealing
with applications for the issue or amendment of a certificate (by virtue of
the Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations 1976) there is no express provision
for fees for the ongoing work of enforcing the provisions of the Act and
dealing with inspections that have to be carried out at least once a year.
The Inquiry may wish to consider whether express provisions should be made
to allow a certificating authority to make some reasonable charge.  There
are many examples of legislation where local authorities are empowered to
charge a reasonable fee to cover the cost of administering and enforcing a
particular licensing function.

D e f i n i t i o n of Roles

The Popplewell Report recommended that there should be urgent consultation
between the Health and Safety Executive and the Fire Authorities and Local
Authorities as how best to co-ordinate and communicate their inspections and
reports (paragraph 3.95).

It has again become clear during the Inquiry that a lack of clarity in the
definition of roles, 3s well as a lack of communication, can cause problems.
This is particularly relevant in relation to the Police who are involved in
the safety.of sports grounds in a number of roles, e.g. a member of the
Advisory Group, upholders of law and order and their role inside and outside
the Ground.  It is also relevant to consider if and at what point in an
emergency the role of the safety officer is subsumed by the emergency
services.

Clarification, following consultation, is needed of the different roles
Authorities are required to fulfil and the means of communication between
them.

The A dvisory Group

The Police and the Building Authority and, for metropolitan districts
subsequent to local government reorganisation, the Police and the Fire
Authority, have to be consulted by the certificating authority by virtue of
the legislation.  Sheffield City Council have included officers from the
Building Authority and Health and Consumer Services in their Advisory Group
prior to this Inquiry.
The legislation therefore, provides the basis of expert opinion on which the
Local Authority makes decisions.

The decision making process can take a number of forms , but perhaps the two
extremes are:-

(a) where all the experts are in agreement that decision is delegated to an
officer of the Council, where one or more experts differ - that decision is
delegated to an appropriate committee of the Council;

(b) the appropriate committee considers all matters relating to works
carried out at the sports ground.

Further guidance could be given over and above that contained   in the interim
recommendations as to the preferred course of action.

In addition to the statutory consultees, together with those recommended in
the Interim Report, i.e., the Ambulance Service, the Club and the recognised
Supporters' Club, consideration should be given as to whether any other
bodies should be involved in the wider Advisory Group, e.g., Health and
Safety Executive.

It may also be necessary to have a consultation group consisting of Police,
Fire, Building Authority, Environmental Health, Ambulance Service in
addition to the wider Advisory Group.

Members should be able to have profassional advice from officers.

Pooling of Information

Some consideration should be given to pooling information   ona national
basis to improve the flow of that information.

Information should be available to all certificating Authorities and their
statutory consultees.  This would assist to achieve a degree of uniformity
throughout the country and enable all Authorities to learn from each others
experiences.

This is particularly relevant to regional level where the emergency services
will cover a number of District Authorities.

Safety Management and Safety Planning

Sports ground management and promoters must accept safety as essential
aspects of their business and not an adjunct to it.   It is essential for
safety responsibilities to be clearly identified and for systems of
accountability to be included.   Any regulations or the "Green Guide" could
usefully develop this theme.   The term safety planning is preferable to that
of emergency planning in that it makes clear to everyone that the process of
safety planning is exactly that and an appropriate safety plan should
promote better safety standards.   All relevant agencies should be included
in the planning process.  Safety planning is aimed to prevent disasters as
well as providing contingency plans to ensure emergencies and disasters can
be coped with.

Status and Content of the "Green Guide"

A comprehensive review of the status and content of the Green Guide is
required.  The present guide to safety of sports grounds is predominantly
written for football single use stadia.  Multi use stadia are becoming more
popular and it is suggested that the guide be expanded to cover spectator
safety requirements pertaining to a wider variety of sports, e.g., speedway,
stock car racing, hockey, archery, shooting, etc. and other potentially
dangerous activities.

In addition, either by expansion of the guide or by the creation of a
similar document, requirements for spectator safety of fully enclosed stadia
should be created.

"Flexibility"

The 1986 edition of the Green Guide, paragraph 6, states as follows:-

"Deviations from individual guidelines are possible without necessarily
detracting from the overall safety of the ground.  The variety of type,
function and layout of sports grounds means that a flexible approach should
be maintained to take account of the particular circumstances at individual
grounds".

And paragraph 8 states:-

"It should be borne in mind when using the guide to assess whether existing
circumstances provide adequately for the safety of spectators the criteria
to be aimed for is that of a reasonable degree of safety.  It would be
unreasonable, even if it were practical, to seek the absolute safety of
everyone attending a ground".

And, again in paragraph 11:—

"The principles referred to in paragraphs 4-10 above should be kept in mind
by both ground management and, where applicable, by the local authority when
applying the guide to an individual ground.  The guide is an aid to, not a
substitute for, professional judgment and common sense".

There is a problem in affording the Green Guide this kind of status.  What
is "flexibility" to one mind may be slap-dash permissiveness to another.
Clearly, emphasis on flexibility was and is well intentioned, but the effect
is to produce a code that is not applied tightly and where non-compliance
can be justified as falling within the scope of some flexible discretion
allowed to the relevant authority.

For the future perhaps the Inquiry would wish to consider recommending that
the approach of the Green Guide should move away from that of "flexibility"
to, for example, an approach of the following kind:-

"That the certificating authority, and where appropriate the club itself,
should always seek to establish whether there is some reasonable cause why a
relevant guideline is not complied with, and that in the absence of some
such reasonable cause emerging then compliance with the guideline should be
achieved or insisted upon".  A recommendation not to comply with a relevant
guideline should be in writing and approved by the certificating authority^
If such a decision is considered by the relevant committee of the Council
then the public will have access to that information.

Parts of the existing guide could become regulatory andother parts
re-issued (in a revised form) as a guide c f . the majority of the Approved
Documents to the Building Regulations or an "Approved Code of Practice" cf.
status of an approved code of practice under the Health and Safety at Work,
Etc., Act 1974.  In the case of documents similar to the Building
Regulations compliance would therefore not be necessary, yet failure to
                                          Page 6



      comply with the Guide could be taken as being evidence tending to show that
      the requirements had not been met, unless it could be demonstrated by the
      party concerned, using other means, that the requirements of the legislation
      had been satisfied.

11.   Specific Recommendations in relation to the Structure and Design
      Requirements for a Sports Ground

      General Fabric

      It is recommended that the headroom for tunnels be increased from 2.4 metres
      to at least 3 metres to facilitate overhead viewing of any crushing or other
      problems occuring along its length.

      Due to the possible risk of explosion, it is suggested that gas
      installations should not be permitted in any building in the stadia used for
      spectator accommodation,  c f . tower blocks.

      To cater for different speeds of travel through tunnels or restricted
      passageways longer than, say, 5 metres, a minimum of 4 units of exit width
      should be provided.

      Ingress

      Segregation of entrances for supporters of opposing teams is recommended as
      a permanent design criteria.

      Permanent unobstructed access to the pitch area for emergency vehicles to be
      provided in at least two positions, and these being at opposite ends of the
      ground (whenever possible) .

      The "guide" states a maximum notional rate of 750 persons per turnstile per
      hour, however it does not state the design time, i.e., the time within which
      all spectators are capable of being admitted.  It is suggested that a
      revised code should state a maximum ingress design time of say, 45 minutes.
      For multi use stadia, in particular, investigation of the flow rate should
      be carried out as rates may differ, e.g., for families with young children.

      Terraces

      Where terraces are to be sub-divided so as to avoid major migration and
      sideways surge, each section should be formed by inserting radial barriers.
      Radial fences should be avoided.

      It is considered that spectator accommodation should not be lower than the
      pitch level or pitch perimeter path level (whichever is the hi g h e r ) , so that
      spectators do not have to step up from the spectator accommodation.
      In the present "guide", it states "gradients steeper than 1:2 (26°, 34')
      could be dangerous" (paragraph 94).   In Table 1 barrier requirements are
      specified for terrace gradients of up to 30° or 1:1.7, therefore
      contradicting the previous statement.   From a graphical interpolation and
      extrapolation of all the relevant data the maximum gradient should be 31°,
      3 0 ’. This equates to approximately 1:1.63.

      Crush Barriers - Design

      To avoid rusting in unseen and non-maintainable places, overclipped barrier
      rail supports should no longer be acceptable.   All parts of barriers should
      be capable of direct inspection and maintenance.
W e l d i n g of all joints w o u l d achie ve the aims set out in the above p ar agraph
and wil l create a structural continuity w h e r e the failure of an individual
element would m i n i m i s e the risk of collapse.

Co ns i d e r a t i o n should be given to the a p p l i c a t i o n of h or izo nt al, (in a d d i t i o n
to lateral) forces.            This could be taken as 5% of the h o r i z o n t a l force thus
r e si sting torsional and secondary effects.

The recomm en de d h e i g h t s of the barrier rails should be re-assessed.
C l ar if i c a t i o n is a l s o requi re d (preferably by sketch) to show w h e r e this
m e a s u r e m e n t should be taken from.       The present "guide" appe ar s to m a k e an
a s s u m p t i o n that the b a rri er rail is in the same v er ti c a l pla ne as the
terrace riser.            W h e n these v ertical planes differ, the m e t h o d of heig ht
me a s u r e m e n t may also differ.        The acid test being at w h a t level a normal
person would stand w ho was comfortable, immed iat el y b ehind the barrier.

The opportunity should be taken to re-appraise the required test and design
loads.  An increase would achieve a greater resistance to collapse but may
increase the risk of injury due to resisting greater crowd pressures.  A
decrease, however, may result in earlier collapse, yet may prevent fatal
injury.

Crush Barriers - Testing

It is suggested that each barrier span should be tested separately (for rail
strength) and then adjacent spans be tested together to determine rail and
support strength.

The specification of the test should be modified to clearly state how
recovery deflection is to be calculated.  Such a modification should be in
accordance with the testing procedures in BS 5950 and other similar British
Standard documents.

To avoid any further doubt, a standardised test specification and procedure
is now required.  This should include a specification of a standardised
testing rig and a standardised test result sheet.

Stands with seated accommodation

Although steeper gradients can create better forward viewing for the
spectators, very steep gradients will have the effect of creating equally
steep radial gangways and may create a domino effect during an evacuation
where all persons may be stood - instead of being seated.  No maximum
gradient is directly stated in the present guide for seated areas; the only
tenuous reference being to the maximum calculated gradient for stairways in
paragraph 73 as being 34°,9'.  It is considered that seated accommodation
greater than 30° should have intermediate crush barriers at approximately 5
metre centres.

Pitch Perimeter Fences

The Popplewell Report (paragraph 4.136 to 4.138 and also Appendix 'E1,
paragraph E29) recommended that consideration should be given to the design
of a standard efficient perimeter fence, with proper exits.

As a d i rec t result of the Hill sb oro ug h dis as t e r it has been sug gested that
spectators m a y feel reassured by the po ssibility of forward escape on to the
pitch from all sides of the ground.
If pitch perimeter fences are to remain, it is suggested that at least 50%
of its linear length is openable and such openings are evenly spaced so as
to provide maximum benefit for spectators' safety.

Where pitch side police or stewards require access into the spectator area
through relatively small doors or gates, these may be provided as additional
openings or as wicket gates in the large opening panels.

So as to avoid sudden forward movement, all such gates should be vertically
multi-hinged and open towards the pitch.  Collapsible panels should not be
acceptable.  It is a further pre-requisite that the release mechanism should
be

a ) capable of being operational remotely in tandem with others;

b) capable of independent opening whilst under crowd pressure, by the
   operation of a quick release, manually operated catch;

c) all opening devices must be capable of use under crowd loading
   conditions.

In order to simplify any new designs of catch for pitch perimeter gates and
bearing in mind the fact that there should be no spectators on the pitch
side of the opening sections of the perimeter fencing, test loading on
perimeter fences could be reduced to, say 3 KN/m.

Estimation of Space Capacity - Terraces

Under the present "guide", terraces in good condition can be calculated as
capable of holding a maximum of 54 persons per 10 m2, throughout the
available terraced area.   It is, however, accepted that some parts of that
area are "peak viewing areas" and as such will achieve in    practice a greater
population density due to their popularity.   The figure of 54/10 m2 is
therefore an average , without the peak viewing parts being given a maximum
packing density.

It is considered that the 54/10 m2 should be treated as being the maximum
and therefore only be applied to the areas of peak viewing.  Other areas of
the terrace should be"calculated as having a lower packing density, say
40/10 m2.

In order to p ra cti ca ll y achie ve the co nsi d e r a t i o n set out in the above
paragraph, it w o u l d be n e c e s s a r y to:-

(a)    Define the size and position of "peak viewing areas".

(b)    Surround the areas of "peak vie wi ng " .using radial bar ri ers as oppos ed
       to radial fences.

(c)    Determine by effective stewarding or policing that the crowd density
       of each "peak viewing area" is at a satisfactory, safe and comfortable
       level.

Flow Rates

Throughout the Inquiry, the flow rate of 40 and 60 persons per minute per
unit of exit width have been heavily criticised as being based on
inconclusive research. A practical lesson that has been learned is that
                                        Page 9



      when people are very tightly packed, their ability to flow through exits is
      dramatically reduced.  Until the outcome of further research is known, it is
      suggested that flow rates are reduced to the following:-

      (a)   "Peak viewing area" of terraces - 30 persons per minute per unit of
            exit width.

      (b)   All other areas - 40 persons per minute per unit of exit width.

      It is considered that the emergency evacuation time should remain at 2i
      mi n u t e s .

12.   Stewards

      Training of Stewards should be carried out by people who have experience in
      training and safety.  Training should be regular to remind existing Stewards
      of procedures and ensure that new Stewards receive appropriate training.

      The acceptable age range for Stewards should be specified as being between
      eighteen and sixty five years, in addition to the current requirements
      relating to fitness etc.

      A Steward (or a police officer) carrying out isolated tasks, e.g.  external
      gate duty, should be provided with an efficient means of communication with
      the Safety Officer.

13.   National First Aid Guidelines

      There is the need for national first aid guidelines which are drawn up with
      particular reference to occasions when large numbers of people are likely to
      be present, e.g.  football matches, pop concerts etc.

      It is also important for the individuals expected to provide first aid to
      receive appropriate training.

14.   Counselling and Support for Victims

      Substantial knowledge and experience now exists about the services the
      public and those directly affected by a disaster need afterwards.    These
      responses are informed by an understanding of the potentially long-term
      needs of victims.   Initiatives must be taken immediately after the disaster
      without waiting for requests for help and be available for a period of at
      least two years.   Their establishment and co-ordination with the voluntary
      sector and between statutory organisations needs to be undertaken on the
      basis of an agreed general plan.   The services have to be carefully
      provided, managed and last appropriate lengths of time, if the bereaved,
      s'urvivors and rescue staff are not to suffer lasting damage.  These
      co-ordinated services are expensive to provide and outside of the normal
      provision made by local authorities.   Therefore their establishment and.
      continuance is dependent on new and additional resources being made
      available.   Such separate funding needs to be made available.

15.   Public Appeals

      The legal issues surrounding public appeals are complicated, e.g. charitable
      status, tax etc.  Guidelines are required on the establishment,
      administration and termination of disaster appeals to ensure that funds are
      distributed as fairly, quickly and effectively as possible.
16.   P re- Matc h Enterta inm ent

      Further to recommendation 25 in the Interim Report, consideration should be
      given as to whether pre-match entertainment and associated activities can
      influence the type of crowd attending football matches (in particular) and
      for example can therefore be used to encourage family attendance.  Such
      entertainment may also result in staggered entry times.

17.   Day and Time

      Cons id e r a t i o n should a lso be given to w h a t effe ct c h a n g i n g the day an d/or
      time of kic k off of football matches, in particular, m a y have on crowd
      be ha v i o u r and therefore crowd safety.

18.   Football Membership Schemes - I.D. Cards

      The Popplewell Report recommends (at paragraph 4.128) that consideration
      should be given to some form of membership scheme for football league clubs
      in England and Wales.

      However, in view of the experiences at Hillsborough, careful consideration
      needs to be given to any national football membership scheme.  It would
      clearly be undesirable if any such scheme resulted in significant delays at
      turnstiles.

      There are other practical considerations which must be taken into account,
      e.g., patterns of attendance,, different method of entry, space required for
      a complex admission system, i.e., two turnstile systems, number of
      turnstiles required, additional policing/stewarding required to control the
      crowd and eject individuals, where to eject individuals from and how and
      reducing further the ground capacity.

19.   All Ticket Entry

      In order to increase the speed of ingress of spectators, consideration could
      be given to requiring all ticket entry for events where greater than, say,
      70% of the total available capacity could be expected.




 HB8AAC/JJJ
                                                     KEEBLE HAWSON
                                                                                 SOLICITORS
                                                    I n c o rp o ra tin g B ra n s o n B ram ley & Co.

                                                                                                                         OLD CATHEDRAL VICARAGE,
 r   >    #   ' 0 '                                                                                                                   ST JAMES' ROW,
  M /v                                                                                                                   SHEFFIELD,
         ---------- —   — ..                                                                                                                             S1 1XA.
                               / q ,.   a   /   ia s j j ia a   J   c               ;     I !    ;         ’<     «   p v g f p x m    i   0742-722061
                                                                        iOO^-1      I U                           " ‘ ■ -MQXUS
                                                                           J       I ri         < Ti    f'-t r-        -FiWM
                                                                                        fjj          ,w v i t     ;   : ; ^ X f|(jp |)742 - 750243


                                                                                                                  u 'TS


With Compliments                                                                                 ALSO AT: 41a MIDDLEWOOD ROAD, SHEFFIELD S6 4GX TEL: 737346
ENQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER




FINAL SUBMISSIONS SUBMITTED ON BEHALF OF

        SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL
            FINAL SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL



What happened?



Why?



What went wrong?




        It is not incumbent upon the Ci.tvjz6 attempt to offer a

ccrnprehensive answer to am^of these questions. The viewpoint          of-i:he City

as certificating authority provides a special perspective on these

question^^Even franAhat/point of view there are obyi'ous difficulties in

the way of any attempt to provide a detailed resp6nse on the facts.         At

best the factual investigation appropriate to this $nquiry allows only a          .

broad brush technique in the assessment and interpretation of the facts.

NcrTgqpiaixit^5--fla!ete^on jjjglTs5oge,. Tha_eyigpnci,ps o f ^ be-oecagion and the

neS3~i^-^3f©ce®3r^xpe§ifeiopgC[y^o_not^alIow-the parties'represented befoi

                              Jbo examine thcrlBsiaes ^m-any conts
meiRneQ_

       So far as the City is concerned the factual investigation involved

produces a special difficulty in that whilst the City through the officepo

in the relevant departments has knowledge of matters concerning the

certificating function since 1st April 1986 the City has only imperfect

knowledge of the relevant matters prior thereto. Ag^Ef           complaint is

made on that account but the cautionary note has to be that there are areas

of potential knowledge and information which, as far as the City knows,

have not been explored.    The purpose of making this point is not to suggest

that any conclusion which this Jfoquiry may ccme to is inevitably

jeopardised by any lack of total information.      Sensible conclusions can be
reached on the information available.     The point that is made though is

that the City at this stage prefers to deal with the questions posed above

in a broad manner.

       The questions can be answered with what it is hoped is not deceptive

simplicity in the proposition that the essential problem here was one where

too many people were in a confined area so that there was crushing of sane

of them who did not escape in time to avoid death or injury.     It is

possible to add refinement to that proposition and to produce an

increasingly complex version of it by an overlay of detail.     The City

though proposes to make final submissions here by reference to the

essential problem as so described.     In essence the City seeks to deal with

the question whether any conduct on the part of the certificating authority

                         The formulation of the problem as set out above

gives rise to a series of issues:



(i)    Too many people

       Did the certificating authority c     _ v         hat there might be

too many people on the terrace?     This involves a consideration of the

certificating authority's conduct in respect of- inter alia

(a)    crowd management outside and at the turnstiles;

(b)    limiting numbers of spectators within the grounds;

(c)    crowd management within the ground.



(ii)   Confined area

       Did the certificating authority by permitting the development of the

pens create sane dangerous area?



(iii) Crushing

       Did the certificating authority create sane unnecessary risk of

crushing or take insufficient steps to guard against crushing?
 (iv)    Inability to escape or avoid injury

         Did the certificating authority create or fail sufficiently to

minimise a risk that spectators might be unable in the event of local

overcrowding or crushing occurring to escape the injurious effects of it.

         There is a considerable measure of overlap between the issues which

arise.    That overlap reflects the reality that on the facts this tragedy

was the product of a canbination of various circumstances.

         The essential submission on behalf of the City in respect of the

conduct of the certificating authority is that this tragedy was not caused

by any wrongful act or emission on the part of the certificating' authority.

It may be that the certificating authority - be it the City or the County -

helped to create circumstances which form the back-cloth to these sad

events but the City resists any assertion that there was any culpable and

causative act or emission on the part of the certificating authorit

is conceded that there were shortcomings in the Administrative system but

it is nevertheless contended that the system as practised was sufficient to

allow reasonable safety.



PRELIMINARY MATTERS

         It is necessary to consider as a preliminary matter the scope and

nature of the statutory function and duty of the certificating authority.

The City is the local authority presently charged with the duty of

enforcing the provisions of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 as

amended and is of course the successor in title to the County which was the

local authority that granted the general safety certificate for

Hillsborough Stadium.   The questions "what happened?   Why?   What went

wrong?" so far as the certificating authority is concerned need to be

considered in the context of the relevant legislation - the 1975 Act and

Regulations made under it.   The investigation involves the consideration of

whether or not any act or emission on the part of the certificating
 authority either in granting the certificate in the terms in which it was

 made or in enforcing the provisions of the Act or relevant Regulations was

 a cause and, if appropriate a culpable cause, of this disaster.   A material

 question for the later part of this Enquiry is of course whether or not the

 machinery of the certificate or of enforcement of the legislation (in

 particular by inspection) could be used so as to prevent or help to prevent

 any further such incident.   There is though an obvious danger that

 considerable wisdan which has been amassed by virtue of the painstaking

 nature of this Enquiry may cause views to be formed of past conduct which
                                                                 I
 are the product of hindsight. Whilst clearly or at least hopefully all

 parties have learnt frcm these disastrous events and whilst the City can

 identify acts or emissions which will not be repeated it is still a proper

 conclusion that at the relevant time when sane action was taken the

^decision was reasonable and proper having regard to what was then known.

        There are certain features of the relevant legislation that need to

 be taken into account as relevant and important background circumstances:-

 (a)    "Qualified person"

        Before granting a general safety certificate to an applicant the

 certifying authority's first duty arising under ‘Section 3(i) of the 1975

 Act is to determine whether the applicant is a person likely to be in a

 position to prevent contravention of the terms and conditions of a

 certificate, i.e. a "qualified person".   Clearly the certificating

 authority must have in mind the terms and conditions referred to when

 considering the question of whether the applicant is likely to be in a

 position to prevent contravention.   When answering that question the

 certificating authority would have to reply on reasonable grounds and they

 would include, for example, in appropriate circumstances whether the

 applicant has the personnel and means as well as the ability to organise

 sane efficient system in order to prevent contravention.   In concluding

 that the Clunzs was such a qualified person the County did not abrogate its
                                                                                                           -7



       statutory function and duty and, of course, did not create an^insurer.^ It

       would be impracticable for any applicant to guarantee that contravention

       would not occur.

                 However, the conclusion in favour of an applicant that he is a

       qualified person helps to establish a perspective of the certificating

       authority's duty in the following way.                        In issuing a certificate to the

       Club and in enforcing the Act subsequently the certificating authority are

       to be taken as having concluded the Club was and remained likely to prevent

       contravention of the terms seen in the certificate.                          The certificate is

       tailor-made to suit the^^'¥T:equirernents.?                         The Club was reasonably

       regarded as likely to be in a position to prevent contravention of its

       terms.     In deciding in favour of the Club that it was likely to be in a

       position to prevent contravention of the terms and conditions such a vote

       of confidence in the Club is a factor of seme significance.                          In condescend t-v-j

       to particulars by way of example the City refers to Paragraph 3 of Schedule

       2:    "the number of spectators admitted to the Stadium and to the several

       areas of spectator accommodation within the Stadium shall not exceed the

       figures specified in Part 1 of Schedule 3".                        Thus the certificating

       authority regarded the Club as likely to be in"a‘position to prevent more

       than 7,200 spectators being admitted to the West Terrace. ^ &*.                                    /©r cJ m j   (m Ilha Iu A
                           le/bro f Cw/uf         :/
(Jfo               <   %    l    (m £M/U\              p   j f   c   j   ual$
                                                                            I   &              if c f "   of                - w

       (b)       The Police and Fire Service.'

                 Under Section 3(3J of the Act the certificating authority has to

       consult other bodies about the terms and conditions to be included in the

       certificate.             The Police and the Fire Service were in fact consulted by the

       County.    The significance of this is that these were authorities with

       obvious expertise and knowledge of matters relevant to their respective

       disciplines.             The Police would know about crowd control and matters of

                       The Fire Service would make a material contribution about fire

                                                        C"
                                                       1 .
hazards and emergency evacuation procedures and so on.     Both organisations

are entitled to enter the sports ground and make inspections of the ground.

         Consulting such organisations is clearly sensible since the

certificating authority is unlikely to have as much knowledge and expertise

as the Police and Fire Service in relation to those matters mentioned

above.    The fact that the relevant terms and conditions have been subject

matter of consultation and have been expressly or tacitly approved by the

Police and Fire Service again does not involve any abrogation of the local

authority's duty.     It is thought again a potent factor in leading to the

conclusion that these terms and conditions were reasonably regarded by the

County as sufficient to secure reasonable safety at this sports ground.

         Similarly the regular involvement of the Police and the Fire Service

in the Officer Working Parties/Advisory Group and the annual inspections

and the consultation of appropriate officers on relevant matters is an

important factor in deciding whether the certificating authority acted

reasonably in the way in which it sought to enforce the provisions of the

Act.

         In this context is is to be noted that both the Police and the Fire

Service are each of them "an interested party"~t'o whcm is granted by

Section 5(3) of the 1975 Act the right of appeal to the Court against the

inclusion of anything in or the emission of anything frcm a Safety

Certificate or the refusal of the local authority to amend or replace a

Safety Certificate.    The fact that no appeal was ever made or indeed ever

threatened is same indication that these authorities did not find fault

with the terms of the Safety Certificate and that in turn would support the

certificating authority in concluding reasonably that the Safety

Certificate was and remained sufficient and appropriate to secure

reasonably safety.
(c )   The encouragement towards a flexible approach

       Certificating authorities are given the following advice:

       "Procedure regarding applications for general Safety Certificates

       ... in framing such conditions local authorities will no doubt wish

       to keep in mind the principles or guidelines set out in the Guide to

       Safety Sports Grounds.   In this connection local authorities are

       reminded that, as was pointed out in Paragraph 6 of the Annexed Hone

       Office Circular No. 150/1975, this non-statutory document is not a

       set of requirements to be rigidly applied regardless of individual

       circumstances. The maximum flexibility should be maintained to take

       account of the different circumstances at individual grounds

       deriving frcm differences in such matters as age, size and mode of

       construction.   In this regard, it should also be noted that the Act

       provides that the terms and conditions should be such as "necessary

       or expedient to secure reasonable safety" and it would be

       unreasonable, even if it were practicable, to seek the absolute

       safety of everyone attending the sports stadium."



       The words quoted ccme frcm Home Office"Circular No. 130/76 (page 6

of Core).   Their relevance even today is preserved by virtue of their

repetition in Annex C to Heine Office Circular No. 7/1986 (Core at 307).

       This emphasis on "maximum flexibility" and the undesirability to

slavish application of the Green Guide is important because it clearly has

influenced a number of persons who had dealings with this football ground

for example Doctor Eastwood and Mr. Lock.

       There are of course further references to flexibility.   On the 26th

August 1976 the Fire Department of the Hone Office issued advice on

amendments to the Green Guide and (page 14 of Core):

       "It is again emphasised that the recommendations made in the Guide

       to safety at sports grounds are essentially guidelines and should be
applied to existing football grounds with the necessary degree of

flexibility to take account of the particular circumstances at

individual grounds.    The aim of securing a reasonable degree of

safety should be kept uppermost in mind; it would be unreasonable,

even if it were practicable, to seek the absolute safety of everyone

attending a ground".

Such advice echoes of course what is found in the Green Guide



(a)    In the 1976 Edition at Paragraph 1.4.:

        "Deviations frcm individual guidelines are possible without

       necessarily detracting frcm the overall safety of the

       ground.   A flexible approach should be maintained to take

       account of the particular circumstances at individual

       grounds".

(b)    1986 Edition Paragraph 6:

       "Deviations frcm individual guidelines are possible without

       necessarily detracting frcm the overall safety of the

       ground.   The variety of type, function and layout of sports

       grounds means that a flexible approach should be maintained

       to take account of the particular circumstances at

       individual grounds",

       and Paragraph 8:

       "It should be borne in mind that when using the Guide to

       assess whether existing circumstances provide adequately for

       the safety of spectators the criterion to be aimed for is

       that of a reasonable degree of safety.    It would be

       unreasonable, even if it were practical, to seek the

       absolute safety of everyone attending a ground"

       and again Paragraph 11:
                                "The principles referred to in Paragraphs 4-10 above should

                                be kept in mind by both ground management and, where

                                applicable, by the local authority when applying the Guide

                                to an individual ground.    The Guide is an aid to, not a

                                substitute for, professional judgment and common sense".

                      This emphasis on flexibility is still part of current orthodoxy as

               can be seen   by reference to Mr. Bownes' experience when he attended a

               Seminarin October 1987 (Transcript 29:      129G and following) and was told by

              the Hone Office speakers (as evidenced by his note) that "the whole concept

              of the legislation was related to "reasonable safety" bearing in mind that

              existing grounds could not realistically be re-built to m o d e m standards;

              it is necessary to work with the existing structures and obtain the best

              result possible".    In the literature made available at that seminar is the

              following description of the Green Guide:

              "It must be emphasised that the document is a voluntary code which although

              intended to demonstrate standards of safety to be achieved is expected to

              be applied reasonably and with a degree of flexibility"

                      There is a problem in according the Green Guide this kind of status.

              What is "flexibility" to one man may be slapdash permissiveness to another.

              Clearly emphasis on flexibility was and is well-intentioned but the effect

              is to produce a code that is not applied tightly and where non-ccmpliance

              can be justified as falling within the scope of sane flexible discretion

              allowed to the relevant -authority.   There is no suggestion that at any

              stage the certificating authority has sought to excuse itself frcm taking

              action by sane contrived reference to the flexibility allowed under the            f)

              Green Guide. I With hindsight though it can be seen that a different result             — jrr-T

              might well have emerged had the approach to the Green Guide been that the

              certificating authority and where appropriate the Club itself should always

   ..       _ seek to establish whether there is seme reasonable cause why a relevant
  y*    m   ') guideline is not complied with and that in the absence of some such


< ! / '                                              ^
reasonable cause emerging then compliance with the guideline should be

achieved or insisted upon.

           It is /Srter
                    ter all a curious approach to take with regard to the Green

Guide whose very purpose is to provide measures for improving spectator

safety.     Admittedly it does not have the force of statutory regulations.

Whilst the references to flexibility do not go so far as to emasculate the

Green Guide they certainly reduce the impact that the Guide makes.

       As a final reference to this aspect of flexibility it is noted that

the County's Officer Working Party considered the point.      On the 30th March

1979 (Core at page 65) the County's Officer Working Party was told that the

County Council had contacted the Heme Office but little information

additional to that contained in the various circulars was obtained.

Basically the Heme Office had said that any new work or reconstruction had

to be a standard not lower than set out in the Green Guide but "the maximum

flexibility had to be maintained in the case of existing structures and

differences in such matters as age, size and mode of construction had to be

taken into account". The advice was in accordance with what has always

been the approach taken but such an approach whilst being far frcm a recipe

for disaster is likely to achieve less by way of^safety than is possible

(d)    The practical implementation of the statutory function and duty

       What a certificating authority in practice is able to achieve in

carrying out its certificating function and enforcement of the statutory

provisions must necessarily be influenced by the nature and quality of any

advice available to the authority and, indeed, the time and money available

for action.

       As to the former it is inevitable that the certificating authority

will rely on advice frcm various quarters as there are unlikely to be

in-house experts who can advise the certificating authority on all relevant

matters.     It is quite clear that the County relied on experts frcm the
                               i Service was "in-house" the Police and the



       It is equally clear that the City relies on the experts who advise

and such was a repeated theme of Mr. Bownes' evidence.      For example with

regard to the removal of Barrier 144 in August 1986 Mr. Bownes said

(Transcript 29: 61F) that he was relying there on the experts who were

present.     Again in connection with inspections Mr. Bownes said (Transcript

29: 7OH and 71A) that as far as he was concerned he was not an expert but

he relied on the advice of experts who frequently gave advice on the

various matters relating to safety.

       Mr. Bownes' lack of expert knowledge on matters of safety is not, of

course, in any sense a disqualifying factor.    What qualified him to act as

co-ordinator of the experts available t o ........                    ‘
                                                   xflAUtXy oj^                 v .
administrator.

       The Act contemplates consultation with Police, Fire Service and

Building Authority. The Statutory Guidance, in accordance with which the

certificating authority has to act when carrying out its inspection,

contemplates the involvement of persons qualified for the purpose of

carrying out an inspection. The reliance by the City on experts is

therefore the product of the legislation.

       On behalf of the City a general point is made here that there is no

reason to suppose other than that the persons available to give advice were

at all material times reasonably competent.    The abiding impression created

by the documentary evidence is that the certificating authority's work was

carried out conscientiously and, it is submitted, with reasonable care.

Specific examples of the conscientious approach can be given and in

particular reference may be made to the way in which the City made

endeavours to keep the Club abreast of safety requirements:

       (i)       In May 1985 (post Bradford) the County sent a press release

                 to the Club (documents attached to Statement of Mr. Bownes
                   at page 135-6).   This was followed up on 9th August 1985

                   (ibid - page 137) and Core at page 274) by specific advice

                   as to evacuation procedures, stewarding, first aid and other

                   matters

           (ii)    On the 15th October 1987 the City drew attention to the

                   revised Green Guide and certain aspects of management

                   responsibility (Core at page 421).

           As to the question of time and money available for action by the

    certificating authority there have to be limits and this is recognised, for

    example, by the Heme Office in for example, Circular No. 72/987! (Core at

    page 423) where it is suggested that the statutory inspections should not

    result in significant resource implications but that in general inspections

    are not expected to take more than about 2 man days per ground.    This point

    is made in the context of emphasising that the scope of inspections

    together with associated report work are not intended to be      as detailed or          .aJu^i
                                                                       IQj,     t"
    extensive as that often required of the holder of the Certificate.^ In fact

    it is known fran Mr. Bownes' evidence (Transcript 29: 70D) that an

    inspection took a day but since it involved several experts clearly far

    more than 2 man days were taken up on this g£@(3nd.     Oj^            s.

           The availability of time is relevant of course to the suggestion of Jl|

    delay in producing a replacement Safety Certificate and the City's answer   > ¥ { <
                                                                                 o a a j U M juI
    is given in detail at a later stage of these Submissions.   The point can be

    made though at this stage that it is hardly appropriate to expect a           ’^TUclUl^o

    certificating authority to take on additional staff to deal        with its     *          I'

    statutory function and duty when the Hone Office view is that there should

    not be significant resource implication.




i
                                        I
                      HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER INQUIRY


                           FINAL OBSERVATIONS




I. INTRODUCTION
1.     A large number of witnesses and a great deal of evidence has
been heard in the course of the 31 days during which the inquiry has
been sitting.     We do not propose in these observations to go into
detail or seek to resolve issues of minor importance.     We will give
our views on the major issues and seek to indicate what in our opinion
are the important findings of fact which the Tribunal ought to make.
We do not conceive it to be our task to invite the     Tribunal to
apportion blame, but we recognise that is inevitable that criticisms
will be made in the course of deciding what happened and why.        We
shall not shrink from making such criticisms as we consider
appropriate.


2.     in deciding what happened, we have been greatly assisted by
the video and photographic records, all of which have been freely made
available by their owners.    We should like also to place on record our
gratitude to the interested parties for their co-operation in
producing relevant documents and witnesses and to the West Midlands
Police for their immense effort in interviewing witnesses and
collecting the necessary evidence and in producing for us, often at
very short notice, exceedingly helpful reports and summaries of their
enquiries.     Without that assistance and co-operation our task would
have been impossible.     As it is, we are conscious that we have
completed this stage of the inquiry within 3 months of the occurrence
of the disaster and that many witnesses who were at the ground and who
could have given relevant evidence have not been called.     We have
taken the greatest possible care to try to call a representative cross
section of witnesses and to ensure that no serious issue has been left
uninvestigated or uncovered by evidence.     We are satisfied that we
have succeeded in this objective and that sufficient evidence has been
called before the Tribunal to enable it to reach proper and accurate
findings.     All parties represented have had the opportunity to
nominate witnesses whom they considered were able to give useful
evidence and we have, so far as possible, tried to accommodate them.
We confidently believe that there are and can be no complaints that
any relevant witness, who could add to the account given by others,
has been overlooked or that any evidence has been omitted which
affects any material finding of fact.


3.      In opening this inquiry on 15th May, there were set out what
the indications were at that stage of the sequence of events.       After
31 days of evidence, it is not necessary to change anything of
importance.     The picture, broadly speaking, remains the same.    By
about 2.30 pm, there was a serious crush outside the turnstiles at
Leppings Lane.     As the minutes went by, the situation deteriorated and
by 2.47 had reached such a state that the experienced police officer
in charge, Superintendent Marshall, decided that the only way to avoid
injuries or death was to open the exit gates to relieve pressure.        He
radioed a message to the controller, Chief Superintendent Duckenfield,
who authorised the opening of the gates.     At 2.52 pm Gate C was opened
;/
/
and about 2000 went through it.     By this time, the two central pens on
the terraces, 3 and 4, were full, although there was space on the
wings.    When the gate was opened, no measures were taken to prevent
those entering going down the tunnel ahead of them into the already
crowded central pens.     Most did so, causing severe congestion in the
pens.     As a result, 95 in the pens were crushed to such an extent that
they died and many more were injured.     Unfortunately, the police
officers in the control room and on the perimeter of the pitch failed
to appreciate that the pens were overcrowded and that fans were in
distress.     The perimeter gates, inadequate as they were, were not
opened in time and measures to relieve the situation were
insufficiently expeditious or adequate.     This does not mean that
individual police officers did not do all they could.     The fault lay
in a lack of planning and of leadership and, above all, in a failure
to appreciate the need to control the numbers in the central pens.


II. STATE OF THE GROUND
1.         Following representations by the South Yorkshire County
Council in April 1978, on 7th August 1978 Hillsborough was designated
as a stadium requiring a safety certificate under the Safety of sports
Grounds Act 1975 with effect from 1st January 1979.     The club
appointed Dr. Eastwood’s firm, Eastwood and Partners, Consulting
Engineers, to act on its behalf in its dealings with SYCC and/or
Sheffield Metropolitan District Council "in relation to the ground
being designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act" (Doc: 30).
There were meetings and correspondence about various improvements
which were needed to the ground in order to achieve the capacity
     /'


cfesired by the Club.    The Leppings Lane terraces were awarded a
capacity of 10,100, after the existing crush barriers had been tested
and, as necessary, replaced and new ones positioned.     This capacity
was based on the figure in the Green Guide, stated to be the maximum,
of 5.4 per   m2 reduced by about 10% to take     account      of the lack of
gangways.    This lack was not considered by     Dr. Eastwood to be of
significance because of the ease of movement throughout the terrace:
at that time, there were     no radial fences.


2.      In   1981 at a cup semi-final there was some crushing. This was
caused by a combination of uneven distribution on the terrace, an over
capacity of about 500 and the late arrival, due to traffic problems,
of a number of supporters.     An early goal exacerbated the situation,
because there was a surge, and a number of fans were injured.
Perimeter gates were eventually opened and fortunately sufficient fans
were able to escape to alleviate the problem.     There had been some
crushing at the turnstiles and the police were, according to Mr Vaux,
slow to react to events.     There are obvious similarities to the events
of 15th April 1989, but fortunately the injuries were few.


3.      It is significant that the police at the time appear to have
believed that the figure of 10,1000 in the Safety Certificate was too
high: see Doc: 136.   Their letter to the FA does not reflect this
belief - see Doc: 138 - and it does not seem to have been put to the
Working Party of SYCC concerned with the Safety Certificate.        The
answer to the problem was considered to be the division of the terrace
by radial fences with 3 pens of roughly equal areas.       Eastwood and
Partners were asked by the Club at the same time to consider an
alteration to the turnstiles, but that did not in the end come to
anything.
4.        The erection of the pens was not of itself a bad idea.      The
fences were to have gates at the top, to enable egress to be made to
the adjoining pens.    Much has been asked about these gates and the
arrangements, if any, to man them, whether by stewards or by the
police.    It seems they were to have a dual use: first, to enable fans
to go from one pen to another to help in an even distribution on the
terrace as a whole and secondly, as emergency exits in case of the
need to evacuate the pen.    Dr. Eastwood said that he believed there
would be police control over these gates because he recognised the
importance of maintaining the numbers of people in the pens.
Unfortunately, although he was aware of the importance of this
control, he does not seem to have impressed the club or the working
party with it.    The police interpreted control as meaning that the
gates should be left open, only needing an attendant if they were to
be closed and might need to be opened in an emergency.


5.        The reality was, as Dr. Eastwood accepted, that without any
mechanical means of counting, there was no possibility of adhering to
the capacity in the pens.      Accordingly, no capacity was formally
adopted and the safety certificate remained as it was.     Reliance was
placed on visual assessment.     The problem with that was that all
responsible, both police and stewards, accepted and tolerated density
in excess of that which was proper.     Evidence was given by police
officers to the effect that full meant chest to back and shoulder to
shoulder and that it was only when people were in obvious discomfort
that action would be taken to shut off a pen.     This is not
intentionally callous; it is a reflection of what football crowds have
been conditioned to put up with.     It is significant that in both 1987
and 1988 the conditions on the terrace in the central pens were       (
thoroughly unpleasant, but no-one complained and each match received a
clean bill of health.   The failure to seek the views of supporters or
to take any steps to inquire into their comfort is a notable feature
of the story unfolded in the evidence.   It has led to assumptions
being made which were dangerously inaccurate.


6.       In 1985 there were plans to improve the turnstiles at Leppings
Lane.   In addition, the police asked for more radial fences.   The main
purpose of those changes was segregation, so that home and away
supporters could both be accommodated at the west end of the ground.
In the result, the scheme to increase the turnstile numbers, and to
achieve not only segregation but a means of counting numbers into each
part of the terrace, was not pursued due to the reluctance of the club
to incur the expense.   In fairness to the club, it does not appear
that Dr. Eastwood impressed upon them with sufficient emphasis the
absolute need to keep the numbers in the pens to a safe level and the
desirability of the increase of turnstiles to achieve that.     He said
that he saw it as his duty to advise the club on the safety
implication of any proposal and to raise any objections he may have
had on that score.   But he seems, perhaps understandably, to have
adopted the attitude that the working party was there to approve or to
disapprove and, if it was satisfied, all well and good.   The working
party for its part did not appreciate the absolute need for regulation
of the numbers in the pens and so no steps were taken to review the
safety certificate appropriately.   In the result, the centre pen was
divided by a radial fence down its centre and part of it was taken out
of commission by a second fence to form the sterile area now known as
                                    7



pen 5.   The barriers in pen 3 had to be modified because one stretched
                                                                          I

right across it.     This was done by removing two sections of railing.
This had an effect on capacity and also resulted in the gaps being too
wide.    In 1986, as a result of a police request, barrier 144 in pen 3
was removed because it was said to be causing an obstruction at the
mouth of the tunnel.     This, too, had an effect on capacity.


7.        It is clear from the history that the pens were developed in a
piecemeal fashion.     It is difficult to accept Dr. Eastwood’s evidence
that he made a positive decision not to follow the Green Guide advice
on the width of gaps and that there was a full discussion at the
working party.     There is no record of such a discussion, which is
surprising.    One suspects that the significance of the changes and the
need to ensure that there was no overcrowding was not fully
appreciated at the time and there is an element of hindsight creeping
into the evidence that has been given.     Furthermore, the record of the
telephone calls at docs. 379 and 380 do not suggest that Dr. Eastwood
was as concerned as he now suggests about the need to monitor and
control numbers in the pens.     His evidence that he was misquoted by
his colleague Mr Strange     is not very convincing. Be that as it may,
the result of the changes was that the capacities of the pens
according to the formulae set out in the Green Guide were 822 in 3 and
871 in 4.     A conservative estimate of the numbers in pen 3 at 1503 pm
on 15th April 1989 is 1576.     It is likely that that pen contained at
least double its safe numbers.
8.        In April 1986 the Sheffield City Council became the licensing
authority.   Mr Bownes was the individual responsible.      He himself had
no direct knowledge of sports’ grounds and their safety and was
responsible for a large number of disparate licensing systems.           In May
1986 he reported that the conditions attached to the safety
certificate gave "some cause for concern, as they appear to be
inadequate or inappropriate in some areas".      In evidence, he said that
those were ill-chosen words and he meant nothing more than that the
certificate should be updated to reflect the substitution of the City
for the County Council.     We find that evidence unsatisfactory,        but we
are left in the dark      as to the precise ways in      which Mr Bownes
believed the conditions were inadequate or inappropriate.       They
clearly were in that they failed to reflect the existence of the pens.
Mr Bownes very properly embarked upon a review of the conditions and
decided that the working party system inherited from the County
Council needed to be changed.     Sadly, his review was not concluded,
nor indeed nearly concluded by 15th April 1989.       He was undoubtedly
overburdened and he did not appreciate that there was any real problem
at Hillsborough.    Nevertheless, there can be no excuse for the failure
to sort the certificate out and more particularly to ensure that
something was done to prevent overcrowding on the terraces.         In
fairness to him, the other members of the advisory committee (as the
working party became) did not apparently appreciate the need for
action.    The absence    of any certificate at all at Sheffield United and
the glaring omission      to change the capacity for the Kop are
symptomatic of failure to do what ought to have been done.
9.      The police and fire authority both had an input, being
                                                                        i


statutory consultees.     But on the key issue of capacity neither had a
direct concern.     The police were, of course, concerned with problems
of order and generally safety.     They were not experts in capacity nor
is it altogether surprising that they thought in terms of visual
monitoring.   The fire service was concerned with the sufficiency of
emergency evacuation measures.     They say they were given to understand
at a meeting on 10th April 1985 that the police would man the gates at
the back of the radial fences and thereby be able to monitor numbers.
The police deny this.     It is difficult to believe that there was such
a positive undertaking by the police: if there had been, one would
expect it to be recorded in writing and it is not.     The only record is
back in 1981 (Doc: 153) where it is noted that the new gates would be
under police control.     The probability is that the need to control
numbers was not properly appreciated so that having men at the gates
was not considered to be as important as it now appears.     The fire
service may well have believed that the police would be in charge of
the gates.    In league games they were, and the system involved the
filling of the pens one after the other.     In 1985 and 1986 there were
no semi-finals and the problem of a capacity crowd into all the
terrace did not arise.     This may have given rise to any
misunderstanding.


10.     It will be clear that it is our view that the avoidance of
overcrowding in the pens is the key to safety.     The perimeter fences
are needed to prevent pitch invasions and they, or some similar
barrier, are a requirement of UEFA and of the FA: see Doc: 296.     They
are not in themselves the problem, although the gates or means of
egress through them must be adequate to cater for an emergency.        Those
at Hillsborough were not, being narrower than the 1.1 metres required
by the Green Guide.     Provided that the fans' are properly distributed
in proper numbers, no problem of crushing should arise.      Indeed,
smaller areas ought in theory to be safer, since they contribute to
ease of distribution.    However, the smaller the area, the greater the
significance of an increase in numbers over the safety limits.


11.       There are other defects in the ground which contributed to the
disaster.    There were an insufficient number of turnstiles to
accommodate the 24,000 or so fans who were to come through them.        The
Leppings Land entrance to the ground formed a natural bottleneck.
Crushes at the turnstiles were, it seems, not uncommon, but normally
they were shortlived and contained well within the perimeter gates.
Unless fans came to the ground over a reasonably long period,
ie. about 90 minutes, and at a reasonably steady rate, problems were
likely.     Furthermore, there was a complete absence of adequate signing
inside the turnstiles.     All fans were encouraged to go down the
central tunnel and would be forgiven for not being aware of any
alternative route.    Suggestions that anyone who had been before,
indeed any fan who knew football grounds generally, would have
realised that they could go round the side of the west stand we found
unacceptable.    The lay out at Leppings Lane was the result of a need
to segregate.     That need had not existed since the 1987 season, but no
changes had been made and no signs put up.     It was accepted by Mr
Mackrell that the club could not at semi-finals comply with the
requirements of condition 28(1) of the Safety Certificate that a
record be kept of the numbers of spectators admitted to the west and
north west terraces respectively.     There were no means of controlling
the numbers on any part of the terrace within the limits of total
capacity.


III. OTHER PRELIMINARY MATTERS
A. Who was to control the fans on the terrace?
1.          The Green Guide clearly places the responsibility of ensuring
the safety of spectators upon the management of the ground, in this
case, the club: see paragraph 23.     The South Yorkshire Police Standing
Instructions for the Policing of Football Matches (Police Doc: 11)
include as one of the specific duties of stewards that they should
prevent overcrowding and ensure that crowd limits in various parts of
the ground are complied with: see Appendix L paragraph 7(a).     The
evidence of all senior police officers from Chief Superintendent Mole
at the outset has been consistent.     The police did not expect there to
be any stewards on the terraces and no active steps were to be taken
by anyone to control or direct spectators on the terrace so as to
avoid overcrowding.     The fans were expected to find their own levels.
If the central pens became overcrowded, the fans would either turn
round and go back up the tunnel or disperse by the gates at the rear
of the radial fences to the adjoining pens.     The police in the control
room would keep an eye on the pens and, if overcrowding was detected,
should take steps to stop more coming in.     Alternatively, although it
was not part of the match operational order, police officers on the
perimeter of the pitch and in the west stand would report any problems
, td Control to enable them to take necessary action.   The club was
 clear that it had no responsibility for the management of the fans on
 the terrace and said there was an agreement, not in writing or
specifically recorded (pace Hr Lock whose evidence in this regard we
consider unsatisfactory: such an agreement would in our view
necessarily have been recorded somewhere), that the police should take
on that responsibility.    At league matches, it seems that the police
did manage the pens.   At semi-finals, the arrangement was as described
above.


2.       In the light of the evidence, which is all one way, it is in
our view futile for the police to attempt to suggest that the club and
not they were responsible for the safety of the fans on the terrace.
It is interesting to note that in Harris v. Sheffield United Football
Club.-South Yorkshire Police asserted that their responsibility went
beyond maintaining law and order and extended to the safety and
comfort of the fans.   This is not at all surprising, since it was
accepted in evidence that the police were concerned with the safety of
everyone in the ground.    There certainly ought to have been a clear
and explicit written agreement between the Club and the police to
ensure that there was an effective means of maintaining and
controlling the numbers going into the pens to prevent overcrowding
and its attendant dangers.    It was a grave defect that not only did
no such agreement exist but no arrangement at all was made which
produced any effective means of avoiding overcrowding.     The policy of
allowing the fans to find their own level was dangerously useless:
Dr Eastwood’s description of it as ridiculous is clearly right.
Furthermore, the monitoring of the state of affairs in the pens by
Control was ineffective.     It is quite extraordinary to find that Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield could look at a photograph of pen 3 at 2.45
(Composite II DB16/29) and say that there was still plenty of space in
it.   There manifestly was not, particularly when one bears in mind
Dr. Eastwood’s evidence that people tend to avoid the very front
because it is below the level of the pitch and so the view is poor.
That evidence of Hr Duckenfield is a good example of the conditioning
referred to in I1/5 above and the dangers of reliance on visual
monitoring.   It seems, too, that the view from the control box      tended
to give a false impression.    No field glasses were available and the
camera, which could have been used for close-up shots, was defective
and in any event not used at the material time because those in the
control box were concentrating on the problems outside the turnstiles.
The police failed to make it clear to the officers who could have seen
the numbers building up that they should report to control; there was
nothing to that effect in the Operational Order or any briefings and
Hr Duckenfield’s evidence that he expected the officers to report
those matters is not credible.    There was no system to deal with
overcrowding and the problem does not appear to have been foreseen.
This is surprising since in 1988 the tunnel was blocked off to prevent
more going into the central pens, which was overcrowded although not
dangerously so.   That was not reported in the course of any debrief
and was unknown to Chief Superintendent Hole or any senior officer
involved in the planning.     It ought to have affected the 1989
operational order.


B. The decision to give Liverpool the Leppinqs Lane end
1.       Chief Superintendent Hole made it clear that he would only
agree to police the semi-final at Hillsborough if each team’s
/
supporters had the same end as they had had in 1988.     That decision
was in our view justified and it was left to the FA to decide whether,
in the light of it, to choose Hillsborough.     The 1988 fixture had,
according to Hr Evans’ report, gone well.     In fact, Liverpool had then
complained that, although they had more support, they had the smaller
ticket allocation.     In addition their supporters had further to
travel.   Mr Kelly accepted that, in retrospect, the choice of
Hillsborough for the second year running was somewhat unfair to
Liverpool.     It was also unfortunate that Liverpool’s complaints about
the choice of Hillsborough for 1989 were not put before the Committee
which had to decide on allocation.     Liverpool and its supporters had
reason to feel unfairly treated.     There were no factors which
militated in favour of Hillsborough rather than Manchester United.
Those set out by Mr Kelly in his evidence are unconvincing.        The truth
seems to have been that it was thought convenient to use Hillsborough
because things seemed to have gone well in 1988.


2.        Although the wrong decision was in our view made, it is
difficult to see how it had any direct connection with the tragedy.
There were no doubt a number of fans who were unable to get tickets,
perhaps more than there might have been had the match been played
elsewhere.     This may have resulted in more ticketless fans coming to
Sheffield in the hope of getting into the ground.     Certainly, there is
evidence of considerable numbers of fans asking for tickets.        It is
clear that after the tragedy, some Liverpool fans were blaming the
allocation of ends.     We do not think that an inference can be drawn
from that that large numbers of ticketless fans gained admission.           In
     i

the shock and confusion things were said which were not properly
thought out.     There is no reason to change the opinion stated in
opening this inquiry that a disaster such as this could have occurred
at any semi-final and that, if Nottingham Forest supporters had been
allocated to the Leppings Lane end, an Inquiry might well have been
considering why some of them were crushed to death.


C. The testing and collapse of barrier 124A and the removal of 144
1.       Two sections of barrier 124A in pen 3 collapsed as a result of
the overcrowding.   There can be no doubt that that collapse caused a
number of deaths.   The barrier had been tested by Dr. Eastwood’s firm
in July 1988 and had passed.


2.       The test had been carried out    in accordance with
Dr. Eastwood’s interpretation of Annex C to the Green Guide.      The
force of 6.0 KN/metre width has to be applied for three 5 minute
periods, a record being kept of the amount of deformation during each
loading and of the percentage of recovery.     If the recovery is. less
than 50% after the third application of force, there is a failure: if
it is 50%-75%, there must be a retest.    As may be apparent, the
question is 50% or 75% of what?    Is the recovery by reference to the
position of the barrier before the first application of force or
before the third?   If the former, a span of 124A recorded 53% and
should have been retested; if the latter, it recorded 100% and passed.
 Dr. Eastwood adopted the latter and so passed it.     He justified his
interpretation in evidence.    We think   he was wrong and that safety
ought to have dictated that the recovery must be by reference to the
position of the barrier before the first application of force.       But we
     i
do not think we can be criticised for adopting his interpretation,
because it is fairly open on the language of Annex C and has some
support from the tests in the British Standards.
3.        Although the collapse of the barrier caused deaths, there were
many who died elsewhere in pens 3 and 4 and, if it had not collapsed,
fans would in all probability have     been crushed to death against it.
In his'statement, Dr Eastwood said     that it was in his view "reasonable
to believe it failed on 15th April     1989 because it was subjected to a
significantly greater crowd pressure than is envisaged in the 1986
Guide".     That evidence was not challenged, since it is manifest that
the gross overcrowding in pen 3 would have created an excessive
pressure.     The vertical run behind it to barrier            and the
diagonal run to the tunnel side of the pen at the top would have
increased that pressure.     There is no certainty that the different
interpretation and a retest would have led to renewal of the barrier
or that, even if it had been renewed, it would have survived the
pressures exerted upon it.     Furthermore,' even if it had survived, it
is difficult to say that lives would have necessarily been saved.        It
is incidentally unfortunate that Dr Eastwood’s test records were
incomplete, since the test of one out of three of the spans was not
recorded.     It happens that in the case of 124A the one omitted was the
one which survived.


4.        We should also refer to the removal of barrier 144 in 1986.
This did materially affect the capacity and we think that insufficient
consideration was given to the adverse effects of the removal.      It
made it all the more important to regulate the numbers going into the
pens; this no-one seems to have appreciated.     Its removal made it the
more easy for fans coming down the tunnel to spread out into the pen
and we believe that its absence did result in a greater flow down the
pen. The evidence of Inspector Bui las, who was looking down from the
west stand, of a sea of people flowing down the pen is graphic and
consistent with the sort of movement one would expect.      A number of
fans spoke of being carried down the pen from the tunnel as they
entered after Gate C was opened and we know that at least 20 of those
who died came in through Gate C after 2.52 (a fact which gives the lie
to the opinion expressed in some quarters that drunken late-comers
killed those who     had arrived in good time) and some of those ended up
at the front of pen 3.


D. The Police Planning
1.      The police operational order for 1989 was essentially a
reproduction of that which had apparently worked well in 1988.      So
much was this so that it omitted to include the instructions to the
police Tango units to assist the ambulance and fire services to make a
rendezvous point     at Herries Road Bus garage as had been agreed in
August 1988: see     Doc:477.   This omission might have been important: in
the event, despite the emergency that arose, it seems to have made
little difference.    Since there had been a minor pitch invasion at the
end of the 1988 match the Order underlined the instruction to serial
1, the offices on the perimeter track, to forbid anyone "access to the
track from the terraces without consent of a senior officer (except to
receive medical attention)".      In this context, senior officer meant an
inspector of higher ranking officer.      Thus it was drummed into all
officers that access to the pitch must not be permitted except in the
most exceptional circumstances.      This led to the failure to react
quickly enough to the emergency that in fact arose.      Police were
conditioned to believe that any attempt to come out of the terraces
must be a pitch invasion and therefore must be prevented.      In
addition, there was insufficient planning to deal with the arrival of
fans at the turnstiles.        It was assumed that they would arrive in a
steady flow and that there would be no build up. It is interesting
that there was a considerable body of evidence from fans to the effect
that in 1988 there had been a much higher profile policing en route to
the ground.         Fans coming down Leppings Lane had been stopped and asked
if they had tickets and steps had been taken to weed out those who had
not and to control those going to the turnstiles.         Some witnesses even
talked of a recollection of barriers across Leppings Lane.         The police
denied that there was any difference and there is nothing in the
Operational Order which suggests any change, save for a reduction in
numbers of officers posted to public order duties away from the
ground.       It may be that the relatively smooth running of things in
1988 has led people to think there was more control than in the chaos
of 1989, whereas in fact there was no material difference.         In any
event, it is clear that in 1989 insufficient consideration was given
to the possibility of the arrival of large numbers at once or to the
problem of a substantial number of latecomers.         The need to control at
    a distance from a ground was identified in 1926; that lesson was not
    learnt at Hillsborough.


2.           The plan had been operated in 1988 by Chief Superintendent
Mole.        He had considerable experience of overseeing the policing of
    Hillsborough.     He was moved to a new post at the end of March 1989 and
was succeeded by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.         Mr Duckenfield had
    little recent experience of policing football grounds and had not been
    to'Hillsborough for some 10 years.     That was, of course, not his
i
    fault.    He inherited a plan which had appeared to work well and was
    content that it would work well again.     He did not have the experience
to recognise all the potential problems.       This was not his fault, but
we feel that he should have taken more time and greater care to
familiarise himself with the ground and all its problems.
Alternatively, Mr Mole could have been asked to deal with the match,
notwithstanding his new posting, since to require that Mr Duckenfield
    should be in control if such an important match with a capacity crowd
    so soon after his appointment was to ask a great deal of him.


    Ill    SATURDAY 15TH APRIL 1989
A.        The crush at the turnstiles
    1.        Because of the need to segregate Liverpool from Nottingham
    Forest fans, 12 turnstiles which normally were used to gain access to
the North Stand from Penistone Road were not used.        This meant that
    all 24,000 Liverpool fans had to enter by the Leppings Lane
    turnstiles.    1-10 were allocated to the 9880 in the North Stand, 11-16
    to the 4465 in the West Stand and A-G to the 10,100 on the terrace.
    This meant that there was considerable pressure on the turnstiles and,
    assuming a hoped-for rate of 800 an hour was achieved, it would have
    taken well over an hour to get everyone in.    Any hold ups would have
    increased that time.    The design of the ground made this imbalance of
    turnstiles inevitable and it is a defect which undoubtedly contributed
    to the disaster.


    2.        It was essential that there should be no impediment to the
    smooth operation of the turnstiles.    However, there are a number of
    things which did cause fans to congregate outside the turnstiles and
/
    to obstruct and delay the entry to the ground.    In particular, we
    would identify the following matters:-
(i) The confusing nature of the tickets coupled with the
signing outside the turnstiles.    1-10 were marked A, 11-16 C
and A-G B, so that they ran ACB.    B was the other side of a
wall to A and C, so that anyone getting himself on the wrong
side had to extricate himself and go to the other side.
Furthermore some of the signs placed to show the appropriate
colour coding of the relevant turnstiles were too low and
invisible once a substantial queue built up.    Police officers
said that there were numerous queries from fans as to where
they should go and that the signing was not at all good.    The
Club ought to have made sure that the tickets and signs were
clear.


(ii) The activities of ticket touts.    There were touts
operating, albeit not in large numbers, in the vicinity of the
Leppings Lane turnstiles: one at least was arrested for
obstruction.   Touts are a menace because (a) they encourage
fans to come without tickets in the hope of being able to buy
one, (b) they sell supporters tickets for the wrong end of the
ground, thus imperilling the segregation of the fans and (c)
they cause obstruction.    Ideally, they should be barred from
the vicinity of any ground, but there are difficulties in
devising a   means of curtailing their activities without
preventing the perfectly lawful and unobjectionable swapping
or selling of tickets other than as a business.
 (iii) The presence of ticketless fans.     The evidence makes it
 clear that there were many fans asking for tickets.       Police
 officers on duty at and near the turnstiles give various
 estimates of the numbers, ranging from 200 to 2000.       Fans have
 told the inquiry that much more was done in 1988 to try to
 weed out the ticketless than in 1989.     Whether or not that is
 right, very little was done in 1989.     The police told the
 inquiry that there was little they could do, since no offence
 was committed in being near a ground without a ticket,
 provided there was no obstruction or breach of the peace.          We
 do not think the police are so powerless.     Ticketless fans do
 cause problems and, in sufficient numbers, are almost bound to
■ cause an obstruction.   It is in our opinion perfectly
 reasonable for a police officer to ask a fan if he has a
 ticket and, if he has not, it is lawful to refuse him access
 to the immediate vicinity of the ground.     Such refusal can be
 justified on the basis of an apprehended obstruction.       In any
 event, we suspect that in many cases an indication by an
 officer to a ticketless fan to go away would suffice.


 (iv) Some ticketless fans tried to get in by bribing turnstile
 operators or by rushing or climbing over turnstiles.       Others
 with tickets for the Kop tried to get in the Liverpool end.
 Both of those categories of people delayed the turnstiles and
 affected the smooth running of entry to the ground.
3.      By 2.30pm all pretence at orderly queueing had ceased and
there was a crush of fans at the turnstiles.   Although, according to
the operational order, officers outside the turnstiles had inter alia
to form orderly queues, the Inspector in charge (Inspector Sykes) told
the inquiry that that was an impossible task when a large crowd
attended.   By 2.40pm or thereabouts the police had lost control.     The
crush got worse and worse and the gates had to be opened.    Attempts to
save the situation by the use of mounted officers failed.    Despite the
views of Inspector Hand-Davies, which must be given considerable
weight, it seems to us that the area was too confined to permit of
effective action by horses. T h e y did not have sufficient room to
manoeuvre and were enveloped by the crowd since individuals were
unable to move away, there being nowhere to move to.   Superintendent
Marshall himself was overwhelmed by the crowd and his efforts to
alleviate the crush were ineffective.   At some stage, an attempt was
made to shut the perimeter gates and to form a barrier of horses to
prevent new arrivals coming down Leppings Lane joining the back of the
crush and so making things worse.   This tactic seems to have
succeeded, at least for a time, but it was too late, for, very soon
afterwards, Gate C was opened.   Evidence was given that, despite the
barrier, fans were forcing themselves through, even going under the
horses’ bellies.   The perimeter gates, or some of them, were pushed,
open.   The evidence of what precisely happened is confusing.   There is
no doubt that there were fans, particularly among those arriving at a
relatively late stage (i.e. 2.45 onwards) who, perhaps because they
had had too much to drink or because of selfishness or to create
difficulties in the hope of getting an advantage (e.g. admission to
the ground without a ticket) or for some other reason, did push and
shove and exacerbate the position.    But those were a minority.


4.      The manual log kept by Superintendent Murray shows that at
14.17 there was a request to close Leppings Lane.     Mr Marshall and Mr
Duckenfield think the request came later and certainly Leppings Lane
was not closed to traffic until after 2.30.    If Mr Murray’s timing is
correct, the police outside were aware of problems building up at a
comparatively early stage.    We find it surprising that no measures
were taken by those inside the ground in the control box to try to
seek information to ascertain whether many fans were still coming
towards-the ground.   It is also surprising that nothing was done by
the Commander outside to deploy officers to try to control the fans
arriving further away from the ground to create a breathing space.        At
about 2.30, Mr Duckenfield, seeing the crowd at the turnstiles, asked
Mr Murray if they would get everyone in by 3pm.     Mr Murray said he
thought they would.   It does not seem to have occurred to them to
check the turnstile count or to find out how many were to come.      It
should by 2.40 at the latest have been apparent that all would not be
in by 3pm and the kick-off should have been postponed.     It had been
decided that kick-off would only be postponed if there were some
reason other than their own volition which caused late arrival of a
substantial number of fans.    This was to adopt too inflexible an
approach.   Postponement might not have eased the crush, but, since it
was accepted by many witnesses that things got worse nearer to 3pm
because fans did not want to miss any of the game, it might well have
done.   If a dangerous situation was created, it should not have
mattered what caused it.     If postponement of the kick-off might
reasonably have overcome the danger, it should have been done.


5.        All the police witnesses concerned in the policing asserted
that they did not foresee that there would be so many arriving late,
and at once.    They go on to suggest it was unforeseeable.   We
disagree.    It is, we would have thought, not in the least surprising
that fans should be reluctant to spend many minutes standing on a
terrace or, for that matter, sitting in a seat with very little in the
way of entertainment provided.    There was some evidence of knowledge
by the police that fans were developing a pattern of arriving 15
minutes or so before kick-off because, it was thought, they were
seeking alcoholic refreshment elsewhere since they could not get in
the ground: see Doc: 434A.     This was not particularly referable to
Liverpool fans, but, on the day, the police were at a fairly early
stage aware of a considerable amount of drinking by supporters.       It
was a fine and fairly warm day, such as would encourage people to sit
around in the sunshine.    It was an all-ticket match, so that fans
would be forgiven for believing that it would not take very long to
get in.


6.        In any event, we do not think that those who arrived Ihour
before kick-off can properly be branded latecomers, particularly since
the tickets said spectators should be in their places by 2.45.       It was
taking up to 20 minutes to get through the crush and into the ground.
Once the crush developed, there was more difficulty in getting through
the turnstiles which worsened the crush.
7.         It has been said that, had the fans not pushed, the problem of.
crushing would not have arisen.       This is a superficially plausible
view. -But it ignores the reality of crowd behaviour.        It has not been
seriously suggested by any police officer that the mood of the crowd
up to about 2.30 was other than good natured.        It is precisely because
people who are aiming to go to a particular place through a limited
means of access do tend to crowd together that there is a need for
control.     And, as one witness said, once you are in that sort of a
crowd, you only move forwards or sideways, never backwards.        Sideways
was constricted, so all were tending to move forwards.


8.       We should refer to other factors which have been suggested as
causative of the crush.


           (a)   Ticket!ess Fans
           As we have already said, it is very difficult to estimate the
           number of ticket!ess fans.     It has been suggested that there
           were a substantial number who were determined to get into the
           ground without a ticket.     There is some evidence, notably
           from Mr Taylor, the effect of which is that some fans were
           overheard expressing the intention to get in by way of an open
           gate or to cause a gate to be opened.     Attention is drawn to
           the arrival of large numbers of Liverpool fans at all-ticket
           League matches in the hope of gaining admission.     And it is
           pointed out that at this year’s Cup Final there were up 1000
           fans who had come to force an entry to Wembley Stadium.        We do
     /
i        not doubt that there probably were some fans who came without
tickets determined to gain entry.      But we find it impossible/
to accept that the crushing was caused by such fans so as to
engineer the opening of a gate, a theory propounded by
Superintendent Greenwood.      (See Day 12, p.95).   That would
have involved a truly amazing degree of preparation and good
fortune.      However, there may well have been a number of fans
who took advantage of the situation and were happy to
exacerbate and make use of the crush.      Opportunists probably
did hope that a gate would be opened and that they would get
in through it.      To that extent, ticketless fans may have
contributed to the difficulties at the turnstiles.


(b)   Drink
Many witnesses, particularly the police, refer to a large
consumption of alcohol, mainly lager.      Fans arrived in
Sheffield in good time but then stayed outside the ground
drinking, either at pubs or in public places.        Some police
officers suggested that the ban on the sale of alcohol in the
ground contributed to this pattern of behaviour.        It was
pointed out that, having regard to the crowds, those seeking
drink inside the ground, if it was permissible to sell it,
would be unlikely to succeed in getting more than a pint (i.e
a single drink).      It does certainly seem that a significant
number of fans did decide* to take advantage of the sunshine
and drink so that they arrived comparatively late and in a
condition affected by alcohol.      The drink had increased
selfish and stupid behaviour, leading to pushing and a
                                        27



            failure to take any notice of police appeals to hold back.     /

            There was a considerable amount of boorish and loutish
            behaviour (e.g. urinating in gardens or backyards, throwing
            empty cans all over the place, shouting, swearing and
            chanting) which sadly tends to be associated with football
            crowds.   That sort of behaviour is inexcusable.    But it was a
            minority of fans who were guilty of it and it did not cause
            the trouble.    It probably contributed to the inability of the
            police to alleviate the trouble once it had arisen.


             (c)   Hooliganism
            This is really coupled with the taking of drink, although
            those may well have been fans who did not need drink to behave
            in a thoroughly antisocial fashion.     Police horses were burnt
            with cigarettes, there was pushing and shoving and some fans
            behaved in a thoroughly selfish way, concerned only to get
            themselves into the ground without caring for the comfort or
             safety of their fellows.    But this sort of behaviour was that
            of a minority and did not cause the problem.     The primary
             cause of the crushing was the bottleneck at Leppings Lane, and
             insufficiency of turnstiles and a failure by the policy
             properly to control fans arriving before they reached the
             perimeter gates and the turnstiles.


    B.   The opening of the gates
    1.       At 2.47 Superintendent Marshall radioed the first request to


•
    open gates.    Ground control was focussing on gate C and so it was that
gate that was expected to be opened.    At 2.48 it opened to eject a fan
and some 200 or so outside burst in.    This happened before Mr
Duckenfield was able to decide on an answer.       Shortly afterwards the
request was repeated, again that the gates should be opened.       Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield realised that to open the gates would be to
act contrary to all the planning and# would let unsearched and
possibly ticketless fans into the ground.     He had a difficult decision
to make and he took his time making it.     Unfortunately, neither he nor
any of his advisers in the control room took any steps to prepare for
the consequences of opening Gate C in particular.      The inevitable
result would-be an influx of fans down the central tunnel and into
pens 3 and 4:    this should have been foreseen.    Mr Murray attempted,
he says, to contact Mr Lock, but was unsuccessful.      Otherwise, no
attempt was made to contact or to warn the stewards in the club.         The
suggestion that the officers on the concourse ought to have acted on
their own initiative does not bear examination:      they did not know
that the gate was to be opened nor did they know that pens 3 and 4
were already full.    In fact, by 2.50 pens 3 and 4 had reached their
safe capacity.    This should have been obvious to those in the control
box.   Even if it was not, steps should have been taken to prevent the
large numbers who were bound to come through Gate C from going down
the central tunnel.


2.       At 2.54 the teams came out onto the field.      This resulted in a
roar from the crowd, encouraging entrants to the ground to hurry to
their places.    So it was that the greater portion of the 2000 or so
who entered through Gate C went into pens 3 and 4.       They came in in an
orderly fashion, glad to escape from the dangerous crush outside.          At
2.58 Gate A was opened, but this time there was some preparation
inside, largely because of the foresight of Sgt. Higgins.     Mr
Duckenfield took additional     steps by deploying a   serial to the front
of the North Stand to cater     for that influx which might   have caused
trouble to the seated customers in that stand.     Those standing on the
terrace were left to fend for themselves.


3.       It is clear that the failure to take any steps to prevent fans
going from Gate C to pens 3 and 4 was the effective cause of the
disaster.     The decision to open the gates cannot be criticised:       the
failure to foresee the result can.


C.   Inside the ground
1.       It has been submitted that a video shows       activity inpen 3
suggesting that the barrier broke before 2.52.     We do not find that at
all likely.     It is contrary to the evidence that is available from
fans who were in the vicinity of that barrier.     It is also less
probable, since a surge in an overcrowded pen was far more likely to
have done the damage.     It was believed at an earlier stage of the
inquiry that the surge of fans coming in from Gate C, coinciding with
the arrival of the teams on the pitch, caused the collapse.        The
evidence now available suggests it may have occurred later, possibly
even as late as 3.05, when the hitting of the bar at the Nottingham
Forest end caused a surge on the terrace.     There is much conflict, but
it seems that by 3.02 or thereabouts, when Gate 3 had been opened
properly, a pile of bodies was already obstructing it.
    2.         Since no steps were taken to prevent it happening, the pens
got fuller and fuller.         As they did, people began to be crushed to
death.         Some fell to the ground and were asphyxiated as a result:
    others were unable to breathe standing up.        Almost all died from
    traumatic asphyxia - the crush was so great that they could not
    breathe.     As this happened, they began to cry out in distress.        The
    police officers at the perimeter fence were slow to react, partly
    because they were accustomed to overcrowding, partly because the noise
    level made it difficult to hear that the cries were of people in real
    distress and partly because they were conditioned and instructed to
              u the integrity of the pitch.   PC Hooson told the inquiry that
    he came past the North Stand and, as he approached gate 4, he realised
                                              XX.
    that fans were in distress and he tookj^upon himself to open Gate 4.
    This was sometime between 2.55 and 3pm.         Thereafter, Gate 4 remained
    open.     PC Illingworth, the officer on Gate 4, does not agree; he says
    he opened that gate.     It is possible that it had originally been
    opened by PC Illingworth and shut again and then reopened by PC
    Hooson.     But insofar as there is a conflict of evidence to be
    resolved, we would submit that PC Hooson’s account is to be preferred.
    PC Illingworth must feel himself open to criticism; PC Hooson has, on
    the face of things, no axe to grind.


    3.         Gate 3 was opened, according to PC Smith, by the force of the
    fans in the pen.     He shut it again.    The same happened again and it
    was only then that he appreciated the need to keep it open to try to
    help to extricate the injured.     This account, courageously given, is
/

    corroborated by fans.     Dr Eastwood accepted that, given sufficient
    pressure, the gate could have opened in the way described.
                                      31



    4.      It is not possible to say precisely when the      gates were
    opened, since the videos available were not focussed on the pens at
    the crucial time.   The photographs in Composite Album II show gate 4
    open at 15.00 and gate 3 at 15.02.     Videos show both   gates closed at
    15.00:45 (MAP 1) and gate 4 open at 15.00:50 (MAP 3).       The earliest
    that Gate 3 is shown open on a video is 15.03: 49 (MAP 8).      All this
    makes Mr Grobelaar’s timing very suspect and his description of the
^   various moves in the match is not borne out by the video of the game.


    5.      Not only was there a slowness to react to the situation in the
    pens, but also, once fans had begun to climb over the perimeter fence
    (at about 3pm), the immediate reaction was that it was a pitch
    invasion.    This was unlikely for various reasons, not least because
    (a) the fans did not go on the pitch and (b) there was no conceivable
    cause for an invasion at that stage of the game.     Valuable minutes
    were spent while those in the control box tried to find out what was


•
    happening.


    6.      Attempts were made by standing on the perimeter fencing and
    gesticulating to get those at the back of the pens to move back.
    These attempts failed.    This was not in the main due to cussedness
    on the part of the fans, but to (a) an inability to move and (b) a
    failure to realise what was going on down the front.      No senior
    officer thought to send police down the tunnel to haul fans out the
    back / - that was left to the initiative of junior officers.
7.         There was an absence of leadership by the senior police       /
officers.     Individual efforts were made to try to save lives and to
evacuate the pens, but the picture was one of chaos and lack of
organisation until Chief Superintendent Nesbitt came on the scene at
about 3.15.     No attempt was made to use the tannoy to try to summon
medical assistance until about 3.20.     Similarly, those not directly
involved, particularly the Nottingham Forest fans on the Kop, were
left ignorant of what was happening.     Chief Superintendent
Duckingfield defended his decision to say nothing on public order
grounds.     We can quite see that fans had to be kept in their places to
avoid interference with the emergency services, but we think that some
announcement should have been made.     Host football fans are decent
law abiding people and, if treated as human beings, are likely to
react sensibly.     When an announcement was eventually made, the fans
all behaved well


8.         The club had an agreement with the St. John’s Ambulance
Brigade to provide sufficient numbers to comply with the requirements
of the safety certificate.     Their members did all they could when the
tragedy occurred.     SYMAS had very prudently, by stretching the
relevant DHSS guidelines, determined that two of their personnel
should attend the ground with an ambulance,     two complementary tickets
had been provided for league games, but not for semi-finals.        It did
appear that there could be some criticism of the club for withdrawing
the tickets, but we heard from Mr Mackrell, and we have no reason to
     i
doubt,that it arose from an administrative error.     In any event, the
personnel were at the ground and able to react quickly.     There was,
however, a lack of proper liaison with the police, largely because the
police had no plan specifically to deal with a disaster at
Hillsborough Stadium.    The same comment applies in respect of liaison
with the fire service, who were eventually called to produce bolt
cutters to remove the perimeter fencing.    The first fire officer to
arrive was told he wasn’t wanted.     In addition, there was confusion
between the club and Dr Purcell as to his role.     He thought he was
present to administer to the team or directors and was not the
physician referred to in the safety certificate.


9.        Much publicity was given to the attempt by the police to
summon the fire brigade and the conversation seeking to identify the
precise location of Hillsborough Stadium.     It would be unfair to blame
the fire brigade operator for her endeavours to get the right
information for the computer.    She expected the police to be precise
and there ought to be full briefing so that the police know what is
needed of them.     There was some confusion as to what was needed from
the fire brigade.


10.       Complaints have been made of the lack of proper medical
equipment.    We do not think any football club could reasonably be
expected to carry sufficient equipment to cater for. a disaster of the
magnitude of that which occurred.     But there should have been at least
a resuscitator.     The SYMAS ambulance had all necessary equipment and
oxygen was quickly available.     It became clear that a defibrillator
      I

would not have been a sensible piece of equipment to use in the pitch.
 We were not impressed with the complaints made by Dr Ashton and Dr
Phillips in that regard.
                                    34




11.      Although there was confusion and disorganisation and a failure
to act as expeditiously in summoning the necessary assistance as was
desirable, we doubt that the delays caused deaths which would not in
any event have occurred.    We do think that, had the perimeter fence
been opened earlier and positive steps taken to get people out of the
back of the pens, some lives might have been saved.     But we doubt that
the delays in seeking medical aid and a sufficiency of ambulances made
any real difference.    As was pointed out in evidence, the first 4
minutes are crucial and immediate mouth to mouth resuscitation is the
only really effective and practical treatment.     This was given by
police officers, St. John’s personnel, fans etc.


12.      Much ill-feeling was generated by the allegation made that
afternoon that fans had taken down a fence and thereby caused the
tragedy.    This version was given by Mr Duckenfield to Mr Kelly-at
about 3.15.     Mr Duckenfield has admitted that he deliberately did not
tell the truth.    That account had been given to the fire service and
to SYMAS.     There was scope for misunderstanding, since the call to
SYMAS may well have referred to the forcing of a perimeter gate.        That
possibility of misunderstanding cannot exonerate Mr Duckenfield.


D.    Radio Communication
1.       Radio communications were generally poor.   This was largely
due to the fact that over 100 officers had radios and so, particularly
as thp situation became more difficult, there was a tendency for more
than one to talk at once.     In addition, shortly after 2.30 a problem
was apparent and the control box seemed to have lost transmission.
                                  35



                                                                          /
The reserve station was brought into use.    This was so badly sited
that it was impracticable to use it.   Hence the control box had to use
a set instead, thus losing the ability to switch to non-talk through
so as to override a]T other transmissions.    It did gain the advantage
on talk through that it was able to compete on equal terms with the
other officers.


2.      The situation was wholly unsatisfactory.    Many messages did
not get through.   Officers on the perimeter were not heard trying to
announce that there was crushing and asking for ambulances.
Superintendent Marshall could not get through his request to open the
gates and had to route it via the police station.


3.       Since an inspection by a Home Office expert has disclosed no
faults, the breakdown must have resulted from too much traffic-on the
air.   Too many officers had radios for the system to cope.    Clearly,
consideration will have to be given in Stage 2 to means of improving
communications and avoiding the problems which arose.


IV.1     As will be apparent, we have not sought to cover all the
matters dealt with in the evidence.    We have not thought it necessary
to suggest the resolution of disputed evidence as to who said what and
when in relation to numbers still to come into the ground.     No doubt,
those matters are important to the individuals involved.      It is
possible that some people ought to have been aware of things which
should have led them to take action which might have changed events.
We are not satisfied that identification of the shortcomings of
individuals in those sorts of respects will help the Tribunal in its
task.   No doubt the parties concerned will, if they consider such
incidents to be important, deal with them in the course of their
submissions.


2.       This was a wholly avoidable disaster, but one which was bound
to occur so long as nothing was done to control the numbers going into
the pens and to provide a sufficiency of turnstiles and
policing to avoid a dangerous build up of fans seeking admission.
Luck prevented it happening before; that luck ran out on 15th April
1989, with the tragic consequences which have led to this Inquiry.     It
is clear that there must be education of all concerned, police,
stewards, spectators, so that overcrowding can be the more easily
recognised.    Ignorance, complacency and lack of foresight, not
deliberate callousness, led to the disaster.    Perhaps the lessens can
now be well and truly learnt and this will be the last of the series
of inquiries into disasters at football grounds which have led to loss
of life and injury.




                                        /ANOftfw COHT n S Q.C.
                                                             j
                                                                                                        v&>                                                        /£..vj     r s '3            y>\

                                                                                                                                                                                                  WG
                                                                                                                                                                                        IA m e n d e d f

                ■L O C K OUT DATES
                                                                                                            West Midlands Police
           W ITNESS NOT AVAILABLE
                                                                                                  S T A T E M E N T OF W ITN ESS
       1    8   15   22 29        8   15   .T2 29                                       (C.J. Act 1967. s.9; M .C. Act 1980, s. 102; M .C. Rules 1981, r.70)
       2    9   16   23 30        9   16   23 30
       3   10   17   24 31       10   17   24 31
       4   11   18   25          11   18   25       N am e                 .S. t* 77?" 1. . . . .                    WXMSAt-
       5   12   19   26          12   19   26                      i iT                           1
       6   13   20   27          13   20   27       Age            •                .    N ts )              Date of Birth . . .
       7   14   21   28          14   21   28
                                                    Occupation                                                                         PT.edC.
        1 8     15   22 29   1    8   15   22 29    Home or business address
       2  9     16   23 30   2    9   16   23 30    and telephone number                                               A    •* f P 4            ....
       3 10     17   24 31   3   10   17   24 31
       A 11     18   25      4   II   18   25                                                                                                S ’*? *
       5 12     19   26      5   12   19   26
       6 13     20   27      6   13   20   27
       7 14     21   28      7   14   21   28
                                                                                                                                 -r   a*'

                                                    This statement, consisting of     [      page(s) each* signed by me, is true to the best of my knowledge
          8     15   22 29      8     15   22 29    and belief and I make it knowing that, if it is tendered in evidence, I shall be liable to prosecution if I
          9     16   23 30      9     16   23 30
                                                    have wilfully stated in it anything which I know to be false or do not believe to be true.
         10     17   24 31     10     17   24 31
         11     18   25        11     18   25
         12
       6 13
                19
                20
                     26
                     27
                               12
                             6 *3
                                      19
                                      20
                                           26
                                           27       Dated the              2                          day   of       Mitf
                                                                                                                                                                  <T53_
       7 14     21   28      7 U      21   28
       ENTER           IF N O D ATES                                                                                                  Signature witnessed bV
                                                    Signed
       TO BE AVOIDED             \

                                                                                                                                      Officer's Name

                                                                                                                                      Rank                        No.   'AT


                                                                                                                                         .£). <frrr

                                                        $                      .   ■&.
-mm.




                                                                                                             .f                          . J.          j                  ^   a                      •
                                                                                                                                  .j.                                   .--Jur. . £ & . . .


                                                                               :, ' M j                          A-c*a


                                                                                                                                                                  ...               .


                                                                 .. Js£&.thJl.?yt**++A .                              . . .j j   ...............                   ..........

                                                     sd~v*Ai,a**           ,                                                sty..                          -dj          ________

                                                                                                                                                  l / / 2 r f/j                   .........

                                                                                                       J

                                                    Signed                                                                       Signature witnessed by

                                                     ' 0 « iete a s «op4tcabfe.

                                                                                                                 /                                         C
                                                                                                                                                                wc
                                                                                                                                                         (Am ended
                                                               West Midlands Police
                                                      S T A T E M E N T OF W ITN E S S
                                            (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s. 102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


          Continuation of statemarp o f .             . /.!              y............'■
                                                              r<-SCo fu.J.                       X   WC     t /.                   < ? A              (I).




          x<^Ovv<v. .jdjg .J44J..                                                                                   j. .J**..        •?*? • ••
           .J^JST. .<*?\ .^ A4< . .                                   . .^r.                                            .... A^C?.*^V?. . .
■vV**
~~ v
     '-
    -'     x*v/r«*^. .2./^_ !*}*S.                                                                   •              .'d^&u .o^T^.f^r^wf
          A&v*-\                                                                                                                                   ^ ^ . . . . ^ ...
                             ___________ . s * m i .. .&!.
          .f.                     .M . .. { ! / * & . . . - -                                                                               ^w/      ^
                      “.            _. . . . ..r^T).
                                               . . . . . . . . . . . .W-.
                                                                       . . .-.&.o                        ..^r. .A ? ..
                              y*/!* rvwsA^~              J sroJ jrf                                          .£h<-'.f.
                                                                     Xtff                                                                     /C*r~

                                                                                                                                            * .JjJrtd.
                                                              -«vv,
                                                                            4 .                       SPrtV^'.'yi-... I/.fl(\ <\C .^wvfr'




                                 (          yfcjT*. .rr?^/.

                         t                 ..jfe.                       Pi!.*. .^.                                    /b.sfrd .                    SGf*S\
          .<$). . J r ^ r ,.. .?f. *??..                                            ..‘r^rrj ..                                                                      r
                                             jLcyC^fJuJl

          <*JW.
                                              -Wo <                                        ^ ,<v^. ./^hf?^!W.j                              * nA j
          s<yf?A              J. X*. syryt**^?..                                                        .<■?*£ /£*.                    .... . . . .
                                                                                                 '.. 'TA^^T: .                                  .'ftV'f.
                                                                                      .■^f^.,.               .4^r.                                rfVT.
             ^ ^                                          Js          Ab.                      jgjrw^^VCA .
                                U r O ff                                                             j y J ..c). .s&Lr. .•jbflt.                         ■
          < T . T .- . . .                   . . .- ^ ^ * /. . .               .m ^        n -           . .j f e r T * ''* '. . .           . y C ^ fW . .


          .&?■. .'£$*?&                      ..J^4.      ..               ..JeT. /$*..                                                                   ..

                                                                      ...................... . . . ^                     J . ...   ................
          .....              ^.Zh^p..                                       .. /£r?V?£v?<>?.                                               .■ry^Vfi^i.
                                                                                                               /^T?. .<»$'.. y^yy^r^TTr....
            iV-
                                                                                                                                      ...
          Signed                                                                                     Signaturewitnessedby
                                                                                                                          (
                                                                               a.
                                                                                                                                                                                                     WG 4
                                                                                                                                                                                        (A m onded 9 .8
                                                             West Midlands Police
                                                   S T A T E M E N T OF W IT N E S S
                                     (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s. 102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation         ofi statement
w u n u iiu a u u ii w   a i a i o iiio iu of
                                           w<    . . .
                                                              <v-r<w‘1
                                                         ........................ | . . .     ...................... %• * ..........................   «•
                                                                                                                                                            (3)             A ..........................

                                   . fifi..£y?-..                                                                       <sfd'..                                           fcfaA.'bd...
 £     '.                                       .r c ^ . . . J r - ' S                j     . r^r: .                                                                  ,J%CtjfJ.. . .
 .zfcb-. .                                                                                       .'T'^ . .                                                                   ...*(.. . .
                                                                                                                                                                             '
                                                                                                                                                                             •
                                                                               ■                           J                           f                      ?                    .......
 ^ei _ _                                                                                         .'. .^'.                              ....
 dpi&.                                                                               ..-ffC\*rr4?. -.... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .


                                ..,J-<4t..^$r*4. .lit..M O . .                                                                                                                   ......
 .JtesdjffjT.                                                                                                         .■#*??. .             <^^4 .                                               •



 £     .jd**?./r^t.                                                                                                                                                .-..
              .<^f.                                      .■£>). S.                                                            . r&fd*!}.                   .T*y/f: .$*<+*4..
                        .sfrrA ..      .. d & f - k .          <$(J. .■$&.                              ...
 ✓^^p. ...jb&rfd&i-. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
  . . . . . . . . ..^o/£.s&*hQ*-.                                                   f.jyrC..               ...
  f o ..        .r r f ^ t . .'A..^ . .rr&fat. .d/Trr>*r... / & £ . iJsYVidfv. M * . . . . .
                                                .. .4<*yfe.. /**&&**!'. .                                                  . 0*1*4*-. /9yf.                                 -^r^nl. . . .
  jt*i                                                           .. fKfb&ys. .J^iL.                                      .         .          >..VVt*. .-t?? .               .■^??,
                                                                                                                                                                                  !^r?'..
     Mr. -d&Tf} .i&i*. L                                                                               .d.'f??!l¥>. . ^r.                                                   .P.Jlvl...
                      s$j. scpy??t .                                aJ.       .Jr!*!°.. .*&£*?.^bhy. .^ ? 4 . .J^r.                                                                      ..........
      s*4*<di. ^ rf^ y y r:. .J ^ r*!.. *$.                                               . s& hfr% r.                                            .d. ■           .'r ^ 4 f 4 ..
 . J h * r r j * r .. . £ . . & w °} ....... ^ . . .'d b * J c * 4 .. ./Or*..                                                            &??<* ■ ~ '^ r r ^ r .. & J L **,__
 /<?r.                                                                             •-•                             ’■•ddxvh**--!                                                                     ...
 sGT: ..JZ». .                                   .M . ..J&fall. .ffJ-. .^Tfi. .& + V A                                                            y
J L f a t . ^ P . ..*#rc4. .r m & y * - d . & . .                                                                                                       .£***&< ■.!*rfj^r. ....
  .A-ipy...^sJ^rr-4...•<fc.                                                                                                                                                          —
  ./ d      i .. t& r & v r A ..                                .-! i^        ti yf . .                         . j .                              . *£ $ x ) d       r( s& * f.‘^ &         l   —
 ✓OT..orvSi’C . .4^. ■&■                    ■               ■■*^h-..                                                                      .*ifj...          /V^V^7

                      . < y w c v j .%                                       ..vV'T?^..                                                .^fr4.                               .<$*?*.
                      I^Tv /Cf^Pr                             \tyy9!’.c)../y^? .^®^v?T?4^x5.                                                                              % ? A . >Y. . .
                                           V*fp..^Arrr4^ . ..^^.^/r: ■sf*. ■Z : .*?                                                                        .«<.                  .Jbttatx
                                                                                                                                                       .                  ..jp. sjtv&^i..

            rlro^.                          .-fc.jbf.sJ&r. .■'th. .Jh&-.                                              .<s^rV..                                    .J X t ^ y i .             ___

                                                                                                                                   /WV                            (%f\ «/(-&,
                                                                                                                                                                                /■c
 Signed
                                                                                                                                                                                                       WG 41
                                                                                                                                                                                                (Am ended 9 .8 :
                                                             West Midlands Police
                                                   S T A T E M E N T OF W ITN E S S
                                      (C.J. Act 1967, s .9; M .C . Act 19 80 , s .1 02; M .C . Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation of statqnent of                      ...                       ....                              f £. . . .                                   . ..     ..                     ................
s€ h r*i. .                                                                                                           . . / ^ T V * . . ^ '^ V ^ r . f T T !                 . & ***!           .'W S y .

                                                         . />*><-. . <^V»W . .                                         .- if t W '.j . .                                 f3 .                            .   ..

sO^t..                      . /?^vW..                                                                                          -... ^J..                                     .. £*Y»r_ _ _
.                    . yy J i-W     f^+ P ..                     . . - 4 ^ ^ ? . •........................................................................................................................

.......... < 5 ^ 7              .                                                                         .   i**rc 4 .        .                                                        .......................

                                                                                                                                                                                                   ....
jd *< 9 t. . .J^9r°.. . -«?■.. . \*A n£. . . y t^ ..                                                . J. *-*». .                                              r .-<?<?>**?>.                                 ..
- ♦T 't ,. . / J W . . * ? .                         .S f^ fO   fy J . .< * ? A .                                           . . S P f^ r.                          .■'& + ** •.           .^tj^wvfc. .



w ^ 4 r f - . . *'*!■'?■*/. £ ? .                                  .. . yf ee. . /C ^ t^ r n ^ d . -< fc .. ^ ? w . .*.........................
                                                                                    .   svd?.          .<£& .

                                                                                                              svs?f4.                                           ■« * '    . jt r f lj

j& ..
          rro ^ .                                       S !* ^ £ . .J h . .•& £ .
    <4~n*>. ». S & .        . /V C f . . .•^ T ? W * /. . . ^ * . .                                                                                .• .V V ^ :

    >^VK .                    • .< *5 V ? C . .    ^*rC”.                                                                                  *.. T ^ W . T ^ * t                                  /•?'?*?..

                           f<?r. . .£&?. .'J^T'. .                                            •J& * * :. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
                                . .if c v f . . - ^ r . .                                                                                                                                   j
    < fh . .J jp rrS H '.. A /jf * . J?h.                                        .J r * $ .. /v^V'V                                                                   si'o. /r y j.
    .{ p ..   v 0 rw y .   . « J £ * ? c i..                     •/ d F r * ? H - • < * > £ ■ ■                                     r f t r® y!r^ _ , . r                                        ..............

    J&   . /3 ^ . ,< /h A              . ,-r=y?.                                                                      .   .J y jfy j* .


sy&M .                                  •'J ^ b .. s?r. .K & e ry f^ l..                                                       .^ 4 < ^ . .A^rt?.
.* * r r ? ty    .              .              .               ^ v f ”. .                                           '. .......................................................................................
...........                . . ^ ^ r . . ✓ w k5ts^ " . . - e W H ^ f o .                         ..    J y ^ y y y H . r jf ir r A .                                      . ■***£ £ . /^ 4 > .. .
                 . r j h r r y f r '. . .                          r 'V ^ r j.                           . ■/ P>^.                           . .< 2 .     ,4rt ‘?hJZA              < *> 0 ^

                           c)J@l                            A*^sc<>        /y s tjU '          ■ ^ ? <r<r ^ 4 y^ 7                           .   .< * ? r V .              ,Af ^ i.
                                                                                    . /y f& v fr.< ? ~ r? y Jrr^ . ' . . . & . • £ : * > & ? / . . ^ . .                                                      .

yC ^yJ^J ■srGfjT                                                                                                                            ..■£ & .-^JF yyy^i'.-.£. ....
.^ 9 ^ 4 - rfc . ArJ^ ti.                                -sryj. . .<fVr>y?..                                     . .yf r . .                                    ..............................
                                                                                                                                                             <TrC^-. )^ U L .....
     <D-yeyJL                                      XXo ^                                    .9   ^ *4 . .v^.                                       S .o fr.                                  A yrr& C
. $ . jd & fy .. M fr r . /T 0 C . $??.r <**?.. . 0 . .                                                                       . .< ^ r 5 ..                                                             ...

                .y ^ r r ^ V '..                                                                   j   . f i '? .                                . ,^ o p M ^ u y > . .                      ..................

                                                                                                        ^O T O r^                                                 aa^ /~ .                .......

Signed                                                                                  Signature witnessed by                                                                           /fc l

                                                                                   4-
                                                                                                                                WG *
                                                                                                                        (A m ended 9.
                                             West Midlands Police
                                     S T A T E M E N T OF W IT N E S S
                             (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Cratinuation of statement of . . . f i . /Y X 9 . C '. 'J .........C A /*. V . f A V                                    7^:
                                    . yp/hr..                         .-rtcJsrvw-..                         <c.lTfUi~...
          .Kff&feJ.                      . .0..                               . .*h+r*c..very.
         .D.                                               . .^9. .oferA.                                         .-3.. . .
            .or$f. .jtf/i&fT*. -sre?) • • s f i y d g      .           .J.                                                    3.
                                                                                                          K>-fi J & u *rjf

                                                   .dsPTfffil..                            .&*r,            Jj-cr*. T^97i*jt.
.. .<£$ .jtr^WrY... '2r*v/..                                               AT.             .-^..r^rhr.                   ...
                                                                                                                 .rhrifcr. .
                                      .o?9?t\ .sk&fi . .J?-.                                   ,4K          .0<&                 .
                         .! ^ v W . ,j&h..**\.<^*y?..r^f-*fC. ^                                      ............
            <?r^\ rfypyr*.,.dvVrJh+i,                       .>.. .^VT?C ,                  7 ?^,. -ffc.            ..
stf&f.      .'V.'fT^. .-tdr. *. d h . .                     .<2. /?*?... *r;,                                             ...


                                                   .y. .<*rifer. .fib. .’Ji&fJi.r M A t...                     'rftvC.___


 .Jri*. ./ir^yf^-. .^j. .jtftt. i+rfysd. .<+rA.                                                           .*$y................
               Z?^fTt4.\                            '. .^9. -<^HT*y.                                                   .. .
                                                                                                                     .4*.
                                          rrr)..^ r o c ? . xvr*r?-.. ?%*$■&*.             M r t r j .&*<&,. d . . . .
  j*^y>..       .-^5V4^?4^-                   .<c?Ctf!rC^lTr.                                            r*Vj .<1IS?fr4...
      ./^c*v^r.../fr-.          ^f- s t ^ h                               .-JUdl.
                        .. ^tr. fYPPfr..                  .<^rr4. r£t**.y > * d . »
         .jw<Vi?.        ., y « w . . ^ - .                                         .-*rW.Jr£il<v+j —
      ./rc+t&l...-/^U^v^rrvnA. -<Urr.               . - ^ v / .. bJ*x>. crrtp..<**'??..        fV. r^)..
 / « * . iirt&vrd         ^ ..-^. .                                    f* .                       ...
 S*XfA <>??            yVT*'’. .            ./Or*?.                                          .^?9T»wM»JL
         : ^ t . i . / . . . J u . .. £ .                               ...................
             cj/.y
                                         <SWjfr4. sn&f. Jfc.W?.* < ^ 9 9 r C ^ .                                                ..

       <r ^ J < srer).. rJS**A.                               .<?r*.. 'TCf'rh rJlrC.*/?^).> .^ y srfr...
         .yfet-, -d. .                          ..$?.                             • sPttJl.'xh. . . . .
 yW*!)                    sO+rX .M ,        .. M i . .<4.. a &                    ,/ffp, /rr , ^ < r . . . .
                _ l o'/                                     ■fT^r..           .‘.. . . . . . . . . . . . . .


                                      .r ^ 5. .Ar>C* .                       .-        r   ^     f   f          __       .. .
Signed .                                                        Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                        /I
                                                                                                                        ^

                                                            S"                                 __________
                                                                                                                                     WG 41
                                                                                                                              (Am ended 9 .8 '
                                                West Midlands Police
                                       S T A T E M E N T OF W ITN E SS
                             (C.J. Act 1967. s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981. r.70>


Continuation of statement of . . .         ftp .                                   K
                                                                                             £ftudZ \P)
                                  ^r5?^5.. -fA^.                               ..^v?Mr^L../9 f^yLA ^ .       •‘^x7y^•■•j           .
  .jQ^rr^rrC^O^. .$&..
 /s^vf..                                                                  ..................... ....................................
  ..........          < 5 . ^ 4 - . . ✓r&t.                                                                                    __
  .                               i^bb&rfj. .'rP?T*-.                        .. /ynar*-..                                 ....
                                       r^ypyfA..<er9^4^.                                       .■fr ? ^ 4 ..4$.                        •
              'yX$yf& .. SH * ? . .. .Q ^ f T ..          .. 'swVfrr'rA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
                  v*<c'? .                      . ‘y ^ v / .             .ytjftvr:. Jzh. . ^ C T ^ f y ^
JksfrcfYfk.. .^1^.                          .jh+vr*). <■.$*??. /*??.                                     .....
/ ^ y r ^ . .jf^r4/r..A h . .y                   r         f      . £ / ? ? ? . .r < w * r c r ^          ...
i/^Vir^. _               _ ^tuL                                                    .$.                w ..,,.
.             . A & ! \ ..'flrirffWfJ.                                  .<ir&.
         . >w\a ,. .</. < ^ r r V « Af.‘V 3 . .                       . .-tj*.,
  /WV^/. sfy*-,                        .        Jfe
                                                 W?)- < T ? d k ^ . .^ W . - ,
                .jtZUf-jy, $ * .sJfX* rr^7.                      r^T)..*?&&. .<<?£>.                   '??.....

                  .Jkhj-d../           r    ?      ./rr^j.. -'srfQ        • • •&•                                         .AihiA...


 /fi .   .jUJr*. dl. .f}. ~. J.£. < W * U &                 .,              /V>. . fjfeff- M . & d - .
                                                                                           /yv^p- /ft\                 ...........

  j»fLk/t.%         * /2^*.                                                        .•^^,.                                     ?*!... .
  ^jLi^XpJX syT?*~if/.,                            ..<jf.                      .l(p.~                             .~$~L .'T**T:f
  < Y r. < €H ^ . .                                                  . .- f r : .^ r * .
              £       d d e - ' ,'rn.. / ^ T r ? ..                         .J*4, .'9ir^Ti4..




                       ^P. .^T?.                                 a ij.   $ £     ^^fy<        ..-r5/.                  .s ? r A . _ _
                          .J ^ A . .                ..<^7 .. ■?r^. w f c **                                               / f & h . ..


          cf. /*/??.. M h « S .             .   ^                                      . /rf^f.                   ryta^J -d^TT.

Signed                                                                          Signaturewitnessedby
                                                                                                                                               W G 41
                                                                                                                                        (Am ended 9 .8 '
                                                      West Midlands Police
                                             S T A T E M E N T OF W ITN E SS
                                 (C.J. Act 1967, 3.9; M.C. Act 1980. s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation of statement
     t.                    .».. h     J>~... & t < H
                  . .^4*3:. J f b j b d . .
................ C7..                                                  ujjsct&r?. &r^.
                V         V^vf" O ^ rO ^ ti /WTSo,                     y^f*e<           J+£$ijU<
          p .............................                                               '■ '' '
Jt'&tfflyS&c*:.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . y •7 . . . . . . . . . . . ■■■•• "•
         !fr...&     * * f . . < ? . . .-d?vr. & • . . . . < 7 .                            ___


dLti?. .***&..J^/M.                                                .Jk.                                                       .'%*&.*,....
          ^ .*&&*. .0?T\ ..rrh^A
       ....s.                                             .,. ./w'W .     -drd. . .Jbt*T'. . ,^y            .
yrr1. .& ( & •          *.. f$. ,t*hs t                                                                 sfyj fy&r*'            TTfrO^.^.
Or-. . /#*.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .'©VrV. .../^?. .
^ji-ec*&P< s. AtJb&lr.             ..-<^5 . /rQ'V. -                                                  ■*•
/ji.                      ’.S t d c r . __ -«<r. .^V. . .
   •^

..........         $.                                                                                                          $L.
                                                                                                                              ............

yi^f. /i**r. .-&4r. .&*./77“5. ri^T .dh .'flfkfc.j. +fj&*i-.t).
                                      .orrr)..                                 &         b        t         .       .
             t'T&j.|. ."^d 9t d4 ..   J r t 'f r * . . &
                                                       S 9.. &Pt*.
                                                             * # * * . rnt *
                                                                           * TQ) ....rft&ih       J&Q.
                                                                                             '.> .^ . ^ V f . iCfC.
                                                                                     r W .% *'.>                          .-v o M


                 fYvi..A*r&r!~..sfrh.. J £ f c & A ..^^P. / f T & .
,&!.                                                                                  £*.                           *!*?.'.
 rM
             $                        .                         yy^Sff^TlX                  J&.                   s&sd.                 .tJ/yA"
             *Y&t

                                                                                 *?/f. SrrlM.


                                                  .                     .. " ^ y ^ A     .-^4r..                                     / •■•
. " ...     .^ .J ^ r^ r. .dw rJ.                           .                                                   .s & r A .f&jry?.'^TT^r^V?
          .vW&l. .                    .sffi.f .Wf. £




     . <3               yy$~.
*rc. ■fib S&fyjx*’
                 ..4j].COT\ .                                    ....



Signed                                                                   Signature witnessed b\                                   A

                                                                        7
                                                                                                                                                                           w<
                                                                                                                                                                    (Amended

         BLOCK OUT DATES
                                                                                                 West Midlands Police
I W ITNESS NOT AVAILABLE
                                                                                        S T A T E M E N T OF W ITN ESS
1    8   15   22 29    1    8 15 22 29                                        (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102: M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)
2    9   16   23 30    2    9   16   23 30
3   10   17   24 31    3   10   17   24 31                                                                                                ( o <lc.
4   11   18   25       4   11   18   25      Name
5   12   19   26       5   12   19   26
6   13   20   27       6   13   20   27      Age .                      . . . (yrs)               Date of Birth
7   14   21   28       7   14   21   28
                                             Occupation                                                         .

1    8   15   22 29    1    8   15   22 29   Home or business address
2    9   16   23 30    2    9   16   23 30   and telephone number
3   10   17   24 31    3   10   17   24 31                                                                                    Quxjsr&t..
4   11   18   25       4   11   18   25
5   12   19   26       5   12   19   26
6   13   20   27       6   13   20   27
7   14   21   28       7   14   21   28

                                             This statement, consisting of            page(s) each * signed by me, is true to the best of my knowledge
1    8   15   22 29    1    8   15   22 29   and belief and I make it knowing that, if it is tendered in evidence, I shall be liable to prosecution if i
2    9   16   23 30    2    9   16   23 30
3   10   17   24 31    3   10   17   24 31
                                             have wilfully stated in it anything which I know to be false or do not believe to be true.
4   11   18   25       4   11   18   25
5   12   19   26       5   12   19   26
6   13   20   27       6   13   20   27      Dated the                  / ^             day of      fifty                                     1989
7   14   21   28       7   14   21   28
ENTER           IF NO OATES
                                             Signed          :                                                        Signature witnessed by
TO BE AVOIDED


                                                                                                                      Officer's Name

                                                                                                                      R ank        fP.c..
                                                                                                                                     .\V             No

                                                                 . OLrn.          <*,                 . cj.cvpari.. Luacy .. o k .fc*.. a k w K . c
                                                                                                                                    wM'W
                                                 0 $ ? . .ny..                axtoL...               ?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
                                                 ... .^4.. .om . a ll .. .LiQvPdJi.. .fcaolboJL . .ChJat. .8uflpcdi& . axel .are.
                      -ao                                   . p f.. .t i * ..         .*. G.hw?l’er‘            a . Q d b . f!.0 o .
                                                 to p h i'.. (9 & .                   .0? & *r   <4>.. LjQ trfJppJ.. /p. .o/&2J/V.’fe J te b t. .fr r . . t h . f - .
                                                 Qip..                     ..   /ukJL. . .AtalcL.. .tetiaw*.                                                        .f&i&t
                                                 fat. . l i e . . .iyajcL .< *£ ..                        .>  ..........................................
                                                                   .a b a t is . . .Q 9 fs J **. .a n . . .S z tw th u j . ./5?T. .f lp t l.              J.HSH .         w.
                                                 U & P ... p ic k e d .. .u p . .l ^ j .. QQqxJ * . .&>, !m •h I ’ . I x . tito . ./odJaoJl. .ttta k c L -..
                                                 tfo ,.. Coach. .UXA.                                 . Pu.. fofiLuiM t*.. C o a d h a ..<j7. . f&pk/.-........
                                                         Of*...                       h . . 8h afl< J          M &. . tsicffteU-. qM>. . .Q>.. .                . m . . Co w l
                                                 Jufit'. .<j/f. .Ha ..                                    dzpf& A. .k*m .. ./or..                                   .. (j&z/Ji
                                                 muxJks. .p7r . .                                     ......................................... .
                                                                        .. jfinp. sbcxJcjL . hojOe.. ioJ&A . .<*Q.. cJbmJU ..                               x           . La
                                                  buJh.                                     . .O fP tJA cl.. . psut:.t. .kaJJ*.. boUJZ.t \ tb o . jJ qjp. . ( j j t x .
                                                  . k . . t k . . U a P M . . .u °.h /Q e .. ff . .b h lib .. .<*%. .^f e. .. f i t . .                     .          . iw a
                                                 4>k..                                       . . a n . . f t * . . tn p fw a<u t. . . a i . . t a w . . &m* * . .1*. a . c o t*
                                                 shxflcl shit'.
                                                  . . . . As>. . coc. . . Carte. . i j f . .                    .JVokrtPf^.              .c c a c h   . toao. .sicpfcJ
                                                 a n d . . fa # . fv lx M K in . . b o u rc U J .. o u r                         c o a o L .. . cuvJ      c h u b d . st**-

                                             Signed ^ : .                                                           Signature witnessed by . . C                       (?cl
                                             *        a s applicable.




                                                                                                          I
                                                                                                                     <£
                                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                                 (Amende*
                                          West Midlands Police
                                   S T A T E M E N T OF W ITN ES S
                          (C.J. Act 1967, s.9: M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70t


Continuation of statement of
                       .k o k . .qba*A*...f& > . .owvJfr?... 0 b . & & . .(&*?.. & K .
  fiiLupf. rflUO... Saidr ...                                .ij.dLcuL. a .ifcd'.ch..w & d L . d .. haOc.. b.
   odi.              .iU..               .....................................
  J . .. M U fl                 .Qok. im k .. onlo... i k * . . /vctdL.. .tU ... h n lfid . o&u>.. end. t
            .eJJr.. .& k ..                        • • Shffadd- • • to b ih . .& & . ./* * /.. Ldptd..                  .
   f a .. .(Vwd.ijQ cdv...                   .&*. .cenht>.. c f..   . .& a cL \................... .........
            M   - . . CPTWtdr.. a J t .. tik>.. SS&ttk'.. .pcudc.. a n d . ux.... staMsl. .^2 . * j oS
 ix&&ndp.. .ib , ., grvurfcJL... JJu . OkfttiQQdi. oudbkJL. .Of*... flitjund. a L .. cd?ovJL . /;’>
 Q fld .. ai>. .<x>.. .um fi>. .c*».. .tvudh*.. oluJL. .(£&. .have..      . foLb-.. Me&h. .6:
  A . ..flrvwicL-. .OiitokU..65*. . g m m c L .. t iv&...(&zm..a t m . f h o .                           .ftolwi. ...
   ovd&cMr. . .iU t.                    . ^ lh f& .. .tM>.. . a . .. I0/. < f. .fk<*ph. .0vJe.*clt,..Hs>
   hjijnskUo.. k d i .. iU f* . .(Jop. . /to..pm*rdLmJD.. dutd. .&j z . . .enhved.. .titu . .^a&
            a rtw TvM & .. JxxteLrj . s w . . i*ckdh                        QIzioojxI.*. : .fh>. i*xu . «oe
            . .0 * . .iZmo.kL .. .db.. .fc&.Q. ,<MJclr&t.. .u^eie.. S avjciaJ... ^ .<*.. k Iiol.
 rn n .. tu t.. . / y .. ntnloud. .a n d . ct#d.. / . .uxr&...                 -..........................................
         (bear.. 'uioicU.. .i&L>.. .fln wkjL .. .ux<.. 4a«o. /to .. . s ^ t 9 . . ciu&JjMj. u p .If).
 o u r .. .teotoi. a#d .. .<*&       ioui. .h . .ci»k. a . .<sk&cwd.. tdLc*..                             had. h i..
 flOf. flL . t k . . .b$4M .               . sJoSrtafie.. Isasdwy.. k>. .owe.Stfidb. m .. Off. JJa,
  .S ta/iclj... .V&..                 • .•S k e .. d&OortJjo.. .art. .(Ur. .6&urtx3itx~.. .taLa. u>»
  sL^k*/Vj. Tt&kJtos.. 3 b . .dU khtA .. .uw b . .an. ib. .fuodi. .if&..8cdi>. .<d*ld...
  foU .                ound.. .1.. id e n /.. ki. g J L . a . .aup.        .. .Cpjfe*-.. a n d . .oLutxn^ .
  M > . . h m * .. ¥&.. ssdy.. Swo.. .aic.. .poh&r.rrwt. .and. Htjctd*.. .&*.. ttMaJmJ..
  on.. f h . . .Usp..              /f .. A i t t . cffko . cuttd. cfitooM. <xt .V&. grxxw d...
  btanrn. un.. m id . .&>.. a u m lv r.« P ..M & L .rtk o h . . tA&nz. .aepc. d id .. . L . dtk.
  .&*>... j w h L , . ......................... ..................... .............
        JJiL . uwd. .up . k. .our.. &extk*.. and...pound. .ti*. ij* » .. .cAda&n . . < o t. .v*u
  pfj&na . . .tb...tfof.. .6^ c*k 4. . <V&. .pom.. fdsu. .fcaark f . clutcJ&j .. hdund...
  .^omjL. . .odf... Mb'... LcGpuhtj.. I jomc. .. £rtcL.\. .fib. .iko>.. tim*...                     .JtOoua. no ■
  .ot& X .. fe o p k ... .tMranc.__ «*>.. oxu .odJL. MXJtb ,.up.h.. d j*.. I & d l. . c w d . .Ipk.
  a v u n . . we. ..caudd.. .$<•.€.... ifiJ L ... ts?c.. .^.ene:. .cuiztMi. .^ . joves*... 4U* . hue
  .MAcUJd**. . . p.C/W.-. . /%.        . .pmkd>. . . W3C. . . <5Cl*3. . . tk f€ *'. . . pP.lf&r AtCA. . Ljo Ifu^ .
  cLbqo, . >v6... ilU ..                  cb. . a J^r. .j£ M . h<Jjo&. .cxnej . JjOC. . . Uifw d'. .<5hod.
   .by.. $A #i’. .. fioli&'.nvLn.. .an.d__ iootcj.. a t . . &>. . c m o d *-..............................
        T & . . . iw fif. <*Xuo.. /)cnO.. . .adtouk*....                  .. Cutd.. a t. .Oiia • £*ou . .taz~
                                                                                             ✓ 1     f
Signed                                         . . . .     Signature witnessed by . .<                        P.C.

                                                            X
                                                                                                                                     {*•
                                                                                                                                         Wf
                                                                                                                                 (Amended
                                               West Midlands Police
                                       S T A T E M E N T OF W ITN ESS
                              (C.J. Act 19 67 , s.9; M .C. Act 1980, s.1 02; M .C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation of statement of . .
.. ih *...& ao.. .oudxAU.... fie/lQ..
           /ft . . ah&d*                IH’^olrs>        . . vdr.
                                              .ciqpm. . looked. .cnL..    .  . paw . ...
 qacJL. .Hu.. Awnkxtv... h a d . .anzdJUj.. uxj&xq&L. .a n d . infad*. .nuj. kuduod
 fZm ar#<c<L.. ik e d ' . .                  . . c a u c L n fr? . c h o p .. a .                              . h t f t * . <*. b Jh x& t
  .thk . .ptppk,-.. .7b... hkwddex?...of. .(fa* . .pccpfiL.. W e r e . . . . tcucJin^ . .ZOcL*..
  dtLr.,
                ... /^»4p.^5 COc                  $0*3.. ptcpis... h tb so .. UP.. aeadm ^. .{rtr.. h*
  r .......... co^ddi. . .bJk.. h j . M y. .Cxh*. on . ik f c .A yzto.. MaJL. . &*J- • • .tAs*"?.                                           ■
 V
      .. .^COod. . .d e a l. cf? .. cLeltiP.-.. fly .. .huahxnd.. .and . Se&erat!.. oJLr. cxjapb
 .(/ipermd. .<*«.. PduajnoM...slancLha.. .cL> 9*,.. bu .. l i d . . .6^... appewtd. . L ..
 bu .. &?*«_ .. .tn x d h . .d o o n .. kdxsG*... ~fh..                              . .lodged. .*h. .ondtLr. Pohx.
 .farH*/T. .oJprgj.. a /id .. .shdod.. dhcJb... S e /w a c * * .. jwxc . .claaLha., o5dL>.~ds„
 ... A. .s la r l.. (u*4«. .OOJ&ed. .and. ch. .ud&o. . £jQtchr&.. jrnm..                                                         or. th
 pccplt.. h d m               thaJh ..no. aaodajoca... .c o a o .. bet/to..                                      .i i t . s lid . £cui
 OCx... mh>. .<jt... ShjjOardp... ejnkt..xHsu..t&o ..tiuclwi..                                                 .~H<l . fizapU.. .
 L d a o ... had... ejQpfcaPtb^o.. . <f.. .{ccur. . a*, 't/big*.. KK3U>.. a jx l. o f passed,
 hdduu? .01.. ( t * .. .CtuoL.’. . U .pad. .am.. roan.. tfap.. h d J L j . . a . (M u.. koj..
 Cuhoe.. Juo.. Latd. and... ( L . . L ) . ucust ..cttjuta. •.......................................................
           Is ln . . .pleaded.. a ffu jn . jtPW U. .(&>... nLcsumcui. . . o j * . . . / . /lu jo e J f. p d b ...
 ODanttd .. for. M s l                 <       5       ff. .(kx .pex^U,. JkJsii. aund— Ic .. w facL...
  U l . at?.. . * » / . £ > . .QQ.. .aty.. a n d . .. <rf<dlresl.. cuukvj ,. .U.c. .uxjdr. h a d .
  h . . our. s e c d b ...a a ..^ ..                                  .an..could, da ■ no ■ .mettz., and. pctfk
  idzrz,. xdo^d-.. .^brknA.. If?... G&ne... o il ?..                              . shw d.. Uado^q.. fa r.. .tin .
  n k d z L . .£>.. .Sla r i '           ......................... y y .................................
                  ;.L50Q.l<z>.. .da*... /ticU cL.. zta rw l . . a n d . .43c,.. beam *.. Oicait. .<$
 p o o fL ..              . . h . . ciunb. Hsu.. .f^mmctirf.. fln<jL... oJr1. . id *... ptmlr. .cjfi. . &
  .■ferqtc^...faJ/nQt. . I k . oUi s>rood.. u f . . o p . Lfia... J&duxd.. 5andJ&j —
   (A w . U>rvrQ.. h c lo lO .... M r . . m u . s d k . . S clo .. it*., .fo d t.. .£>uppartidr. .r tm
  m is . -ifa*... .p iid L y..               m a d iL . .usao.                              • <=*»*• $ • fd»s*nKu%. ..
  nun. . u f . . h . Jum. .cvtd- . knodrcd. .Lia. . k . ( h . .f.Gstsr. .a n d . esc adsd. .kt*i
   fcum.. .Bsu.. .pdek....................................................................................................................
           klU n.. t i t .. looked.. hdj&).. cnti.. .iL... f i x * . . :& ... .could. ,«Sce..Ttkoh.
  .elk. .iP(XQ.. .aluaulA .. cJkxo^^. .pcopisL. .v&nz . cUppcuvdeJLt... Scx*£**cj. .6h
   pw jtytjir*.. .fGJOGA) .£*•.. .t£ttrOZ. . (d l.. sicxdjj^.. . J i . .ocurs.. .fo r. .&L*.. .Metb
    L . .jz<L . alaved. !*. lJ<-.. .uxsc... .cJxxdrcd— 6. .see...ik J b ..                                                                .
                                                                   Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                            P.c.
Signed .

                                                             3
                                                                                                                                                                 tt w
                                                                                                                                                                 (Amende<
                                                           West Midlands Police
                                                 S T A T E M E N T OF W ITN E S S
                                     (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation of statement of
           . f^.. M * . .jpJflCiO..                            .. tui to. .                   . hick.. .L j . .                              an. .6 m-...........
 Ctkur. Hi.ib'. ./fa ..pcCtflU... (%*/).^c&tt .                                                         ..ijb*..ptid* . . . .d m . .
  fct&iiJk. . . .                . . IkicJf. . . kfj. . xfa-t . . pOi&H*.: . t(i. jLO                    OLO ahoioxAO...
 fto isx.. cjLiL. . n o t . . . tmcUrJranJ.. .<J.hoJk. . u &o.. h cp p avj^.. a / d . .<Md.oc
   hruaO.. .iP.hxb.                      d o , ...................... ...................... ..............................................................................
        B i . .. o J b c u J b . ... /SQfe/rs.../..                            . a .. .. O M . . c m t o . .6lit..pu
 and              Spedr.. t z . . .ifa... .rcherot-.. l^L q . ihijM tt                                             stepped. .Ha .. .m a tc L .
 M . . &U>... .tshuck.. .i^j.. .k<mm . . a n d . . tia . . fa d r ik d L .. i&-. . W e n t . . hdfLne
 Q4/kI .. Cjould . . .ob>.. floHwhcj.. .L .. Jdp .a n d . .<j6uJ:. JtaJ.. L . .zl’a nJ.ct*u..
 . 4 W .o L . .and.. . . f y . . /loQ . .c o x fa i. . .                                                       . :haJ.. hem.. .tjU .. . t y .
  f i m t. .. bebsQ.n .1 U ... p & fh                                                   .ftati.      jjbO.       iaJ... hmn . p d L y . peopU
 u p .. [C £ .. a . . .o s h b ................................................................................................ .............
         J , .. .cpuJLJL djy.                                    . .stc,        n a / r f h t r : . .<f...p o s f b . . . J y u * } .cn.
  ( h . . pdcl        & *« ...                                         .(Jbe&xsLy c h a d . c u M. m a y . mere, .aunun
  Q k. .th o .. tm >.. c l . . taud. .speaker... anticuxau*Mj*jb... f&jioutdrcd.. t h i . . &
  iudapeel       ^.appaf^cO.. .%.LeuJd. . . chos:. ..Ha .. p i h c L . c , rxdri. /to/. k L
 ohaL. . lx .... h c v d * .................... ..............................................................................................................................
    ^    . ./)?& ..             ____ poLu3U. . cf fa w . . . i a J .. .O w hcl. .o v e r..                                                                       . o/JL*
     £ i c h . . . c P . . . £ t & .. . .Q r c u L n d . . a n d              .                                      . .Si     jth     . . ( £ * . £ * # 3 . . .& * > .
  Hfu.                        .. hlpu/xj.. tia* . . u y u ttd r. ...J-... ss* p. ... r ib * . .*ffdr^... ly ^ j ■&>
  ope/f...                  . ff<dZo.. .Ctffci. .pfQfitb.. ~ifytbg. .bt.. njp.. cjbstDrt.. Htu.. / a t a f c j
 L .. .£j*db.. pcopb.. avM.».....................................................
        3 ^ . . . L O ad d ... ( J x .             . T t h a k . .. .cj*. d . J J . sto 1 . . b a n .. f i r . . H» . ..
  L .o .f if u . . a d o . . it ia J b .. . . / . . £a<p. . . . f y . .                     tn e u y .j .SupparktL.. SiaL . OtCUlUj .00*

     .iSajJtl. .lcUk*. .c lu d \ ............................................................
          £czK>tuaJLj.. .aj>. J it — ijjr a a a .. ch& rcd                                                  . . b fLj .D P.          ../.. c o u ld . .S fje —

  (JLu.. bcdjMD... cf..                            d *-..                                  • pd*o.          . s h a d e d . agfXAnd. . Mcu'cnafi
 <      f. ik u . . . p t A f w i J ? . . ftn C S L O ............................

     .... .V???-.. .^ h xd km ... uiiJin---- sJ&rtJ- •                                                         ,LJCX<Z. . u»..4O&0- •Q-403. . .
     hcCGrwiy.. uitkeojojfa.j.. c u d . uahxck.. J.                                          C / u d e J . .. kecauucj^jj-
     . t i * . . ./uurthtf. c f'... .ft G p b . . .ih o k .. h a d .      ie.es)..            . jflam.. .h<b&.. I .
     U . a a ..                 -fo    •• •                          -A"-
                                                           ■ & * . . . S ctjd x j. .tfr. /Kjy /dufuhj.. a x c i. cb i
     . d . . tP.cu).        . . t ? . . .hauZfe./. .CmcJ. ( n a c U . . & w r .     • • < 5 . . e n d . c f . ..
     .iku.. f f w n d j . .         . .t o o o .. cdom L .... /550/»sy .. < x n d                 .tocn.l..k a *
     .hi... aurr. .. Hoads......................................................................................
Signed .                                                                            Signature witnessed by                                                   (?C.
                                                                                                              wc
                                                                                                       (Am ended
                                      West Midlands Police
                                 S T A T E M E N T OF W ITN ES S
                       (C.J. Act 19 67 , s.9; M .C. Act 1980, s.1 02; M .C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation of statement of .
                                                . £ x w . .a   .. -htU. .loci'.. tf.
. b d f& m ... 'tt* .. .feufa... is a /d *.. d u x ! . cxa£n)J*.                                a n d . .t k j..

. hasjned                  . . a . . im J r.      (n«JbrioM*       .. iku/tect. pcssanJ.. jcukI . l h . .
. jtdao.. .L jl.. .fdC. iZ. . Icfcj. tto a . .f ix .. OTtZutctttj. .p<0pk,. .&.. CUiXidJ-.. . fo-. . .

. .cJtu%<£. a n c i. . c ^ u / c c T . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    ..............
        Ukfl...         .I . . .amCtcl.. . .hen*-____/ . . &oJ:. .ciaoo.. jpdJL.    . /mojtutJ.
.dLfcl.. w rth .. .clcnPfl...                  . .<An<Jk_ _ /.         rtn ri—   — 'a m
t                  .)... th*a ■■/ .. hcjfaleJ. ..h.. .@C.-.




Signed .                                                Signature witnessed by .
ECHELLS                                       TEL:      0 2 1 5 5 9 6 7 55       Q) _______ 10 . 0 7 , 8 9            16:48   No. 002 P . 0 2 ^

                                                                       I ____________                                                  •          c< 3 ^
  TYV^j V>A.^r»bccn.dL , nr\A_^sjU^ c ^ \ c l                                                           -v                    p.M:,^.cL ^
                        C.O£*_X-'t/V». w'N-          ^"'Oss U - C 1^                               .1        £A_.fM     .^5T!«wt           ft        j

   (^5"^                                          Cocvc-W           e-uo                         f£ t3w^^bv^x4_Ls^ C.xj c.vo i*

  ^B-vcol-e^^.                                b-vj       Gb r^l-t>£. ^^rto^v_.<^,oK=?.r t ^ o - e . ^ p o ^ £ - L
   <3^-A--pf^c rt-j2J-0 CtU-<j3               ,

  ’T ! a . c \ . J a D                   W ^ 4 ^ - ua.i_c!L / ^fcc^CL^.«_rv.^ x j ^ t Cev^A-rvwcc/^
                     n\A-A^jLfcjt^            <^-c<      r ^ r t ^ V w v v i » - / O c S y <scrT\-0“i~'V^ ^ - b
  d^k-      ( - U - £ <*_^0'VC<'K .
                                              / ^cocX^<i-<-A^j * , W p p u ^ g                       ^ o ' &.£> r*JUsj^)                    .<2lK-w
                             *2^v                                  yst k-B            t   Jovx/\-f\AAj ylsoo
  t v '/€t V\J& ^ 0 - 0 /     (X^Sl          JcX>    -^fcjl ^CV^vofiL Wto-%,1.1 JY\ t>„ e^-
 lS2^> j ^ < ^ ^ o J L i U j crV\_ J H U 2          fYv-^Vcs/ v.OCj~0[                              -ko                                         AiT^Ui
          J c u c v j s J>                         jc^urw_a                   >*-     ce^/v^jaJ^-tc
 £> f\^   ^o<x^Ky\>^^                         r v v ^ 5 o r c o o - < 4 ^ j => ^?ls»-a><J1 .v^fvjjo
 ^          £^Oca,cU J L ^ X v O                                    • « ^ l O O ^«£^<J2^Y\J2,(A_,                 )o <^CX^SXx£ l_j^j£ l

 < ^ o t f t c W . o ^ r v a L c^A-C't<ls».ci>- - £ r k o d b j2-A?e^xjo rJa- enrv ^^>«=>ov-rcL ^ > _ ^ c L
 Jfc\xlcfe,fe5 'TtvJvo - ^ b e k                   cx^oerccis 5 * lVs^n-»-duJ2^ . fcrlX<_a»rAJttv cA^<^rfYv^.c
jOuO                                    >uoe»C. j e ^ 2 ^ 4 - u r v g               IQ.£>      o o a ^ r ^ o           &>.

 y|-<jJJ^     <^j- L^cO-^t- p o c £                ^Ju^sf>cr^^-              rb , 'TT n je ^    ^J\UL           e^v^trU^L*^
 C^cks     ^.cJb                                  >^W                   c-k-e^ckjoo-CKt, .
<^OC^clw            *^£>OeU*.A.                           , b - u » _ ^ o 3 2 A j a - ^ x ^ N g Cr<te>                                               •»
<KIo                         ou     Jtorv^L                                                                                        ^
j K o ^ e -          o-rA-'.                         >*>                                                                      jijej-'a.
 6 > > \ W > V v - "TiJEe- c-e »-t r e d A « j 5 » l - ^ o ^ s ’/                                       A.'oWeoyte,.

 C oack-                            fo-O B fi-cl «-<vd-                              J U |\= ^               L ooX te. t o
* fca, A ^ M s i . .                   CVr-h^A,                ^         ^           ajwiA-lryeL               tu^o/«, ?                        / ^ U c
■ V W L ? . ^ « t ^ s L .                          o_b<=-oJb           c^     W aJ j l
 O ru                                JWW2-                                             t o o
h ) < x i ^ . '^J3kA^c^rsj2,c^_ / N > s W                  UuO ,                                                                            i    .

£5r\^AJL,        CVOO         &A/QC' ,4^ a n J ^ a ,A.^ cJ ' W                                           0 <~a-O P . ^ W x A a -'I^
J^Q                                       ^   A^io           .AA>®-*'C. o V ^ . ^ 2 - A <


H V a^                              ^.sa^rvA- J           AAjCfvb
^trOorv^-- /                      /tOwVA.A        ^ r«ah»^c^-<J^-vvvct..<\,             kb-S'VZ.     » \ O s x v ^ < v > ^ ^ wWji. ^
NECHELLS                                                  TEL: 0213596735                      (g)              10,07,£9             16:43 No.002 P .■:


|                               ■■'~>lk:-      > W L        ZiiJU?., ^ X ^ - b W o                  K ■ {VVo-rvsj ^fiC.c.pKn <.05:-/^.                                 (
               p - C *■           *
        f\\- j    'i' '- '• '• o b tx - '^ A    cT-rvck       I    _>-0? <vfe:' -A-'~ j° A"K_>>. ^ t C—*-K °                                   '•-r*-.
     dli-vXc^ \£./v .o_iVcL                                 ^|.v- r\c^_ tTVi-v i s a-t'i .
                 re.ool'v.C-r\.c» csv.»-r                                  ^                                    -l ,a . ^ix-ca .&.S2.C.C rvjcL rtr<-C
    ^ v ^ r € c .t i . ^ bje.>u-u.acL xttvC-                          Cj&oXi ,  CS-ioo-OTT.
         ^       *\v- O *"V                                            is 0 C w ,
    ir^sz r o & W C c J i                                                  rv\_tf-rs.  <^'b sH-sJx.                                       ^

    ^.icc^tru^vcj xxJ'tcN, /                                                        J=rfc-K: o r i ^ - ^ c L o                           .
    XOptob                 ^clcb^vg                    ^                        ( W o - l - c U A*>                                          ^ W c L .           .



    cx^e.p-v^K         3. - \ S        . U jv.                        ^ry^c^^ci                           --irUct, i \ x . u Y J a a w         ^
        p-pt.             <l W < U ]                j.o ^   - ^ cL U ^ k >                A U l      m X A J J i a . -&*xfe«*N ^                             J=em*-


    g-p~p.AjQ<. o2.-~ 3 Q                   <Cr^                  \q-JS_Lov^O _^U-/0              X r\S^- c L               c ^ ' t:UjA'
        rfU» W w W A . xa-’iA -te. TJL. 'A ^ v u a^ X i-n -'y k~ **t < ^ P                                                                                       „
        ^ . < ^ 4 i/v-Wf^      ><v               iH^Ji g A A p k . A * . o = » v
    -TV* i W U i u o                            ^         f * ^ p U                                                    ^                 & U j *j        •




    o-p^s.             2-1V O             . / & o r w u v = bs^o/a - i - W ^ b

    voa          » o ^        p o f V                                                                ^          h A L f'

     «     w                                    ^           c«    ~    a       &,              ^               *   r    t    *   ^   '


    ^              A3k-b f - = f U
                       ~ f As. - u ^ r y u ~ )                                                      Scnrv^o.Uj                                       ^
    *-««.           - f e ^ n ^ q               Jbo       -ttA                             • ft>' « -                                    rr^-v^Air
    C^OU.                                             ^                                   $*-p-       ^                                      Ja^Js-
    * o m »<rr^                   r w ^ b           Acxve                                  Xrv                                           c ^ A               Os-OA-


        r^c&      *A^'-f>*                                                                              ,              .                                         '
         rru vL^>Ol-%A.                                     ^-^rtJl                  t » 4 W ,       f » - v A k U -Uuo                                       « = -.
                                       t-C? rvoA^iOcAjZ-                                                               ' ^ J2'                     -'K-V*'^ •
    ,ojC- ^ c ^ 5’                     iV'^-ct-.j„.(\^            a >5 c v o         ,4>>rorv^‘                        X o o ) 3- ^ -          <n ^ u v -=u c >
    Jfeo         JtUc - - p c ^ l < a               c^v.ov..-, » V & a A ^ 2                                                                                   ,o^c
         A. rJt       ytotib'                       ^K^tb             ,'ic}TM-ijrM2-               4^.      A-g^-^(y^                               ite.
                                                                                    © '
      Cvv..'_-r\^_._£- wLO ^ o t.rv b ^                                    ^t'-                     j2.-V'*U'j<-ia. rxXT^ | v ^ ,-»%. xWv&NJc>v. c Vj O cL                                   1eJ
                           <\_-t;                       «M'v-.i' „-&j:s.rl iaUi-W-,-^                                              • L\J ,i ✓ij.tuXD ^3c\..<„o
      rv.o ,j’.'>(^-t.v_o*^ o f                   a   L’-* v.c c ^ ’ucLo                                             o^-cC* LX.H. .Ax. nrvt-c.v.
      P   2                     ^ -v C v . c l                                    a^.->          ^Jfc-cv-P c n                 J ^ i* - i.. ^ r                         c - . / i <^-

                 p - 'e c w ^ c t        .PvJ^LpXsc'XO                    t-rv                   c ru o K ,

     «•-^ • i                              f^JS-K^tr        ^ o ^ e t             o-       rrvc>v i v , .                                                              b c ,-u j

      tfsJpcA/-e                         /5v_js_crtwcL ,,                    to-% j                         c n -jt-r ^ ,

     Ua ^.- *p-^«.cx.*rLecL <*>--CjjOw^r\ ..xo-vjfcL J b U i P . c . /CN^s> A-otf (. o^-^A^iJi_^Asr-e,o j
     je^jnoTmjt cL                               JrUft.A    ck^   J   c                   --fckQ.       ^Z , < z p X j z        is^G.1S'WO            »




                                           T ^ r v t ^j-o o n , &»<\dL                                                                            ,
                  ✓Hv- co                                f U i c^.K-&.V ^pcr^L.-C&.                                                                       a w '^'-^-A^L         »

     (0<2         ^coe.A-t'           Jt<> CnJiSKr                                               C_-€> t-*JtcL                   r ^ O CWCrhG. < W ^ c L
 frv crr-e ^ iA .o p ^ a                                    c,©/wv.ricj **A& fx .v e ^ ^ 'v rl -U-x^ t
     * * „ O c C U ?                 JttdZ- A>>xx-^X,                 2^                   (TiXcJrt>U .
                                                            at\                          ^p-Ltoc-L^ «

     j>- D O                fVu2          » v u ?J b c: U         *J b ^ r t e c L .             A a -*ks> n ^ t c W                              .^\^©JJL*j
                            / Aoe           U^e<x-r>n_JL. , ^ - o a - r e                                                                ,^-oe^
 Jfeb                                        jL±s^Jr<xJL.hz~r'                                                               ^J-vorvb <^ ^ t U a i 3 t m > - o ^

 ifLfXo^   t                 ,                                                                                                                                 u ’
  G-Osi^A^orvC. / cV^e\^u-<X.¥\^ .a a o / ^ V r o o e L -A~*_p                                                               '°°^'                                ^
« A o                .
 | i v w - u J U , js<ia^-o                       -feW                            p^rc>crpw t o                n ^ - « v c?t O s > .A^ a* p A - ^ k y
' f W "frvo^cK                                          .^JbrJlD                            cm.. A              P<*W^r^n.                                                    ho

 je«s2          rrv^rv.                                W r v o ^ W a A^ptn                          ^                        ^vcrwnxL 7. ^ r y ^ g                             W        .

                       »?vcrrv                                                       .


 V w O - o W A - n ^ W a X o v o --VA-/0 ^o«»-o <sA=to                                                                                  . Pt«-e>pti2                                    .*


     ^          VcU-rs C^ c c a ^ . e ,                           <}o/ ^ k i 2 . n f \ . c c X o k                    Jcz>                                             *:
     U0<2        Uie+4S.             ^koc^ksX                 *20          ^>•52'/                             <X^» p*Of>£s2- rC-«VcUlft-ci-.
                   ^                       ^ v J r r u e J t ^ (| ^ f v c ^ o / p X ^ c ^ r v x ^ - r v                                                                *Jo'        -^->
 ^Uo^r                 .4-Uc©                    >Wq>.                                                    -^W=.VwAg                                             t>^ck
 OnJc?o ✓ b W                       on>^o<L^ .                .                      ^§)                                            .
 ^    ^       .-|2J2. C?             (T v < fV                                                                v^ c V v -S^                        / *^ W     j 2,a ^
NECHELLS                                                         TEL:        0213596735                                      /£ \        10,07,89                  16:48               N o . 0 02 P . 05
              .                                .                         .
     , c|                                                             trL-v.(.L          p-<cV:                     r\      c\.ja.^ . 1 « _                                                               ^

     ^ \.C .--J ^ . p                      ^   O   i~                                - C O - V \C - .b         ,- f c o                *sv_             t-    _ X -t- .




      3 - D *o ^                                   a           r :;tu<_v. rr>.o.f\ r t X A                                   cjrvCc. ^rWi>                   p\Jcc--U. o-rv<sl. ,<s.pr,
      ■W’*' ,,fcWs^. |-^^-r2-v> .u^=rt-uCi.                                          A-\z c.|ap-u.cL                                   fYVC^LcU. .
      Kx?                                  A-br^vcte.                                -Vvorrc-r /                                pV^-s^o , C o v a _ILc L c L o n _ o t K ^ < \
                        ^ ci-rvc^ << l o c X < j V v                                   c^fy-cL                     b ^ j jrv^o^                o£> ry\_j» ft-
                                                                         X ^ ^ j^ cL                                                           b_j^X.^^O, < " K e . £ ca-c L o

  V-.'v-'                                              r^-^o> _a,o nere-                                                                 ✓p-fi-o pis?                                    la-a-Lo^o ,

     P - e e f X a > J jv ^ o ^ L ,                                                                                A o r n f l ' ^ w = . c ^ U j - x=U.< e^ L ,
  b J u ^ - x>-^-cL J 2 i f * W o X - B c .                                                                        jo-febcUJ? ^ - t ^ k                                            .
             a    I                                                                                 f\m^f &.fW5L-/\Jb> CA.MJ2,- Cr^'-^'**’
   fVL                   c^r\ -es-
                                                   vW*-U^                                                                               •                                                       1
                        r                                  »             •   V ^ U                       I U        * E>e J T V ^ j g ^        «*><=>     -<J~*-rC .oJL                o > - A .< i




                                                                  I                                            ^ Jl                                     C A^ r



                                                               rvc^o                                                                                    1 r * ~           ' I^           V0>


 *°
 a^~ «v ~ *                 Tj
                                           :.y
                                             J
                                               —^                                           v                       w
                                                                                                                              ^                                               r0* ^ $
                                      Vi                   ,                           >.                v-                          A o J t                                                    ^



                                                   rrx^                                         <K~»e                                     *                                   ';,, '

     f e M                  u A                    ^            & * ■            ^        ^          ^         3                                 ^                        .        “T ^ 3             ’




 t       c»vU                    **»               ^                                            ^        f ^                                   f ^ S/ \ ° : $ * ; :
         '1                       ,s .                 '       ,Ju                     ^.Ua               xio-p.n'jd^-'" -^•'w ! "s •
  ^ o ^ v o W                                                                                             T ^             9                                                   :.          _

  It.               -icon^vj                                                                                            ^      cr^ h a d .
 t^e- x ^ c ^ e - (      (vxo_i^                                             f^o^Msz                                                                              rj                     v          \ \

                                  VO©                                            roxxcb? c ^ r                                                o -w   Jc                X U a |<crwvd
 •tt-       3      ^ O p tA                                                                         b a -e -W .             b o     < A > r          C o a .c l\,
                                 k-                                     «    ^   . , . .
    I am a single man living at the above address.     On Saturday 15th April, 1989

I went to Hillsborough, the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club ground to watch

the F.A. Cup semi-final between my club, Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.        I

have been a life-long Liverpool fan and was a season ticket holder until last

year.   I met my travelling companions for the day outside the Bow and Arrow

Public House, West Derby.     I travelled down with_________     and

who I call          We left Liverpool between 11.30 and 11.45 a.m. in my pick-up.

We only had.one hold-up on the motorway near Stockport where we spent about 3/4

hour travelling a mile.     We didn't stop on the way and arrived in Sheffield at

2.20 p.m.    We parked the pick-up in either Withens Avenue or Crofton Avenue about

2 minutes walk to the ground.     I had been injured sane days before the trip and

was in fact on crutches on the day.     None of us had tickets for the match but we

were confident we would get seme because there are always spare tickets at these

sort of matches.    As a matter of fact I went to the same fixture last year and

managed to get a ticket outside the ground.     On the way to the ground it was

very relaxed, but there were fans drinking from cans.     We got outside the

Leppings Lane entrance about 2.30 p.m.     The crowds around the entrance were

backed up into Leppings Lane itself.     I took one look at the crowd, and as I

was on crutches thought to myself I 'm not going in there.     My two mates went

into the crowd to try and get sane tickets then came back about ten minutes

later and told me there wasn't any to be had.     I stood away from the main crowd

on a little rise just over the bridge on the river. From here I could see all

the turnstiles and turnstile area in front of me. Numerous people were milling

round by me, all asking for spare tickets.     At about 2.40 - 2.45 p.m. the crowd

outside was chocka and many fans were starting to walk away, realising they

weren't getting in.    All of a sudden the gate on the right hand side of the
"standing" turnstiles opened.     Fans started to rush through this gate and

people were shouting that the gate was open.     Everybody in earshot turned round

and made a run towards the gate.     People were caning frcm every side.   The gate

stopped open for 30 seconds to one minute then it closed. This made the

situation worse outside because people had the expectation of getting in and

they all crowded round.         went into this crowd and I didn't see him again

till the evening.    Me and        stayed where we were, we could see the crowd

building up.   At the time the right hand gate was open, the gate on the left of

the North stand turnstiles was trying to be forced open.      I then heard an

announcement over loud speakers asking the fans at the Liverpool end to move

back as the people at the front were getting crushed.      Near to 3 o'clock I saw

the gates at the left hand side of the North stand turnstiles, the left and

right of the "standing" turnstiles open.     All these three gates were open at

the same time, and within a minute or so everyone around the turnstile area had

disappeared into the ground.     Thousands of people were there one minute and the

next it was empty.    I thought about hobbling in when the crowd had gone but

decided against it.    I'm glad I did.   As I said earlier, I went to the same

match last year.     I arrived at the ground about 2:30.   I hung around outside

and about 2.55 people with spare tickets were selling then at below face value,

last year there were two lines of policemen outside the Leppings Lane

turnstiles checking tickets and searching people.     This slowed peoples approach

to the turnstiles which allowed then to queue.     This year when I got to the

entrance, all I could see by way of police were three mounted officers and a

bobby with a flat cap.
                                      STATEMENT OF WITNESS

Name      Age           Robin HEROLD
          51    (Yrs)         Date of Birth

Occupation              Retired Police Officer

Home or business address
                                              Ecclesall
                                              Sheffield



Telephone number

This statement, consisting of 7 page(s) each *signed by me, is true to the best o:
my knowledge and belief and I make it knowing that, if it is tendered in evidence
I shall be liable to prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I
know to be false or do not believe to be true.




                                              Signature witnessed by

                                              Officers Name

                                              Rank                     No



Prior to my compulsory medical retirement from the South Yorkshire Police Force,

following a domestic accident in the Spring of 1989,              I was a Chief superintendent

with that Force.         Primarily my career has been C.I.D. orientated, apart from a feT

short spells in uniform.         I was promoted to the rank I held on my retirement       -

Chief Superintendent - in October 1979 and transferred from C.I.D. duties to              'F'

Division at Hammerton Road Police Station,           Sheffield.     Prior to that time I had

little or no command experience of public order situations whatsoever.




During the winter and early spring of 1979/1980 the Steelworkers strike took plac

in the Sheffield area and I became heavily committed to the provision of that

public order situation.         Additionally,    I was involved in the policing of League

football matches at the Sheffield Wednesday football ground at Hillsborough.                  At

                                          in the second division and although there were

                                          rery serious nature occurred.




 Signed                                          Signature Witnessed by


                                          I
We learned some weeks prior to the date of the 1980 FA Cup Semi final that that

match was to be staged at Hillsborough.    As a result,   I examined all our previous

documentation concerning the policing of major football matches with capacity

crowds at that stadiumn and, in the light of my experience of the public order

situations of the Steel strike and the general situation in a public order sense,

I was not satisfied that the policing arrangements which had appertained hitherto

at Hillsborough were adequate to deal with the occasion that we were confronted

with in 1980.    I therefore gave instructions that we should completely re-think

the situation and draw up a policing policy and contingency plan to adequately

police the 1980 semi-final cup tie with an anticipated crowd in excess of 50,000.

That was carried out and the Police Operational Order which came into being for

the policing of that match is still the backbone of that which appertains to this

day to the best of my knowledge, although of course, with the passing ye*c>, it

has been honed and refined to take account of changing circumstances at the ground

and with local road systems.   The policing arrangements for the 1980 semi-final

proved to be a superb success, no doubt as a result of good crowd behaviour, good

weather,   and teams travelling from totally opposite directions, north and south,

which obviated the need of traffic congestion on the motorway systems and that

type of thing.




The following year in 1981 we learned, again,   that Hillsborough was to host an FA

Semi-Final Cup match.    The teams in that match were Tottenham Hotspur and

Wolverhampton Wanderers and the date of the match being Saturday 11 April 1981.

To the best of my recollection we again had adequate time to pre-plan that match.




Signed                                   Signature Witnessed by




                                    JL
                                       - 3 -

There are occasions after drawn matches when police forces have to plan such

matches at very short notice, but I believe in 1981 we had more than adequate tinu

to prepare our planning.    Based on the success of the previous year in 1980 we

followed the   'mixture as before'.    The only difference being that, on this

occasion, both teams were approaching the City from the south - that is travelling

north on the Ml.    Tottenham fans travelling either by the A1 or Ml and the

Wolverhampton Wanderers supporters coming from the Midlands travelled by a number

of routes, mostly using the A38 and joining the Ml so that both teams were

approaching the City from the same direction.       In the event that caused problems.

There were traffic accidents and other matters which resulted in the late arrival

of fans at the stadium.




I have been given the opportunity of having sight of the minutes of a debriefing

for the F.A.Cup Semi-Final between Tottenham Hotspur FC and Wolverhampton

Wanderers FC        at HillsborouSh » Sheffield on 11 April 1981, with the Police

Policy File No. J?22/02/08 and can confirm that the bundle of the documents under

that reference number accurately reflect the events of the day and the inquiry

which resulted from the slight crushing in the Leppings Lane end resulting from

the late arrival of fans at the last few minutes before the kick off.




I remained as Divisional Commander for     'F' Division until November 1982 when I

transferred back to C.I.D. duties as head of the Force C.I.D.           During my time in

officere there the sub divisional Commanders of FI Division changed on several

occasions.     Initially, Superintendent Stark was a Sub-Divisional Commander,

followed by Superintendent David Chapman, who was then succeeded by Superintendent




Signed                                         Signature Witnessed by




                                      3>
Douglas Lock (now retired).    Each of those officers was aware, and dealt

personally with many of the routine league matches staged at the Hillsborough

Stadium and it was only on the occasion of a major match such as a semi final cup

tie, or one in which intelligence dictated was potentially troublesome,      that I

would personally take command and attend at the ground in uniform to do so.




During my time at    'F' Division we experienced difficulties in our relationships

with the Hillsborough Club, insofar as the activities of their official stewards

were concerned.     The respective duties of police officers and the club stewards at

football matches are quite clearly defined.       There were many occasions, however,

when I felt the stewards totally abrogated their responsibility and blatently

ignored incidents to which they should have responded.       Such was my concern that

on 18 August   1981 I dictated a memorandum to Acting Superintendent Walter Smith

and Inspector Calvert on FI Sub-Division regarding that concern and giving them

precise instructions as to the briefing of stewards for the future.       I have been

allowed / C ^ ight of a photostat copy of that memorandum,   dated 18.8.81, under

Policy File          instructing those officers to formally brief the stewards as to

their precise terms of reference and duties and their relationship with the police

officers who were detailed to duty inside and outside the ground in the immediate

vicinity of the entrance and exit gates.




I have been allowed by Chief Inspector Ross of the West Midlands Investigation

Team to have sight of a transcipt of evidence given by ex Police Superintendent

Douglas Lock to the Inquiry, being conducted by Lord Justice Taylor,      into the

Hillsborough Disaster.     At one point in his evidence Mr Lock makes reference to




 SigneL                                    Signature Witnessed by


                                      ‘r
succeeding Mr Chapman at FI Sub-Division and attending the Sheffield Wednesday

Football Ground with myself and probably Mr Chapman.      He also makes reference to

the fact that thereafter there was a formal agreement that the police would assu

many of the duties of the stewards.      I absolutely, and quite unequivocally,      refu

that suggestion.    I cannot say that I did not visit the Sheffield Wednesday

Football Ground with Superintendent Lock, for I very probably did on a number of

occasions in connection with perfectly routine negotiations.      However,   it is

certainly not the case that there has ever been any agreement, oral or in writin;

(formal or informal), which in any way alters the duties of the steward and thosf

of the police officers in acting as agents of the club.        The only manner in

which police officers have acted as agents of the club is in practising their

authority, under Regulation 15 of the Ground Regulations,     to eject persons from

the ground.   Regulation 15 was introduced during the era of my responsibility for

policing arrangements at the club.      The rule change and the negotiations leading

up to it had no relevance, whatsoever, to the relationship between stewards and

the police in any other respect     .




Having said that I would also wish to state for the record that being aware of th

inadequacies, the age and often the imcompetence of the stewards, in the interest

of public safety I, as ground commander, always felt it necessary to ensure that

we had a police officer(s) available to assume the duties of the stewards should

trouble arise.     In essence,   I suppose one could say that we were acting as a

longstop, but by no means did we ever seek to assume the responsibilities of the

stewards, nor should we do so.




Signed                                       Signature Witnessed by
I have been asked to comment on the question of the radial fences erected on the

Leppings Lane terracing.        I have been given sight of documentation under Policy

File            1 (referred to earlier).     I have been asked to comment on the

question of the gates at the rear of the radial fences beneath the West Stand on

the Leppings Lane terrace.       During the negotiations prior to the erection of thos*

fences, the Fire Brigade were anxious to satisfy themselves that the gates when

closed and locked would be "under the control of the Police".        Clearly, the

purpose behind their concern being to ensure an adequacy of safety precautions in

the public interest in an emergency.        In interpreting that requirement,   I

understood that to mean that police officers should be in possession of keys and

in a position to open those gates to ensure adequate evacuation in an emergency.

To the best of my knowledge that took place on each and every match for which I

was ultimately responsible and to the best of my knowledge it has been so ever

since I left    'F' Division.     I never understood that requirement to mean that a

police officer would be physically and personally stationed by each of those gatet

before, during and after, any particular match.        We have certainly,   as police

officers, been in a position to open those gates in plenty of time for an

emergency evacuation, for example, if a terrorist bomb alert was to arise.

However, where the gates were to be locked back in the fully open position, as at

a semi-final tie where all the supporters at the Leppings Lane End followed the

same     team, police   'control' of the gates was a redundant concept.




 I would comment that on Page 46 of the transcript of evidence given by Mr Lock tc

Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry, he makes reference to a meeting that he had at the

Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground with Superintendent Chapman, myself and




Signec                                         Signature Witnessed by
                                       7 -


"somebody from the Club", who he identifies as Mr              I completely refute

that suggestion and accept that later in his evidence Mr Lock agreed that was a

mistake and that he intended to refer to Mr England.   However,   for the record it

should be noted that during my tenure of office the Secretary of the Sheffield

Wednesday Football Club was Eric England and he was the only Secretary whom I ever

personally dealt with in a professional way.   Although I know Mr           ie was

not in post at the time and I have had no dealings with him.




Signed                                 Signature Witnessed by




                                  7
                                                    KEEBLE HAWSON
                                                                    SOLICITORS
                                                    In c o rp o ra tin g B ra n so n B ra m le y & Co.

A. H.G REG ORY               N.   T . HAWSON                                                             OLD CATHEDRAL VICARAGE,
C. J. PRYCE                  G.   CONNELL
P. A. SEALEY                 A.   J. COOMBE
K. L. W EBSTER               C.   M . M . AYRE                                                                    ST.JA M ES’ ROW.           x
M . A. PLATT

                                                                                                                           SHEFFIELD,
Consultant:
A. H. CONNELL
                                                                                                                                    S1 1XA.

                 The Clerk to                                                                            TELEPHONE 0742-722061
                 Mr M J A Murphy
                 Barrister-at-Law                                                                        MDX NO. 10537
                 Counsel's Chambers                                                                      FAX NO. 0742 - 700813
                 12 Paradise Square                                                                      FAX NO. 0742 - 750243
                 SHEFFIELD
                                                                                                             12th July 1989

                                                                                                         W H EN YOU TELEPHONE OR CALL PLEASE ASK FOR:
OUR REF:                                         Y O UR REF:


                 AHG/VS                                                                                      MR GREGORY




                 Dear Sir

                 Hillsborough Inquiry

                 We enclose a copy of Harris v Sheffield United F.C.
                 (1987) 3W.L.R. 305) and 4 further statements which
                 we have received from the Treasury Solicitor, together
                 with Submission of Counsel to the Inquiry.

                 Yours faithfully



                 KEEBLE (HAWSON




                            THE FIRM IS REGULATED BY THE LAW SOCIETY IN THE CONDUCT OF INVESTMENT BUSINESS
       Although the certificating authority is allowed

to charge fees in respect of dealing with applications

for the issue or amendment of a certificate                  (by virtue

of the'Safety at Sports Grounds Regulations 1976) no

express provision was made in respect of fees for the

on-going work of enforcing the provisions of the Act

and dealing with the inspectiteiis that have to be carried

out at least once a y e a r ./ ^ I f s ^ c e r t i f i c a t i n g authority

were able not simply to etnra^y tout to charge f o r / l h e 1

services of someone such/as Dr. Eastwood then/the effectiveness

of an annual inspection w o u M ^            enhanced <^nd "this

Inquiry may wis h to consider whether express provision

should be made to allow a certificating a uthority to

fialce s ome r e<seonab le c h a r g e .



       Mr. Bounds was asked to consider a suggestion

that on taking over as certificating authority the

City ought to have had a meeting of everybody involved,

including the Club and its engineer,              in order to say

in effect     "Look, we have taken this over.              We are responsible

for the certificate.           Tell us if the situation at the

moment is satisfactory.            Have there been any changes

or anything to be done?"             {Transcript 29:124G).         However,

in c onsidering how far the City needed to go consideration

has to be given to the following matterss



(i)           The substitution of Mr. Bounds for Mr. Vaughan
                                                                               *

              of the County was effectively the only change

              that came about in the c er tificating function.

              It was not a case of the City taking over
              some function which had not previously been

              administered        (when a fresh start from zero

              base would have been appropriate).             It was

              not unreasonable for the City to proceed

              on the assumption that the existing system

              was one which had been operated in a reasonable

            , manner.      ■_



(ii)         The letters sent out- by Mr. Bounds to Dr.

             Eastwood of 23rd October 1986             (CORE at 373a

             and Bf,       to the Chief Fire O fficer on 3rd

             November 1986         (CORE at 373C)    to the Chief

             Constable on the 23th N o v e m be r 1986       (CORE

             37 3 0 ) , 'JMatf to the Building Surveyor of the

             City on 3rd M a r c h 1987       (COJ3E380A) and finally

             to the Club (CORE at 383) certainly gave other

             parties the opportunity to indicate their

             views about what was to be done and of course,

             in the case of the Police,             produce the encouraging

             reply that the ground met Police requirements

             under the 1975 Act         (CORE at 373E).



        The approach taken by Mr. Bounds in this context

is, it is submitted,            an appropriate and reasonable

one.     There was no point in him muscling in as the

new c e r ti f i c a t in g authority and m a king change for change's

sake.     His approach was more gradual.             He proceeded

upon the assumption that all parties were reasonably

content w i t h the system that he was taking over             (T29:52E)

and he a ssumed that the ground was reasonably safe                    ^ w-*/>

            cmmasl-   %. i/eluifa oJJntae*-
 {T29 i6 3 D ) .



 RELEVANT ISSUES ARISING



 First issue       ; Too Many People



 (i )          Outside the turnstiles



        The fact that too many people were in Pens 3 and

4 was to a material extent a consequence of there having

been a very large crowd at a late stage p r i o r to kick-

off outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles.     Paragraph

44 of the Green Guide indicates that turnstiles should

be of such numbers as to admit spectators at; a rate

whereby no unduly large crowds are kept waiting for

admission and yet at no faster rate than the arrangements

for distributing spectators within the ground permit.

This ground had a total of 93 turnstiles.     A capacity

crowd could arithmetically be admitted in a little

over 45 minutes.



        Leppings Lane end terraces and the West Stand

were capable of being served by a total of 23 turnstiles

which at an ingress rate of 7 50 per hour would require

a little over 50 minutes to bring about full capacity.



        The kind of event which involves a capacity crowd

is one where most members of the public would have

an expectation of some delay in gaining     admission

and where most people would make some effort even if



                               -3-
not told to do so to arrive well before kick-off.

From the certificating a u t h o r i t y ’s point of vi e w it

is not unreasonable to have concluded that the number

of turnstiles was such as to provide a re a s onable rate

of admission.        It is not the sort of m a t te r that would

spring to the m ind of the a d m i n i s t r at o r ^   Any such

consideration would need to be initiated by for example

the Police or even the Club.           No doubt was e v e r expressed   ;

to the certificating authority that the turnstiles

were inadequate or that there were any crowd problems

outside the turnstiles.



      If there had been a problem brought to the attention

of the certificating authority then some reaction might

have been expected either by way of suggesting an alteration

to the layout o r by way of asking what contingency

plans Club management had made to deal with such a

situation.        Unless the certificating authority was

made aware of such a problem it is not reasonable to

expect any action to be commenced independently.               This

is not a case w h e r e to the certificating a u t h o r i t y ’s

knowledge the available entrances at the ground had

"proved insufficient to stop unduly large crowds from
             t.

gathering outside'* which is the kind of circumstances

envisaged in Paragraph 46 of the Green Guide as n ecessitatiing

the p rovision of a contingency plan.



      The Certificate impinges upon this topic to some

modest extent.       Under Condition 6(1)       the hold e r has

to agree wit h the Chief Constable the m ethods of admission
 to be employed;     under Condition 9 there have to be

stewards pr o vided for the control and direction of

spectators en t ering the stadium;     under Condition     11(4)

all means of ingress have to be maintained free from

obstruction;     under Condition 29 that the stadium shall

be ma i n ta i n e d w i t h the entrances and means of access

to the entrances in the number,       size and position existing

at the date of the Certificate and indicated on the

plans.



         It w o u l d be wrong to ascribe the presence of any

large or excessive crowd outside the turnstiles to

any wrongf u l act or omission on the part of the City.



{i i )        Safety Certificate provision in respect of

Crowd Capacity



         The Safety Certificate provides under Condition

2   of Schedule 2 that "the number of spectators admitted

to the sta di u m and to the several areas of spectator

accommodation within the s t a d i u m shall not excecd the

figures specified in Part 1 of Schedule 3".          Part 1

of Schedule 3, headed "Crowd Capacity"        indicates that

the n umber of spectators admitted to the stadium and

to the various areas of spectator accommodation within

the sta di u m shall not exceed in the case of the West

Stand 4,465,     the West Terrace 7,200 and the North-West

Terrace 2,900.



         These provisions have to be considered in the
 light of Section 2(2) of the Safety of Sports Grounds

 Act 1975 in its then unamended form and wh ic h p r o v i de d

 that:-



       "(2) Without prejudice to sub-section        (1) above,

      a Safety Certificate -



      (a)         shall specify the maximum n u m b er of

                  spectators to be admitted to the stadium;



      (b)         may specify the maximum number to be

                  admitted to different parts of it...;"



      It is clear that it was not obligatory to specify

the m a x i m u m n umber to be admitted to different parts

of the stadium.



      A lt h o u g h Section 2(2) has been repealed the Home

Office advice is nevertheless that such terms should

still b e included in a Certificate.



     The capacities specified in the Safety C e r t i f i c a t e

are p l a i n l y de r iv e d from Dr. Eastwood's report which

was a cc epted by the County's officer working party

(page 60 of CORE).      Dr. Eastwood discounted the total

area on the West Terrace by 10% to allow for the absence

of gangways.    He then applied the rate of 54 persons

per 10 square m e t re s as suggested in Paragraph 15.4

of the 1976 Green Guide.       That 10% discount was p re s umably

in a c co rdance w i t h the suggestion that an a p propriate
reduction should be made in the area available for

standing when the posit i o n i n g and width of gangways

did not meet wit h the recommendations at Paragraph

7.5.1    (every s pectator to be within 12 metres of a

gangway or an exit).            It was based upon professional

judgment.



        The approach taken by Dr. Eastwood found favour

with the officers of the officer working party.                    It

came from a man w h o was highly experienced in sports

ground safety and for who m the question of safety was

paramount      {transcript      26:79F), who did not feel that

he was acting solely for the Club and was conscious

of the p u blic interest         {transcript 26s79B)       and who

would have felt it his duty to report had he any reservations

with regard to mat te r s of safety             (Transcript 26:86E),



       The appro a c h has been challenged on the basis

that Dr. E a s twood ought to have applied the more restrictive

provisions of P aragraph 15.4.3 of the 1976 Green Guide

w hich applies      "when the spacing of crush barriers does

n ot'conform to the g u i d e l i n e s . , , 1'.   However,   the reference

to spacing is that set out in Paragraph 12 which deals

with the m a x i m u m horizontal distance between barriers.

Dr. Nicho l s on ' s report at 2.5 indicates that in Pen

3 only one spacing does not conform and in Pen 4 only

2 spacings do not conform.              On the other hand it may

be said that the spacings are much closer than they

need to be w h i c h adds to the safety.              It is felt therefore

that Dr.    Eastw o o d was in no way unreasonable in adopting
 the m e t h o d he did or in putting forward the figure

which he did of 7,200*



(iii)        The Green Guide and Capacity



        It would be wrong to suppose that the Green Guide

provides any hard and fast rule for dealing w i t h the

assessment of safe ground capacity.         At Paragraph 15,1

 of the 197 6 Green Guide what is described as         "a method

of c a lculating the number of people that can be safely

accommodated"   is set out.     The 1986 Green Guide at

Paragraph 217 adds that the paragraphs which formulate

the^method of assessment      "contain as of necessity generalised

guidelines in vie w of the wide variety of types,

configurations of sports grounds,       their use and general

condition".



     M o r e o v e r w i t h regard to the packing density rates

it is to be noted that these are put forward as being

in the na ture of allowances for the purposes of the

calculation and whilst achievement of those allowances

in p r a c t i c e ought to produce safety it does not follow

that n o n -c o mpliance produces danger.    In localised

areas wh e r e fans may well prefer to gather higher rates

of density marl^be^-sschieved but without danger.        Reference

may be m a d e here to the Fire Service photographs and

the experiments carried out.



     It is to be noted moreover that in putting forward

a method of calculating safe ground capacity Paragraph

220 {formerly   (25.3)   of the Green Guide)    deals with


                              -8-
                                     ! jr*

      the n umber of people that can be "safely a c c o mmodated
                   „                                           \
      "on a terrace",          There is no unequivocal s u g g estion
                                                                   '\
      in the Green Guide that a capacity needs to be e stimated

     for an area such as a pen.                    If reference is m a d e to

     Paragraph 101 of the 1986 Green Guide it! is seen that
     ..*■nrv *-•- -,_ ••- .                      .
     a 'recommendation is made that a ground shoul d " b e divided

     into " s e c t i o n s ” to prevent potentially hazardous migrations

     by spectators and "each section of the ground has its
                                                     1                                                      ‘
     own limit of safe c a p a c i t y ” . There is iaii least a h i n t                                ,
                                                                   v        -■    •' •'                         ->
     that Paragraph 101 contemplates a large's, unit than
                                                                                        r   -   ?

     a pen in its term "section" because it do^£*i% f o v i d e                                 /

     "each section of the ground fc^r example each ejjd ol
                                    : }Jf H     *I
     side should be s e l f -containedJ



          M o r eo v e r Paragraph loilaescribes \iiovr eaph of l:he^
                                      ' 'i~. -■<  v, I i / ~ ' w -                                  ■
     "major sections" should be sub-divided 'by^gangways
                                             " /' i                                                         J    '
                    rriers.
     and cr u s h barriers          Again in Paragraph^lO^ f a i l i n g s ,                                               /
                                                       ’   %   ^        :                               ■             ,#
     fences etc.        "dividing sections r\$
                                           of t4*h»a
                                                 h ^ g■rrr'nil
                                                       r o u nnrt ’cVirtii
                                                               &^'s h b u l"1/i
                                                                             d                                       /

                                                   \       ■                                ;
     be of the strength of crush b a r r i e r s ^ ' O n ^ ^ i g h ^ b c ^
                                                                                  ft'
     forgiven for thinking that the Green GuiSe is riotVcontemplating

     a pen whe n proposing that each section bjE the ground

     should have its own limit of safe capacity.
                                                                   ‘X       ; -


     is eith e r a lacuna or an ambiguity here.




                                                                                                            ,-r .




W-
                                                                                                                               f




                                             -9-
                           V'




(iv)       Revi!i.iun              of      Capacity



           There            is     no      evidence               tu     s how t h a t            the        County             throuqh

its    O ffice r                 Working          I’ a r t y     ever         considered                the             quoution

of    holding               ctipocity             in        1981        when      the     radial               Fbmuhb

were       in n t u j led             or    1985         when           the     layout,           of    r.-idinl              fences

was    m odified.                     On t h e          uUihi'         hand      it     io        not       surprisin g

that       th is           is    so     since           no p r o v i s i o n          Hither            in         the     Act

or    in        the        Green        Guide           ur     u 1u h w I i u r o     (for         example                in

any    safety               r o g u l at iuitH           wh i c: fi i n. i yht        hove         been            iuisuod)

expressly                  dealt,       with       the         need       t;n o n ,1 cuJ nt ; e             capacity

for    an        area           . such «h      a       pen.



           Titci'c          ia    tl»«ifli         a further                  and p r a c t i c a l                reason

why    such           a     capacity           whh           u nlikely           ever        t.n Iihvk              been

calculated                  au    a holding                  cupucity            and     that           iu         that        tl us

areas       created               in       J 9 B1 and            ] 9 8 3 were           not.      self-contain ed

areau       w ith           thu       meuna        of        iriunituriny             numburii              sit.    Ll m       point

of    entry.                The       naa eaament .              of     n holding              capacity                  would

sensibly              be        understood               to      require            auuuuumcnl.                    of    the;

number          of        spectators               who w o u l d              remain         in        an     area         durintj

the    foutbui.1                 ynm«,         ‘i i n e e        the     spectators                    were         free

to    move        about           from       o ne p e n            to    anuLher             and        sinco            no

pen had           the           meuhunicul               means          for      checking               the         numboru

entering              it        provision              of      a holding              capacity                won        quite

meaningless.


           It    m ight           be       uuid        that       a revised              capacity                   should

have       been           calculated               if        only       to     re fle ct          the         accoso




                                                             -1 0 -
 channel              crcatcd             between                 the     2    rune,           uf    rnflint          fences

 between              pens          4 a nd        b    or,         1t i l e r ,         tu     rel'lH rt         the    removal

of     b a rrie r          144.             It        is        unJikeJy                though        Unit        ypecifie

capacities                 for        pens            3 and         4 would                  have     boon        produced

for        the        very          reason            that         any        such           capacity            oven    if

jl     could           havo          boon m o n i t u r e d                   could           not     have        been        enforced

as     Jong       an       w p K c tu tu rH                w«tr         f t ’ nn        to    hkjvr     between          the

pens,



(5)     Not       a cause              of        what           wont       wrong



           Ev e n       .i f    Dm. -l ur         (..HSsLwaod             ' s o riginal                ca lcu la tio n

was    higher             than         it        should             have           been        or     cvon       jf     tho

ce rtifie d            copaoity                  for         the        West        Tcrracc            uhou.ltl         hnvu

been       reduced              or     Hub-divided                       in to           the        component           yruusj

it    is     subm itted                thnl.          the         evidence                   does     not     e sta b lish

that       any        reviujon               of       i. 11« c a r t i f i ca L e t o                  re f l e e t      thnnn

matters           as      for         exumpjH                by    providing                   that        the    ma x i mu m

number           to    be       adm itted                  to     pen      3 should                  not    cxeeed        say

000    was        a cause              of        wl vot         wkmI.      wrong,                   A sensible

in te rp re ta tio n                 of     theee               Hventa             is        LhaL     death       and     in ju ry

resulted              from          the     uuddan                in flu x          uf        large        numbero        of

spectator*!               ot i ue      the        gates            were           opened             and    which        were

numbers           so      groat           that             ov«» * t : i ' uwdi f uj           a nd    crushing           was

ever       lik e ly            to    occur.



(6)    Overcrowding




           Ren J i a t i c a l l y               the         t.rnyndy             ot:t:urrod           boouiinu          of

lo ca lise d           areas           of        overcrowding                       giving            rise-      to    in to le ra b le
crushing             pressures,                     I he      osrtj flo a tin g                      a a t h o r j t y 1s

position             here         i«        Unit        t.*rcjwd m a n a g e m e n t / w i U i i n                       Um         tjruund

 is    esse n tia lly              a, ma n a g e me n t              r e u p o n s j l / i 1 i l.y            f i nd      th is
                                                                                                                                              /
is     envisaged              in       the       Green           Guido.            /fliHt.' h i              iiut        to    say

that        the     c e rtifica te                 does          nut    Vouch            upon            t.his          aspcct

at    a ll.          The     emphasis                at      the       m omentt            h o u g h           in       mi     the

managerial              r o s p o n s i b i 1 i i.y w h i c h                 is       envisaged                       for     uxomple

in    chapter           13 o f           t.he [ J r een           Guide:            " L f C h i : t.     i   vh        atewarding

should        prevent              overcrowding                    in       section!!                 nl '    the         ground,

reduce        the       like lih o o d               and         incidHiicu              of .'disorder,                        hnlp

disperse            spec. t ot . c, j t h        .in s u c h       a way            as     to         r ncJucH           crowd

pressure                     .         A go i n ut.         paragraph                 191>a              fi bo.*; i t: d u t y

which       a steward                  is    called           upon          to     curry              uut         includes

that     the        duty         'to        help        aehiKvw             »*n    b v o h        flow            of     pnnp.lu

to    the     viHwing              areas           and      ssnfe d i s p e r s a l                  of       spue t u t o r s

on    the     terraces                 or    viewihy             slopes’                        By p u r n q r a p h

]97    stewards              have           to     bn     fu lly        capable                 of       currying                 out

the    duties           allocated                  to     Ui hi h,          Again          at        pornyrfiph                   204

the    Green          Uuide            specifies              "Ah       in        other           areas             of        smfoty,

management              is       responsible                  fur       the        crowd             control

arrangements                 ...".



         This         re sp o n sib ility                   is     developed                    in       chuplfii'sD

Ingress           and     8 Terrm.'ss                   and      Viewing              Slopes.                     In     p o r t i cu.l

chapter           fl d e s c r i b e s           how " a r r a n g e m e n t s                  should              be       made

to    encourage              the        even        d istrib u tio n                 of         t hi s       crowd           on

the    terraces              to     provide               case         of    u o c h h s          an d        egress}

to    control           and        fu e ilita tc              novnmcni.,                 p u r I i c u 1 a r 1y                if

a local           emeryHticy                should          or inn          duriiiq             the          event;           a nd

to    contain           pressures                 before           they          i' h h u I i     dangerous
proper t i     oiks        , . . " .




                                                             -12-
(7) P r o v is io n in                       the       Safety        C e rtifica te                re la tin g           to
crowd management



            The        aaf'ety             c e rtifica te          provider                 quite        apart           from

the        lim it          of     wpHctator              capacity           on         the    Whsj I .     lerrace

some        further               a pe cific           terms     that            impinge           upon         this

issue.            Under              Condition            6 (ii)       the        holder           has        to        rofur.e

admission                  t.o o r       evacuate              spectators                   from        any    part

of    the        stadium               bn Cu r e       or. d u r i n g      a {.specified                 a c tiv ity

upon        receiving                  in structions             uo        tu     do     from           the    Chief

Constable                  (aa       defined).              Under         Cum) i t a o n           7 the           holder

has        to    arrange               for     the      attendance                of- P o l i c e         O fficer!;

"to    secure               the        orderly          and     law ful           behaviour               of       the

spectators",                         (i v o r c r o w d i mj    in     a p a rticu la r                  area

                disorderly                 behaviour.                The        Club         and    the        Hulice

would           therefore               have       an     in te re st           in     ensuring               that        there

was    no        locoi           o v e r c r o w d i r?tj and          that          might         if     noc es- i aar y

be    achieved                  by    refusing            admission               to    .spectator a to

parts of the stadium.


           Again           Condition               9    provide.**          for        tho     holder              to     arrange

for    the        attendance                  of       safety        stewards                who    are        to       carry

out    amongst                  other        duties        thul.      of        controi            and        directio n

of    spectators                     entering           uuimj        or    le aving            the        atuclium.

It    is        true       that         the     ce rtifica te              provides                for        the       m i n i mu m

number           of    uufaty              stewtfrda           required              e nd     thi-D      mi ni mum

number           does           not     include          stewards               a p e c i f i e u . 1 1y a s s i g n e d

to    that        duty           on     the     West       Terrace.                  On t h e       other           hand

the    safety              cert-i f i c a t e           makes        no p r o v i s i o n           for        nuoh

stewards              to     be       on     the       Spiori        Kop b u t          the        Club        do p r o v i d e




                                                          -13-
stewards             there.                 It     would         be w r o n g            to     in terpret              the        safety

ce rtifica te               as    meaning                that          the     minimum number                          uf    stewards

W8 S     the    correct                number            for          each     and        every         occasion.

The      minimum            number               has     to      be p r o v i d e d             for     every           uptjeified

a c tiv ity       a nd        that           presumably                 includcu                religiou s              conventions,

reserve         matchcs                a nd       go     on.           In    practiec              some       fo o tb a ll

matches         would            p la in ly            r c q u j r o . i i mr e       thou         the       mi ni mum

number         and    th is            was        recognised                 by     the        Club         who        provided

mo r e    than       the         mini mum              numbur           on     l.lie o c c a s i o n          of        this

sem i-final.                it         is        to    be     remembered                 that         thin        its u

general         s a f e t y . c h f t i fi c a t o                and        riot     a npui.-ial             one           for

each      g a me .       It       mak es              general          provision.



          The    submission                       made        oh b e h a l f         of        the     City        j n that

the      general         safety                  ce rtifica te               provided             a s u fficie n t

framework            w ithin            its           conditions              that            would      havo          ctiublod

the      Club    to      fu lfil                 i t s 1 re sp o n sib ility                     of    uueuring

safe      crowd       management,



(8)      P ractical           avoidanna                     of    ovcrcrowding                    and       crushing



          in    practice                in        the       past       th is        whh        achieved            by        visual

m onitoring.                The         description                    of     the        met hods;          used            varies
                       *•

in    the      P olice        evidence                  but       tha        common            feature            is        that

of    reacting           to       any            detection             that         t.liH d e n s i t y           of        the

crowd       unless          further                   restricted              would            b c c o me    excessive.

This      has    been         described                     variously               as    packing            or        fillin g

the      terraces.                It        appears              to    be     h     tra d itio n a l           method.

It    was      one    used         by            Mr.                   (transcript.                   26)    nuw I . A .




                                                              -14-
 O fficia l           but        who p r e v i o u s l y             tin u P o l i c e              O fficer             used

 to    walk         the        terraces             observing               and     detecting                      and

 re s tric tin g               further             entry       to      any     area           if        he    fe lt        that

 the       level          of    cum f u r l 'wti» ot.                rink.          It       would           be       wrung

 to    categorise                    th is       method        as      that        of     reacting                   only

 to    dJwuumfurt                    ur     dunger.            Aft                           ub' i w r v u r          alive

 to    the        rjuku         of        uveruruwdiny                uni i c r u n h i ncj nui j ht . I.u
                                                                         dtM/Hfc
 be    able         to     detect,           that       the        cnj i p- oi t y * i s w i t h i n t o l e r a b l e

 lim its.



            A ll     the        mu r e       uu    uhould            thul     bu        p u u u j b .1u w l m r s

the        area      under            scrutiny           is     re la tiv e ly               oi tmJJ         on      wuis

the        case      with        pens         3 and        4 which            m i u u i u r mJ          in     ruund

terms        13m x 14m and                        where       there         were         advantageous*                         viewing

positions                for     the         person        carrying             out          thn        in o n i   Luring

task        (cith e r           from         the    Weut.       SIuikI        ur        frum        LIih      |.jh   1- i m e l . e r


track        or     at         the        rear     of    the        terrace).



           Such          visual            monitoring               would      be        h    necessary                  part

of    any      system            b e c n u HB       even       with         numbers                in     a p a rticu la r

area       less          than        a ny     r c c u mmc r t d c d      capacity                  thorn           'ui.il I

is    the     risk         of        local         overcrowding                a nd          crushiity.                  It.

would        be     fu lly           fur     anyone           In     as s ume       t.hut           t.hc      to ta liz e r

number        wus* u mi f f i i: i en I. p r e c H u t i u n                       mid        uf        uourae           reliance

on    it    might          be        dangerously               m isleading.                    Spur: L;i l.oru

go    to    popular              areas           and     moy p r e f e r           i.u be           »    clo ac-kn it

group,             1 he    v ita l          requirement                in    to     know wl ui t                   conditions

are    like         on     the        terraccs            and        there         cannot               bo   any

su b stitu tio n               for        careful         visual            m onitoring.                      I hut        j




                                                        -15-
 not        an    in e ffic ie n t                 syulorn       if        curried            out       by       pornoim

aware            of        the     potential              risks.



 (9)        Lack           of    Knowledge              by      the        City



             The C i t y               whs        never        told        thnt.       (.here        wau         any     riak

of     Jueal           overcrowding                     n r crushing.                     (l ad      Ui bj-b        be e n

any      such          riuk        that           was     k nown           of    then         it     is      liku iy         that

a member               of'       the     Advisory              Group            would         have        boon         n wt i r u

of     it        and        that        its       existence                would        have         been         made       k nown

to     the        C ity.           Had        the       City      b c e o mc           awam          of      a ny      isut:h

problem               then        on M r .         B o u n d 1o e v i d e n c e               the      moons           was

available                   for    achievintj                safety             and     thiu         could          have

included,                  if     necessary,                 a proh ib itio n                   notico.



            It        is        therefore           subm itted                  that      t he- C i t y           boiiovnd

reasonably                      that     the       Club        with         the        at?u   i ls l . a n c o    of. the

Police           would            be     able        !.u a c h i e v e           the     wa f'c d i o p e r a a l

of     spectators                  on        thw     terraces               in     a    nt anne r         Unit      would

avoid        local               overcrowding                  and     crushing.                     I lie C i t y        c on

reasonably                   be    forgiven               for     not           Imping         included                any

mo r e      specific               provision               ao     to       i-he m a n n e r            in        which       terraces

should           be        filled-           or    ay     to    Lho        need         to     look         out        for

a nd     guard             uQainst            IochI        overcrowding.                           lliene         sro     mutters

which        are           of     a basic           nature,            which            do     not        r mo d    spelling

out      and       which           could           eafely        be        left,        to     t -houo           involved

in     the       match-day                operations                  to     acfvjnvo.




                                                        -16-
 S E C O N D ISSUE; CflNF 1 Nl. D A R E A                                   ( \ <'UJL-
                                                                            (      U fe(£<AZ>


 (i)       H istory              and    Purpose



             I he          history          uf        the     pens          i   h    fn irly               u tra i yht forward .

 The       perim eter                 fcnce           was t h e r e b e f o r e                   C e rtifica te                  and

 was       there            as    a s e c u r i t y fence to                         keep            spectntnrs                   tiff

 the     pitch.



            The        radial           fences            were           provided                  .in      iy(U       f i nd     19 D !>

HU     t i f i peo i’ ii    fruin       the       dncmi i Hh l.n t i on .                     The          piirpom;             nf

having           radia l          fcnccs              appears               t o 'have              altered.                 ln iliu iJ y

they       were            provided              as     a means                 o f' control lin g                     la te ra l

movement              of     ‘j p e c L u t u t h .            1n        19 f J I . I i h         h c h e me       approved

was      Tur       the       purpose              uf     iiff'ectim j                 si uyi ’ u y u t i u u           uf       home

supporters                  from       away           supporters                    on     the            terracco              a nd

to     that        end       a s te rile               area         b e t wee n por t s                    4 ami        !■> was

created            by       the       addition              of      a radial                  fence             thefe           with

the     added              option       of       creating                 a larger                   s te rile          area

if     necessary                 by    nhuttiny               off         pan 4 .



           The       purpose            of       tlin       r ui J j o. )        f ' t i ncoi :      chunyed            again

after        the           1986       ueuaun           when         it      iib h h k iJ          I. cj    be    Lhe        practice

to    have        any        mixture             of      supporters                      at       that          end     of       Uu»

ground.              lhe         racial          fences             then            became                availab le             as

a means           of        containing                 sm aller             groups                of       a way      s u p p u r t er r a

in    specific               areas.              Un t h e         occasion                    of          any    big        match

where        the        whole          of     the        !. hi- r a c e a m i c j h t               be      needed           the

policy         b e c a me         one       of    le ttin g              the         fans           find         th e ir        own
 level            subject             to      visual            moni t o r i n t j,             lima           liittwi'jy


 the     ra d ia l           fences             have         been         restored              L ij     the           purpose

 of    c o n tro llin g                la te r a l           movement.




 ( i i ) The R o a s o n a b l c n e s s                        of    the        C a r t i f j v u t i tnj              AuLhority ' a
 ApprovaI



             It     i a quite               clear            that         the     c e rtific a tin g                     authority

 approved            the        in troductio n                       of    the      radial               I'etices          in        1981

a nd    the        purpose                 of        i’ «: 1 1 i mj       pena      in    J 9 fi         .        It     docs

not     seem        that            the         ce rtific a tin g                 a uthority                  uv t sr     hod

its     attention                 drawn           sp e cifica lly                   to    t h e . aba ndunmo. nL

of     the        policy          of        segregating                    riva l        uuppnrtiM'is                    at     Lhal

end     of        the    ground.                  It       is        subm itted           that               the       i:w rli f ic a tin g

authority               at     a ll         m aterial                times       acted           reasonably                     in

approving               the       in sta lla tio n                    and       continued                    prcscncc            of

the     radia l          for          the        follow ing               reasonst-



(a)      The        1y 7 6 ( i r e e n            Guide           provides               at     pa r a t ] r a p h            .10.1:



         “ Cr o wd           movement                 on     tnrranos              should              bw ■ i sovo. r o 1 y

         lim ited              in      order            to      give        the      P olice                 the       fu lle s t

         opportunity                       for       crowd           control.             Less           problems                occur

         where           the          terraces               arc      divided             as       f a r       an       possible
                         p

         into           sections                by      the       use       of     rn ilitn p !              or        barriers,

         hoth           radial             and        la teral



The    radial            fences               were         introduced,               in       I ‘/ H I       Juvyoly            as

a result            of       I’ o J   u .'h     recommendations                          and      in         the        abduce

of    a ny        contrary             view.               Again          in     190 3        the        P olico              favoured
 the        in tro d u ctio n              of    the        i : hi i 1 r a l        radinJ         f'cncc        between

 pens        3 and           4 and         the     provision                   of     the        s te rile          channel

 for        th e ir     access            purpose                between              pent?        4 f i nd         .     1 ho

 ce rtific a tin g                 authority             would            have             needed         w eighty             reasons

 to      challenge                the     Pa] i    ch     view          but         .it.    i«     in     any       event

 subm itted             that        the         Police           purptiss             was        a (jenHiblu              and

 proper          one.



 (h)         Ihe       proposals                both     in        1901         and         IVH'j       were        s u p p u r t od

by     Dr.       Eastwood.                  He had           some         vac. i I I h t i u n           ( t r a ruse r i p i.

27 s 23 A)              but        never         fe lt       i n the            event            tfuit     there          was

a ny        problem          in     c u n t r u 1J i n g          spectators                     (tra n scrip t               27:

7 5 A)      he     appreciated                   the     manner                in    which          in     198J? t h e

pens        were        to    be        fille d        by      for       example              using           the       galas

leading            in to      thu        centi-sl           pens         so         that      once         eithe r            p en

> or        4 was        fu ll          j t. c o u l d      be c l o s e d             off        and     people

channelled               into           the     remaining                p en        of     the.        two     contra.t

pens        it    is     impiirtHnt. to                  r emember                  from      the        c o r t i f'i m L i n g

a u th o rity 's             point         of    view         that         Dr.         I iistwood             fe lt      him self,

able        in    the        exercise            of      his       professional                      judgment             to

issue        annual           ce rtifica te s                 of      safety               as.for         example

that        dated        2nd       August          J9U0          (CORE a t                 page     4710-               Dr.

Eaatwuod            intended               ouch        a ce rtifica te                      to     rela te          to    those

structures              ‘w i t h    which          he       as     engineer                 was     concerned

a nd     th is      included               the     radial             fences,               gates'.,          perim eter

fence,           cruuh       barriers              and        so      on.           lie     meant         tl'«      c e rtifica te

to     be    read       as     meaning             that          as     far         as      Uv o h h      structure::

which        were       within-- h i s             remit           wure         concerned                 the     ground

was     safe       to      use.           Ku c h      a c e rtifica te                     carriuu             therefore!
 great,        weight               comimj           as      it      docs            fruro              epu t a b l e f i H u r c e

 such        us        Dr.        I- o n t w o o d     who w o u l d                 not     put        his       professional

 reputation                   in      jeopardy.                     It        i h to       be     rioted           that       Dr.

 Faotwoad               was        ce rtifyin g                that            the        various            structures!

 in    the        ground             were        iri      a satisfactory                          condition                  and

 appropriate                      for      the       stadium                  to    be     uaed         to     the       fu ll

 capacity               as        la id     down          in      the          C e rtifica te                of      Ground

Safety.



 (c)         Jt        woo        reasonable                 for          the        c e r t i f' i i : n t i ng        authority

to     suppose               that         the        Club         with             the     asaiat.iincs               of     the

Polico            h ad       the         a b ility         to        control               spectators                 wnLuring

ond     using            i.h« p e n s .                Properly                    organised             thw        pmt H     were

capable            of        b« i ng used               safely.                     There        is     no        evidence

that      the          c e r ti fi outing                  auth o rity                   was    ever          made         aware

of     any        disquiet                on     the      part            of        anybody           about          any      risk

attaching                to        ttus    pons.               The        c e rtific a tin g                  auth o rity

was     never            put         on    enquiry                and         that         probably               re f l e e t s

the     b e lie f            of      the       t:lub      and            the        Police        that            the      pons

could        be        used          safely.



(d)       It       was        not         neeftooary                 to        enshrine            any        p a r t i t.-ul a r

method            of     fillin g              t.he p e n s              in        the    terms         of        the      (Jeneral

Safety            C u rtific a te .                    Ihe        method             was       beet .        le ft      as    an

ope ratio nal                 decision               to        be        made by            the       Club         with       the

assistance                   of     the        Police.                   The m e t h o d s            described               in

the    evidence                    vary        but      from             Lhe        c e rtific a tin g               a u th o rity's

point        of        view         it     was       reasonable                      to     suppose               that       those

responsible                   for         fixin g         a method                   would        be a b l e            to    do

oo w i t h o u t          d iffic u lty .

                                                                         -20-
 ( iii)          C ffoot             un    Capacity



             At      least            to       the        extent       that           the    u t o r i In          ehanncl

 took        away          a part              of     the       area        available               for      Ht.miding

 the       provisions                     of     the       perm      .in     th e ir        fin a l         Corfu c o u l d

have        had       un        effect               on   the      f 1u J ti i n «j c a p a c i t y          of     whnt

io        le ft.           Jt    is        to        be   noted        though           that         the      central.

pehH        created              were           re lo tive ly              sm all.           O rig in a lly           1074

of        the     area          of        the        l.erraee        h ad        been       discounted               to' a l l o w

for        the       absence               of       gangways.                I hat      dioeuunt.             might        we l l

be     regarded                        generous                and     perhaps              even       unnecessary

in     the        wsb           of     the          central          pens        where           the      m ajority

of     spectators                    would           be     w ithin         12 i i i b I i ' h h    of       the    tunnel

exit.



      •     The       fact           iu        that       it    docs        not       oueri r t h a t .       the
                                                                                                                     W      >
ce rtific a tin g                    authority                 e v e r ^eoriai t i e r e d          c a p a c i ty^’ b u t

the       reason           for        that           .i 8 p r o b a b l y        that       it      way       meaningless

to     do       so    in        tcrma           of     any      holding           ca p a city.^               The    I ire

Brigade              were        evidently                 sa tisfie d            about            tho      pen     capacity

in     terms          of        evacuation                 titnus.



(iv)            Adm ) n i a t r a t i v«              Shor tcomiriqa



            The      presence                   of    the       radinl           fences            should          have

been        noted          up        on    th«        plane         ari d    that        would' Imve                involved

an    amendment                 of        the        ce rtifica te               uf    which           thu     planr,

are       part.            The        uyme may be                   said         of    the         add itiona l

perim eter             fence              gate        provided              in    19H,^.            Ilowovnr,            though

the       paperwork                  wau n o t            dealt      with         as     woll          aw    it     should
 have        been      it      iu    (submitted              that       thin     iJid        not      contribute

  in    any     rospcct             to    the        tragedy.



           If    it     were         ooid           that    appropriate                advurt.in.inij                    with

 regard         to    neuen.HHry                amendments              might      have            o N ti wed         some

 in te re s te d        party            to    query        wh;it.      wiih   being           propound               nr

 done     the        answer          must           surely      be      that     any         such      argument

 is    somewhat             remote            arid      unlikely         but     iri    any         ovcnt.          if

 any    interested                  party          os    defined         under         Soul , i n n       'j    (!>)


 of'   the      Act     wished            to     ehuJleriqe             the    in tro d u ctio n                uf

 the    radial          fcnceu            then          since     the        radial          I'uncos           were

 obvious         to     s ee        on    the        terraces           an    appeal' c o u ld                 havn

been      brought           tu       Court           under      Section         3(3)          if     necessary.



         The         perim eter               gateu        which     are       part       of       tlu;        sstructuro

com prising            the       pens          are       dea lt     with       under         the      4th        I f . sum

bclow.



THI RD       I SSUi ;       CRUSHING



         It     ia     proposed                to       consiider       Imre     tho         m atter           of

the     crush         barriers            and,           sp ccif'ie a lJy,             the     removal               of

crush        b a rrie r        144.            I he C i t y ' u      poe itiun           is        that        even

allow ing        for        differences                   between        the     crush             barr.iei'H

as     they     were        on p c n o          3 nnd        4 on       the.day          u I' t h i s          trayody

compared         wi t h        recommendations                     in    Lho^Grcen                 Guide

n e v e r t h e ) ess       as      far       ao     the    c rus h ■b a rrie rs *             were       concerned

they     were         reasonably                safe       ari d s u f f i c i e n t l y           otrony

for     the     kind        nf      situ a tio n           which        could      reasonably                   be

orivioayfjcJ.           B a rrier             12 4 «      fw iled       bccauoe          ofqruss                overloading
a risin g     in       exceptional                       circuiiiaiym.'iiii,              I ho        follow ing

points      are        made;



(i)    The        adequacy                  of        the     crush      barriers.:         at        the       time

       of    issue            of       ce rtifica te .



       D eficiencies                        in     the      barriers*         ay      they       were           before

       the        issue           of        ce rtifica te              worn      noted       by        Dr.       Luo t . woo d

       and        the        U fficer              Working          Party.          A Schedule                   of

       Required               Improvements                      wau d r o w n       up.          Uarrieteu

      were         tested              a nd       whore         neeeisHary          replaced.                   Add i t i o n a l
                                                                                                                      'li                         tidfQ
      b a rrie rs             were          provided.                  I here      wau    ennui dei'able
                                                                                                                             1a l e t f n U M .
      reliance               upon                 t h e p r o f o u u i unti 1 j u d g m e n t             of    Dr.        lil             A f.   c'

      Eastwood.                    In            the event          whut        whh      provided               wuu,

      it     is        subm itted,                    a reasonable              oy»toui          of     crush

      b a rrie ra .                Although                 there      were      d(?viaLions                 from

      the     Green               Guide           thia        wns   an     urea       where           it     woo

      appropriate                      to        apply        maxi mum        fle x ib ility               since

      the     syatem               whs           so     greatly        in fluenced           by        the       presence

      o f'b a rrie rs                  which            had    been      there        fuH^iear ly                half

      a century.



      Moreover               it     is                t o be n o t e d     that       the    terrace                  in

      front        of        the        Wes t            Stnnd      is     quite         a n o r row            one

      from        front           to        back.             I ffe o tive ly.th e re                 urn       only

      3 rowu            of    b a rrie rs                and     the     e i t u s i t j on- i s       quite

      d iffe re n t           from,               for       example,        that       which o b t a i n s

      at    the
                           M 2
                       ot fHel f e nd                 where     there       iu     a much             la rg e r

      area        of     terracing                     on a much mo r u               sig nifican t.                  in clin e .
        There      seems         .little          doubt           that         the     barriers             were

        strohy      enough            to    me e t       the        r ei i . ' ummendat j o n n           in       the

        Green      Guide.             The    heights                uf'    the        b a rricru          urn

        somewhat          variable           but            i I. i s      subm itted           th/it.       tho

       hflicjhts      involved              lire       not       dangcrouu.



       So    fur    tis    the. la y o u t             is      i:uiiccrned             Dr.     I wstwood

       advised       the        O fficer           Working                Party        that.    t.he       ga p e

       uhouJd       be     larger           than        r ecommended                   in    t.he    Green

       Guide       (transcript               28:        1CA)           ani l     he    took     account

       of    the    fact        that        the      Im rriera                 were     m atu ritilly

       closer       together               row     to       row        than       rcqui rsd          in        the

       Greon       Guido.



       It    was    very        much a s i t u a t i o n                  whers        approval             of

       the    system           wan    influenced                  by      professional                judgment

       and    common           sense.



(ii)   S ufficiency             of    the        1 b huh       uf       the      C e r t i f ' i ca t o .



       The    ce rtifica te            makes            specific:              pruvision            in      rnupect

       of    the   barriers            by        way     ofi



       (a)     ”          Condition               15 ( i )          1 Ii h h o l d e r       shall          a I.

                          nil        times        m aintain               a ll    jst.ructural              parts

                          of     ths       stadium             in      ynund          order     und         to

                          the        appropriate                 a nd      relevant            standards

                          in     (.he G u i d o         ari d       irr a i l         eases     to        the

                          sal juf'ncti.on'of                     the-.C ouncil.




                                                    -24-
          (b)                   C ondition               2b i n       relatio n             to        the     systematic:

                                 t o u t .i ng      of     barrioro              by     a tsuitubly                q u a lifie d

                                 Chartered               I- ihj i riKH i ' , ,



          (c)                   Condition             29       in     respect            of '     the       rnu i n t o n a n u o

                                of     the       crush b a r r ie r s             ao        ind.ictit.otJ           on

                                tho       plans.



         C learly          the       c e r t i f'ieute           huu      not         k t?|j t    up - l . u - d a t e

         w ith       the    changes              in      the     Green          Guide            in    that       tenLing

         under        Condition                25     was c o n t e m p l a t e d                as    in vo lvin g

         a cycle           of     not       leoa         than       4^    y our s ;       and         to    be    by

         way     of    a roprpoeni.nt.ive                        s* a tri ple    of       not         less       than

         20?o o f      the        total          n u mb e r      uf      barriers.                     Properly

         the     ce rtifica te                 ought        to      ref'lcct            the       fuel,       that

         now t e s t i n g           uhould           Luk e |>1 nee             every            4 yearu          (Croon

         Guide        1906        paragraph               38).           Thia     made            no       difference

         on     the    day       b e e u u He         the      relevant           barriers;                 h a d been

         tasted        in       July       1980,



( i i i ) Mai n t e n a n c e        of    a reasonable                   Hyat.em u f                 crush      barriers

         after        issue          of    ccrtifju u tc.



         It     is    subm itted               that       the       oyotern       of        crush           barriera

         present           on    li>th         April        1989 was             reasonably                  rutjurded

         by     the    City          an    h    safe        and       proper           ayr.torn.             There

         have        been       «ume a l t e r a t i o n s !             over     the            ycaro       o.inoo

         the     c e rtifica te                was       issued          both     when            radia l         fonceu

        were         put    in       and,       p a r t i o u i u r 1y ,         in      July          1986      when

        ba rr i er         144       was       p artly         romovod,                I ho       s i g n j f'i c a n o e
of     barrie r        144    iu     dealt           w.i I h    furthfir           boluw.             At

th is    stage         though        the      City        advance           the      oubmissiort

that     they      reasonably               concluded             that         the       barriers

were     su fficie n t         and       proper           hnviny        rognvd            in      p a rticu la r

to     the    foJ.la wing          mu I. t e r s . * -



(n )              The .b a r r i e j ’H w e r o 1-ubjncl.od                         to    regular

                  and        appropriate                 testing        iti        reaped             uf

                  their        strength               and where          nociiimary                   l'tiinedial

                  or     ropnir          work         whh c a r r i e d        out.



(b)             Dr.      fastwood               pruvided          hiw       Hi triual         L’ » r L i f i c t i t . « a

                  of    Safety           mi d     anybody          reading               wu eh        a

                  c c r t j f i c a t e wou 1 d p r o p c r i y c o n c 1 u d a

                  that       bin      p r o f e u u i n rial- v i e w          whs        that

                  the    crutth          barriwrH              were    in      tjood       order

                  and    rnnde t h e            U n 'a ce        fit     Jind        oafn         for

                  U «« ,


(c)             There         were        reijular             in opediono               by     the

                  O fficer          Working              Hnrly    or     membero               of '

                  the    Advisory               Group          which     includud                in upedion

                  uf    the    crueh            barr inris.
         i*




(d)             Ihorc         were        no e u m p l a i n t u        of         any    d .'m g e r

                arising             from        the      presence             of    cruuh             barriers

                  (except           in    relatio n             Lu 144         -    see       boluw) .

                 There        were        nu a c c i d o n t y         a riu in y          from

                the      p re tiH iiL -e        of     erueh      b a rrio ru .



                                            -26-
 Hi e     tM’ UHh b a r r i e r u           appear            to     have       done

 th o ir      job     e ffe ctive ly               in    that         they       had

bei *n     in    rnyuJur            uoe      and        on     occasions

subjected             to      eapHc.il.y          cniwtis           as:    for

example          in      1988.          It       would         not        be    surprising

if      the     c e rtific a tin g               nut.hority               reyoi'ded

t.hfs o * t i« h      b u rr i era          ao    a trie d            and       tooted

u y u l o(ii.



Tho C i t y         on     taking           over        the        c e rtific a tin g

function            in     n - H ip u u l    of    thu        yround            would

ruuuonubJy               have      concluded                 that         tho    crush

burriorti           a«     provided              had     boon        approved

u iid .             l . hey   could          only        bn        chumjed

if   there          was       reasonable                eauso        to     do
             Given that the system had indeed been approved

             and subjected to regular testing and inspection

             the City would have found it difficult to

             assert any reasonable cause for changing

             what was there and any attempt to change

             would have been contrary to the recommendation

             in favour of m aximum flexibility     in the application

             of the Green Guide.



(iv)         Barrier 144



        This was removed after the inspection of

1986.     It is relevant because of the thesis advanced

that the absence of barrier 144 was causative on the

day in allowing a channel through which crowd pressure

flowed wit h the result that barrier 124A was broken

down.



        The circumstances under w hich barrier 144 came

to be removed are unfortunate.         No prior notice was

given of the proposal to remove        144 and the matter

seems to have been dealt with on an ad hoc basis on

site.     Some time was taken up in probing w h e t h e r Mr.

Bownes was acting ultra vires but he refuted any such

suggestion    (Transcript   29:77E).



        What can be said is that even if barrier 144 had

been dealt wit h in a procedurally impecable m a nner

the same result was going to occur namely that barrier

144 would be removed.       The reason for removal was that

advanced by the Police      (see Calvert and 318A or CORE).
           There plainly were safety considerations in mind / w h e n

           the Police advocated the removal of 144.                          Those safety

           considerations were assessed by Dr. Eastwood and Mr.

           Strange and in pa rt i c u l a r were assessed against the

           competing considerations including the possibility

           of p roviding a replacement barrier.                     The considered

           and balanced v iew taken was that removal was in the

           circumstances a reasonable course to take.                          That was

           a m a t t e r of judgment based on reasonable grounds and

           probably would have been the decision no m a t t e r in

           what circumstances the discussion took place.



                   W hether or not removal of barrier 144 was in the

           event causally relevant is a matter of speculation

           b e c au s e : -



           (i)                even if present barrier 144 only partially

                              intruded into the gap between the central

                              radial fence and barrier 149*             If crowd press

                              flowed through that channel then the presence

                              of 144 would have had little if any effect

                              in reducing such crowd pressure.



           (ii)               It is by no means certain that crowd pressure

                              did flow through the channel so as to have

                              any effect upon barrier 124A.             The evidence

                              as to the circumstances in which 124A came

                              to be d amaged is in some conflict.               Gary

                              Gains   (Transcript 2:150) described barrier

                              124A breaking down after a steady build up



                                               -29-

RECEIUED   FROM    0 60 2   4?6532                    ?.   3.1989    16:18                  P.   3
of pressure and he put that very clearly

as occurring before kick-off.       statements

w ere received from other witnesses for example

                who put the collapse of barrier

124A at the time when a surge c oincided wi t h

Mr. Beardsley's shot hitting the crossbar.

As a m a t t e r of speculation it is p o ssible

to envisage how a large group came through

gate C, down the tunnel and then through

the channel so as to cause increased pressure

on barrier 124A but it is equally possible

that the pressure which affected ba r r i er

124A was generated on the pitch side of where

barrier 144 would have been.



It is unfortunate that the video recordings

do not resolve the doubt.      There is a suspicious

movement to be seen on tape ^       at about 2.47

but no certain evidence as to what was happening

within Pen 3 at that time.



Moreo v e r the continued presence of bar r i e r

144 might well itself have been highly dangerous

in the circumstances of the 15th A p r i l 1989

since it could well have lead to a different

accident where excessive pressure w a s thrown

onto barrier 144 itself or obstruction occurred

wit h great risk of injury to persons in,

say,   the tunnel.



The channel as envisaged is probably illusory.
              In fact the removal of 144 opens up an area

             where any crowd pressure is likely to toe

             dissipated and certainly it involves opening

             up another channel down the lengt h of the

             radial fence.    Whilst that might not be desirable

             in itself it would have had the          effect of

             reducing any pressure       caused by p e o pl e flowing

             in from the tunnel.



        At all events after barrier 144 was rem o v e d its

absence did not lead to accident or injury at any m a t c h                       j
                                                           o/c4J>&a£^ C 4 0 *U 5 r& /}   .
before the 15th April 1989^          No report or complaint

was made    about its absence.       It was n e v e r sugg e s t e d

to the City that action needed to be taken w i t h regard

to the absence of barrier 144.          Dr. Ea s twood copjtiiTued

      provided hi3 ground safety Certificate^'1* 8 is respectfully

submitted that the City would reasonably have concluded

that the removal of barrier 144 had achieved the desired

o bjective put forward by Mr. Calvert and that its absence

had not given rise to any other risk.



(v)          The Strength of Barrier 124A



       This barrier failed.     It did so b e c a u s e it was

grossly overloaded.     Dr. Eastwood's evidence about

this as set out at the end of his statement has not

been challenged.     It is therefore submitted that barrier

124A was sufficiently strong a n d probably complied

wi t h the requirements of the Green Guide as m u c h in

April 1989 as it had done in July 1988 w h e n last tested.



                              -31-
                                                                                             A
No one could reasonably have foreseen that such excessive

o v e rl oa d in g would be applied to barrier 124A.



FOURTH ISSUE - Unable to escape or avoid injury or

death



(i )          Perimeter Fence Gates



        As a m atter of history the majority of. these gates

were pre se n t before certification although 2 gates

w ere added later namely gate 4 in 1985 and gate 7 in

{         7          -           Because of the ample width

of the exit      points at the Leppings Lane end of the

Terrace the perimeter fence gates were n e v e r regarded

as part of the primary exit system but were simply

a secondary facility available*



       The gates     are inround figures about       30cms,     or

say one foot narrower          than the recommonded w i d t h   for

such gates according to Paragraph 209 of the 1986 Green

Guide.    There was of course no recommendation of a

specific wi dt h     in the 1976      Green Guide.                   '



       The width     of the gate was evidently a m a t t e r of

d e l i be r at e choice when consideration was given to the

p o i n t in 1985.       The competing interests w ere on the

one hand those associated with matters o f security

and p ublic or de r when for example the Police might

need access within the Pen and preferred a narrower

gate as against those associated with emergencies
   03                               2    0602    476532   BAR   ROP EWK   N OT T M   0?




 and evacuations when for example the Fire Service

would p r e f e r a wider gate.



        It is submitted that the certificating authority

acted reasonably in concluding that the gates as provided

w ere of a width which satisfied the relevant interests.


             Q-V\£__
        Instjjve-trj^e l v ^ n e l ^ r e a c t i o n in the face of this

awful tragedy may be that the gates were so narrow

as to hamper rescue and evacuation attempts*                              It is

submitted that such a conclusion is a tenuous one.

The evidence suggests that spectators w e r e crushed

together inside the Pens but that when they reached

the gate they passed through without being further

obstructed at that point.               Certainly if a comparison

is made against gates of the width recommended in Paragraph

209 of the Green Guide it is suggested that an extra

foot or so would have m ade little if any difference

to the ability to escape or effect any rescue.



        The attitude of the certificating authority was

ever likely to be affected by the way in which the

Green Guide is couched.           Paragraph 209 of the Green

Guide    (which is in similar terms to Paragraph 18.3

of the 1976 Green Guide)          advises that "access to the

pitch must be made as difficult as possible in normal

circumstances while at the same time ensuring that

the Police have effective access to the Terraces for

the purposes of crowd control and enabling the pitch

to be used     (where appropriate)              in the event of serious


                                   2>3
e m e r g e n c y . , , ”.   The priority consideration in the case

of these gates was ever likely to be Police access

as the determining factor since the gates were only

intended as a secondary means of exit.               Conditions

were different at the Kop end              (see CORE page 82) where

gates of the m i n i mu m width were necessary.



         It is therefore submitted that the c e rtificating

authority acted sensibly and properly in allowing these

gates to be present,             that there was no sufficient reason

to require alteration prior to the 15th April 1989

but that in any event the particular reduction in width

in    the order of a foot compared with the          recom me n de d

width in         Paragraph 215 of the 1986 Green Guide made

little if any difference.



(i i )          Evacuation and Emergency Procedures



         It is submitted that these are not matters that

can be dealt with by way of specific detai l in the

Certificate which ought to provide generally,                the

relevant Certificate does make provision as followsj-




(a)             By Condition 6(2)      the Club have to evacuate

                 spectators from the stadium or      any part thereof

                 upon receiving Instructions so      to do from

                 the Police.



                By Condition 9 the Club have to arrange for
             stewards to man the exits,   to patrol the

             stadium and deal with any emergency and have

             to arrange for training exercises relating

             to the action to be taken by such stewards

             in the event of an emergency,



 (c)        By Condition 10 the Club have to ensure that

            egress routes are as so secured as to open

            immediately and easily from the inside and

            to be manned at all times,



(d)         By   Condition 11 the Club have to sign,   illuminate

            and maintain exit routes.



(e)         By   Condition 14(3) a public address system

            audible in all parts o£ the stadium and available

            for priority use by the Police has to be

            provided.



(f)         By   Condition 17 emergency procedure notices

            have to be posted as required by the Chief

            Fire Officer,



       There are of course other and specific pr o visions

r elating to emergencies involving fire.



       It is the City's case that the provision made

within the Certificate is sufficient to ensure that

a ppropriate means for dealing with an emergency were

available and that it would not be reasonable to require
 the certificating authority to have done more.           The

specific training of those who might have to be engaged

in dealing with an emergency and bringing about an

evacuation is not a m a tt e r that would need to be dealt

with by the certificating authority and ought to be

left to those services w ith the expertise and where

appropriate authority to deal with the relevant events.

Moreover since the kind of emergency likely to arise

is one which would probably require a Police p re s en ce

it would     have to     be a Police decision as to how many

Officers     to have     available and   what kind of e xpertise

might be required.       This is not a m a t t e r that can be

dealt w it h in the certificate and of course un d e r Section

2(2)A of     the Act     the provision   of Police services is

reserved     for the     determination   of the Chief Police

Officer.



(iii)        First Aid



        The Certificate makes provision un de r Condition

8 in requiring the Club to provide and m a i n t a i n a suitably

equipped First Aid room {adequately signed and l i t ),

a physician to be available at the First Aid roo m if

required and the provision of First Aid assistance.



        Mr. Bownes told the Inquiry that there w as no

nationally available index of a ppropriate e quipment

for these purposes.      Ho had made specific enquiry of

the G , L , C . , a body whi ch had experience of ma j o r pop

concerts,    but was unable to d is cover any specific detail.
       Originally the County's Officer Working Party

      nade   enquiry of Dr. Bailey,   C ommunity Physician,

 •«   'ae had provided a list of equipment w h i c h the Officer

 •>cking Party had in turn put to the Club.



      However,    that list had ceased to be relevant

by April 1989.      After the City became involved their

Health and Consumer Services Department had become

involved as a member of the Advisory Group and had

made specific enquiry of the Club w i t h regard to First

Aid facilities     (see the evidence of Mr. Gr aham Mackrell)

and the position which resulted was       that the Club undertook

to find out from St. John's A mbulance Brigade what

equipment they recommended and to comply wi t h their

suggestions.      The evidence of Mr. wells of the St.

John*s Ambulance suggests that this arrangement was

put into effect.      Certainly the Club relied upon St.

John's Ambulance to provide First A i d assistants and

to-suggests what equipment was needed.



      Having regard to the obvious expe rt is e o£ the

St. ^John's Ambulance Brigade it is submitted that it

was entirely proper and reasonable to rely on them

as the   source   of advice.   It is though further   submitted

that the certificate by Condition 8 makes sufficient

and appropriate provision in respect of a subject which

by vi rtue of the Green Guide Paragraph 29 indicates

that the provision of First Aid facilities and First

Aid staff is a management responsibility.        It would

be unfair to require the ce rt if i ca t in g authority to
do more than was in fact done here.



      One consequence of relying on St.         J o h n ’s Ambulance

Brigade was that in so far as they relied on their

own e q uipment that equipment was not likely to be available

at the Club on the occasion of any annual inspection.

However,   it was r ea sonable to believe that St.         John's

Ambulance Brigade wo ul d attend any specified activity

with a ppropriate equipment because they invariably

do attend and pro vi d e Fir3t Aid at the events of mass

entertainment,



      Two specific points call for further comment.

Firstly Dr. B a i l e y ’s list did provide for a M in u te-man

Resuscitator and it seems that such an item of equipment

was not p r ov i d e d by the Club or St.   J o h n ’s A mbulance

Brigade.    It is thought that the absence of such an

item of equipment was not culpable because had such

an item been r eq uired then St.      John's A mbulance would

have advised accordingly.        Its absence mo r eo v e r was

not causative.     In the event various resuscitators

were m a d e available by the Fire Service and Ambulance

Service.    It is unlikely that any resuscitator in the

First Aid ro o m would have been got into use e a r l i e r

than the r e suscitators wh i c h w er e in fact used.       It

is unlikely that a Club r e su scitator would have mad e

any di f ference to these events.       Mr. Wells felt that

m o ut h -t o- m ou t h r es uscitation was at least as good.

It was his vi e w a nd that of other, witnesses including

Mr. Higgins of the Fire Service that no equipment would
        have made any difference to what occurred.



             Again there is some confusion as to whether or

        not a Club Physician to attend at the First Aid room

        was provided.    The Club believed that this was so in

        the f o r m of Dr. Purcell.    Dr.   Purcell was regarded

        as the Club Doctor.     Doubtless he would have attended

        if required so to do even though he felt himself to

        be mor e specifically the team Doctor.        it is though

        submitted that the absence of a Club Doct o r to be available

        at the First Aid room (if such was the position) made

        no dif fe r en c e to these events and that was essentially

        the evidence of Dr.   Purcell.




1
SV:.'




                                      -39-
                    DRAFTING NEW CONDITIONS



         Attention was drawn to the lapse of time between

6th May 1986 when Mr. Bownes first referred to re-drafting

the Conditions     (CORE at 314) and the absence of any

perfected revised version by April 1989.         Mr, Bownes'

personal answer is as sot out in the memorandums supplied

to the Inquiry in the course of his evidence and which

was incorporated as part of the written evidence on

w hich the City rely.     So far as his position is concerned

it is w it h respect submitted that Mr. Bownes has not

acted unreasonably or in a dilatory way.



        So far as the City is concerned it must be remembered

t h a t :-



(i)                              conduct of the Administrative

             and Legal Department in respect of the alleged

             delay wa^Vspn^isi«4(ed, in a manner appropriate
                              cwv          *
             to dismi s sa l of action for want of Prosecution
                <k            K      h
             (sugfeo&%ironB that the delay was inordinate

             and inexcuseable)        is inappropriate.

             This was not a ma tter of litigation nor even

             a m a t t e r of any kind of dispute or confrontation

             between the parties.    The task which Mr.

             Bownes h a d set himself and commenced by way

             of the re-drafting was exactly that kind

             of w o r k which could be put to one side when

             work of a higher priority demanded attention.



(ii)         Mr. Bowncs did not feel that Lhere was any


                             -40-
            risk which arose from the conditions as they

            were in the original Certificate.       As mentioned

            earlier he believed that the system was working

            reasonably well and assumed that the ground

            was reasonably safe.     His letters to the

            various parties involved in Lhe Officer Working

            Party which have been referred to above and

            the answers he got would have confirmed a

            view that the re-drafting was not a matter

            of any great urgency.



Uii)        W ha te v er time was taken up in re-drafting

            the new conditions it should not be supposed

            that work in respect of administering the

            system or enforcing the provisions of the

            Act stopped.     The inspections carried on.

            Work continued.



(iv)        It was suggested that additional staff should

            have been taken on,     That ought not to be

            required where the work involved in dealing

            wit h the certificating function ought not

            to have any significant resource implications.

            In any event one member of staff was taken

            on as an extra     namely a clerical assistant

            in 1986.

                                                                .
                                        P^uTcTi?cW«4aU-Awrf1<load



       It is though submitted that the absence of a r e ­

drafted Ce rtificate was not a cause of this tragedy.
                  was was such as to enable reasonable

                  >all match.    The system under the

existing Certificate dealt with issues which were raised

and responded to those issues.     There was clearly a

general belief amongst those involved in organizing

such an event as this semi-final that it could bo organized

safely at this ground with its fixtures and fittings

and w i t h the ma n power which would by arrangement be

available.   That belief was ever likely to affect the

City in dealing wi t h its certificating function.
                              INGRESS



      Two aspects relating to ingress to the ground

need to be considered:      Directional Signs and the Tunnel.



      There is no provision in the C e rtificate w i t h

regard to signs.      The   1976 Green Guide made some provision

under Paragraph 6.6 in recommending a co mprehensive

system of signposting being such as wo ul d clearly indicate

routes to various parts of the ground.         U nf ortunately

this is in a part of the Guide dealing w i t h egress

and it does not obviously relate to di re c ti o na l signs

for the purposes of ingress.



      The same point can be m ad e w i t h regard to the

1986 Green Guide which also deals wit h signposting

under Paragraph 57 but is again in the chapter headed

" Egress” .   Management have to provide d ir ec t io n al flow

signs under Paragraph 2 9 (xv).



     The absence of any detailed r ecommendation in

respect of signposting for the purposes of ingress

in the Green Guide is unfortunate,        it is thought though

that the m a t t e r of signposting is better left to m an agement

to deal with.     The information to be put upon a sign

would pr o bably depend upon the o perational requirements

affecting a pa r ti cu l ar m a tc h and for example if a small

group of spectators attended there wo ul d bo no point

in putting up signs w h i c h i.£ re lied upon might allow
         J
them use of the full w i d t h and length of the terraces.
 The Police in those circumstances wo u l d w i s h to contain

 tha fans within a particular area and the signs ought

 to reflect ^that.

     >

         It is in any event submitted that any suggestion

 that spectators were likely to create d a n g e r for themselves

 through being confused by the lack of appro p ri at e signs

 would have been treated as a remote p o ss ib i li ty p ri o r
                                                          "     '           ^
 to this tragedy .    The likely r e s p o n s e ‘t o   such a suggestion
                                                                                     pduez
 would have been that if spectators found through lack

 of signs that they had in fact gone into an area w h i c h

 was already crowded then for reasons of their own comfort

 they would have left that area and/ o r looked out for                         "k       .
                                                                                         j

 som«where else to go to.



         From the City's point of vie w it is another of

 those matters where they would have expec t ed to be

told if there was a prob l em (Transcript:              29.90 a ) and

in the absence of specific comment arising from probably

the Police or possibly the Club it is unlikely that

this was an issue w hi c h would ever have seen the light

of day at any advisory group meeting.

'(o m a J L
         So far as the tunnel is concerned it is with respect/-

submitted that whilst its gradient does not accord

w ith the Green Guide recommendation it was not unreasonable

for the Certificate to be provided in spite of that.

It would probably have been unr ea so n ab l e to require

extensive work to be done       (see Dr. E a s t w o o d ’s evidence).



         It is unlikely that the tunnel had any effect
on the events of this day and there is a wealt h of

evidence to show that spectators proceeded through

the tunnel without mishap.        Hr,   Foster (Transcript

1:63) described a solid mass in the tunnel walking

steadily;   he was not bu ffeted and was not even aware

it was a slope    (1:80).     Mr. Henn e ss ey had no apparent

problem in the tunnel       (Transcript 2; 48) and suffered

no pushing,     Mr, Cruice had no p r o b l e m in the tunnel

(Transcript 2:94).      Mr.   C u mm ingham descr i be d the catapulting

effect at the end of the tunnel as a result of a surge

in it (Transcript 2:104)       but that was the result of

the numbers involved rath e r than the gradient.



     In any event the "landing"         effect of the level

area at the b o t to m of the tunnel needs to be stressed

since this would have had a compensatory effect after

the gradient.



     Generally it is submitted that the tunnel had

no effect at all on the events of the day and whilst

it may be Dr, Eastwood's view that the tunnel would

need to be looked at again that is a view dependent

very mu c h upon hindsight.



     Dr. Eastwood evide n tl y had what appeared to him

to be good reasons for leaving the tunnel as it was.

It is suggested that the City could not reasonably

have re q uired extensive works on the tunnel since there

was no evidence of any history of complaint or accident

affecting the tunnel althou g h its presence was well
known and It was pr es umably used r egularly and probably

by the majori t y of spectators attending those Terraccs.
     Telephone:          (0742) 726444


       Facsimile:        (0742) 735003


^ c o m Gold 79:         LLA 3020


                         265871 MONREF G (quote ref ILA 3020)
                                                                                                                 c   /  T    Y
             Telex:
                                                                                                                 c o u N C 1 L
Your reference:                AAW/MRK

 Our reference:                AH/EB
                                                                                                                 Administration & Legal
               Date:                                                                                             Department
                                3rd June 1991
                                                                                                                 Head of Department
                                                                                                                 M a rk W ebster,   c ity solicitor



                    Mr A Watt                                                                                    Town Hall
                                                                                                                 Sheffield
                    Keeble Hawson Solicitors
                                                                                                                 S1 2HH
                    Old Cathedral Vicarage
                    St J a m e s ’ Row
                    Sheffield SI 1XA

                    Dear Austin

                    Re Hillsborough Inquest

                   I think you still have the transcripts for days 71 to 79 inclusive of the
                   Inquest.  As I would like a complete set and as Arthur Butler wou l d like
                   extracts from some of those days, I should be grateful if y o u could let me
                   have the missing documents as soon as you are able.

                   I believe                 may also still have a car parking pass for the
                   underground car park, if you are in touch w i t h h i m regarding the transcripts
                   could you check this out as well please.

                    I look forward to hearing from you.

                   Yours sincerely




                   Assistant Head of Department




   Keith Trelfa
   Senior A ssistant H e a d                                           '                  _                                                      Elizabeth Bashforth
   (A d m in istratio n )                                         Assistant H ead (Legal)




                                                       For te le p h o n e enquiries on
   R2220/X14                                               this m a tte r please ring:        .(STD Code 0742)
-
     t,       /
*r   \




                                                           HI L LSBOROUGH FOOTBALL DISASTER - 15TH AP R I L                               1989



              I nfo rm al M e e t i n g of H M C o r o n er ,          Legal Representatives                    and the B e r e av e d,         H e l d on T ue sda y,

              6th M a r c h 1990_________________________________________j____________________________________



              L eg a l R e p r e s e n t a t i v e s :-



              M r F r a s e r - m e m b e r of the           Steering Committee which was                        formed by         the    firms of s o l i c i t o r s

                     in Liverpool who were                   i n s t r u c t e d by f a m i l ie s   s h o r t l y a f t e r the di s as ter .           My

                     Committee           represents        a p p r o x i m a t e l y 150 p r a c t i s e s w i t h i n    that Group,          a bo u t 50

          5          practises have             received          instructions         f r o m b e r e a v e d fa m il ies .        Th o s e   50 p r a c ti s e s,     I

                    u nd e r s t a n d ,   represent         92 of the decea se d,              there b e i n g th r ee b e r e a v e d          famili es w h o

              have e i t h e r n o t       c o n t a c t e d us   as a g r o u p or c o n t a c t e d         solicitors         th e ms e l v e s .    We h a v e h a d

                     general contact              and it w o u l d be o u r i n t e n t i o n s           subj ect       to y o u r app ro val ,        to be

                    p r e s e n t to a s s i s t     the b e r e a v e d a n d the C o u r t         throughout           a n y h e a r i n g yo u may

                     re convene.



              Mr Gregory - represents                     S h e f f i e l d C i t y Council .



              Mr P e t e r D o y l e - D a v i e s A r n o l d C o o p e r So li ci t o rs ,             for S h e f f i e l d W e d n e s d a y F o o t b al l   Club.



     ^ ^ l r Andrew Callaghan                     - D i b b L u p t o n B r oo m h e a d ,    represents           T re n t R e g i o n a l H e a l t h A u t h o r i t y

                    a nd S h e f f i e l d M e t r o p o l i t a n A m b u l a n c e   Service.
     )
              Ms K a t h e r i n e   Thorpe       - Reynolds         P o r t e r Ch a m be r l a i n ,    r e p r e se n t E a s t w o o d & Partners,



              Ms N o r c l i f f e   -     H a m m o n d S u dd ar ds ,   represents          SY Police.



              I want      to i n t r o d u c e M r M e r v y n Jones,          A s s i s t a n t C h i e f C on s ta b l e,     W e s t M i d l a n d s P o l i c e and

              he   is a c t i n g as m y C o r o n e r ’s O f f i c e r for the p u r p o s e s of this m e e t i n g an d also fo r the

              p u r p o s e s of the       In quests.
The p u r p o s e      of this m e e t i n g           is to try and te ll y o u                   some of the             t h i n k i n g w h i c h I h a v e be en

e n g a g e d in,      the p r o p o s a l s w h i c h I h a v e w i t h                r e g a r d to r e s u m i n g the I n q u e s t s      and      to o b t a i n

 from the        le gal     representatives,                confirmation                 that w h a t      I am proposing would appear                           to be

an a c c e p t a b l e w a y      forwar d.           I ought          to,makes it clear,                 that I h a v e h a d a p r e l i m i n a r y

discussion w i t h Hr Fraser and Mr Kennedy                                        last week,          w i t h a v i e w to e x p l o r i n g the v e r y

sub jec t w h i c h w e          are    discussing          today.            These        are the 2 s o li c i to r s            I have had most
                                                                   t     r     f    *
c o r r e s p o n d e n c e wit h.                           ^



j^he s e c o n d t h i n g I w a n t         to    say,     the        fact th at w e are m e e t i n g              today and I a m t h i n k i n g of

re su m in g    the    Inquests           rather       s o o n e r that I h a d o r i g i n a l l y             intended,          does n o t m e a n        that

the D i r e c t o r of P u b l i c         P r o s e c u t i o n s h as       either        i n f o r m e d me of any d e c i s i o n s          or t a k e n any

de ci s io n s w i t h      regard        to this m a t te r .



M y C o r o n e r ’s O f f i c e r w h o       is al so h e a d i n g up                the T e a m w h i c h    is p r e p a r i n g the p a p e r w o r k

for the D P P         in fo rm s m e       th at      the D i r e c t o r at the m o m e n t               is n o t able to take                a decision

b e c au s e all      the p a p e r w o r k h a s n o t b e e n d e l i v e r e d                to him.



As y o u w i l l n o t e         f r o m the      l e t t e r I sent to you,                  it is m y       i n t e n t io n    su b je c t   to this

m e e t i n g to try         a nd r e s u m e      s h o r t l y a f t e r Ea s te r .          Th e    timing     for that has got n o t h i n g

w h a t e v e r to     do w i t h a ny a c t i o n or i n a c t i o n b y the DPP.


)
The p r e s e n t     time       schedule         for s u b m i s s i o n of p a p e rs            to the D PP is such that                     if w e do

resume t h es e        Inquests           shortly        a f t e r Easter,              the p a p e r s w i l l n ot yet h a ve b e e n               submitted

to the D P P         in full.           The p o s i t i o n w i l l be e x a c t l y as                 it is today.             It m a y be     that whilst

w e are p r o c e e d i n g w i t h the In qu es ts,                    the p a p e r s w i l l         go to the DPP and i n d e e d                 the

s u b m i s s i o n m a y w e l l be c o m p l e t e d .          We had considered                     s o m e t h i n g of this       sor t    some time

ago and w e          rejected          it b e c a u s e we w e r e c o n c e r n e d that p e op l e mi g ht                      feel t h a t    th ere         is

s o m e t h i n g g o i n g on w h i c h       I ’m n o t l e t t i n g on about.                      Th a t is not the case.



The r e as o n w h y        I revised my              o p i n i o n as to the p o s s i b i l i t y of re su min g t h e s e                     In q u es t s ,      was

b e c au s e w e     received a letter                 fr om M i s s         Steel,       who    is a m e m b e r of the H i l l s b o r o u g h

Steering Committee,                    in w h i c h    she h a d e n c l o s e d a l e t t e r w h i c h             she a c t u a l l y w r o t e       to the

DPP,    and by c h a n c e w e a l s o h a d a l e t t e r f r o m H a m m o n d Suddards, w ho d i d n ’t a c t u a l l y m a k e

the    same p o i n t b ut it w a s               also    raising points                   r e l a t i n g to timing a n d d i s c l o s u r e .             I

r e a l i s e d th at w h a t M i s s        Steel was           s a yin g w a s         s i m i l a r to m y origina l t h o u g h t s           an d      felt      it

was a p p r o p r i a t e    to r e c o n s i d e r m y e a r l i e r d e c i s i o n w h i c h w a s              to do n o t h i n g u n t i l a f t e r the

DPP h as       an s w er e d .
   I want to indicate three possible       scenarios before the Inquests.     Please listen to these

   bearing in mind what I have said as to my knowledge as to what the DPP is going to do.

   The first one is, having considered all the paper w o r k and the evidence, he decides            to

  bring a prosecution against somebody or bodies,         corporate or otherwise,    but he decides to

  bring a prosecution for a m a j o r offence wh ic h falls within Section 16, and the only one
  which is likely to apply is manslaughter.          If he were to bring such a charge,      then the

  procedure under Section 16 of the C o r o n e r ’s Act is that I would adjourn the Inquest.             At
                            ;!• j I-../'
   he end of the/Town Hall proceedings,       it would be m y option w h e t h e r I resumed the


t  nquests or not.'      I t ’s only fair to say that I ’ve been Coroner n o w for about 4% years and

  I ’ve never yet resumed an Inquest which was adjourned under Section 16.



  Scenario     two is the DPP says no prosecution but that one or more or some other person

  decides that they w i s h to bring a private prosecution against somebody corporate or
  otherwise.    If that were to occur and if a charge were laid,        then Section 16 w o u l d apply

  again with exactly the same consequences.



  The third scenario is that the DPP says no prosecution,         and nob o d y else wants   to proceed.

  In those cases, we would in a normal run of events,         resume the Inquests and complete it

  within the    ......   that I consider appropriate to the circumstances.



^ ^ 1 d o n ’t k n o w which of these scenarios will apply but if we were to resume before the DPP

 5 makes a decision,     and if a Section 16 situation w e r e then to arise,   I would immediately

  after resume the Inquests purely and simply for the purposes of adjourning un d e r the

  provisions of'Section 16 in order to comply with the Act.           That wo u l d be a formality but

  w o u l d n ’t take very long but in a sense,   getting the information now, would have      the

  advantage that we wo u l d be able to deal with it fairly quickly.         One of the reasons you

  adjourn under Section 16 is that families can get their death certificates w h i c h they

  c a n ’t normally do until the Inquest is complete.
Following receipt of Hiss S t e e l ’s letter and my reconsideration,      I got in touch w it h the

DPP or one of his representatives,       to see w h et h e r he wou l d agree that I should resume the

Inquests on a limited basis.      What I proposed to h i m was that we wou l d resume for the

purposes of   taking the medical evidence,      and we would deal w i t h the alcdhol levels of    the

individuals   at that time.     We w o u l d endeavour to put before my Court of where the

deceased were within the Stadium and if possible,        evidence of where they were seen either

alive or dead at various points w i t h i n the Stadium and probably,     some evidence as to how

they got to the Stadium.      We w o u l d not deal w i th h o w or why they died or who is to blame.

The reason for this is:



a) the DPP wo u ld not agree to me resuming the Inquests if we were to deal with

controversial matters.     He wo u l d not agree if we dealt with matters which would impair
his investigations or the scope for action which he might w is h to take.          It is in the

interests of justice that nothing I do should muddy the waters and perhaps hinder other

proceedings   wh i c h make take place   in a different Court.



If I resume   these Inquests,    they will be of a limited nature.      They will be designed to

be non adverserial,   to present the factual evidence.        The way I want the evidence

presented to meet the legitimate requirements of everyone involved is as follows.
i

We will deal with pos.t mortems.      Some Inquests will require the Pathologist to be present
others will only require documentary evidence.         We will discuss this with the

Hillsborough Steering Committee and other relevant parties to determine whether the

Pathologist is required.



We will deal w i t h the alcohol levels of the deceased.       They were all done apart from one,

and we will tell you at the Inquests what the individual levels were. Dr Forrest will

attend some of the Inquests     to formally prove his evidence and if there is any individual
case where the alcohol level mig h t be controversial, we will ask Dr Forrest to attend.
My intention is to hold a short Inquest for each individual deceased and complete the

evidence as far as we are going.
    W Midlands Police are preparing the remainder of the evidence following Lord Justice

    T a y l o r ’s report and the publication of the interim report and submission to the DPP.                       The

    Inquest cannot be held until the DPP has completed his work,                   so I said get the paper work
    done for the DPP, my documents can come later.               A file of each individual deceased will

    be presented to me containing copy statements together w i t h a summary by one of the W

    M i d l a n d s ’ Police Officers wh i c h will summarise,   factually and non a d v e r s e r i a l l y , the

    evidence of the witnesses.        We intend to present that summary to Court.


|                                                       -A
” n order to help the legal representatives and the bereaved families, we intend to

    circulate the summaries before the particular Inquest to enable comments                       regarding

    inaccuracies or unclear statements,         to be made to me via legal representatives.                    If it
    is possible, we will either get the Summary Officer, who will be here and will be giving

    evidence,   to elaborate on the particular point, or I might decide it is possible to get a

    witness to deal w i t h that point,     or we will read a w i t n e s s ’ statement by way of

    documentary evidence on that point.          Under no circumstances are we going to call any S

    Yorkshire Police Officer to the hearing.
    The Officers will e i t h e r .themselves or possibly other W M i d l a n d s ’ Officers, will explain

    to me the identification procedures and I am expecting to make use of plans where they

    will indicate on the plan where a deceased was        seen.   I do not intend to use the video in

    the Court and I am going to be very reluctant to look at either video stills or

    photographs.    Partly because   it is logistically very difficult and partly because I d o n ’t

    think it is particularly helpful and because in many cases the photographs or video

    stills have already been seen by members of the family because they helped in locating
^and identifying some of the deceased.



    In summary, we want to have a limited Inquest, we w a n t to present the evidence in a

    particular form and we d o n ’t want to do anything w h i c h could possibly be construed as

    impeding the DPP or could constitute an attack or criticism of any person or persons or
    corporate/incorporate body.



    Are there any questions?



    Mr Fraser - the only question w h i c h you may come to ...........       is the question of timing

    of the issuing of the summaries.       The logistics from our end w o u l d be, as I anticipate

    it, the solicitors will want to go through those summaries in some detail with families,

    for those families who want to see them,       and they will then have to report to yourself

    and to us and explain w h e t h e r or not they want to be here, what questions if any they
\
'have to put. Those questions will have to be notified to Mr J o n e s ’ Officers and answers
    found if they are available.      So the logistics of that may occupy some time.          Is it

    possible when the summaries are complete to give an indication of when they might be

    issued?



    I am well aware that the more time I give you,        the easier it is.     All I can say is that 1

    have got to read them first,     but we will try and let you have them as soon as possible.

    Please bear in mind the limitations,      the summaries will be designed to give the factual

    evidence,   so you will k n o w the names of the witnesses and you will know what they are
    saying w i t h regard to that particular factual bit of evidence.
 Mr Fraser - h o w far in terms of time do you anticipate the summaries will go,            to the

    point of identification or beyond,     or not as far.: as that?



    I would expect that they w o u l d go at least up to the temporary mortuary and possibly up

    to the point of identification.      The identification in a sense will be dealt with at the
 opening so we may well stop at that point.         The objective is to trace each individual

    from the moment he left home to the point in time w h e n he was     in the temporary mortuary.

|We may not succeed but that is the intention.          We feel that is what you want to know.

i
We will probably have available but I d o n ’t think hte will circulate,         documents called

 anna-cappas,    these are rather nice summary      charts which have clocks on them and it is

easier from that to see where certain events occurred.            There will be a copy in Court on
 the relevant day.



 It would be unreasonable for people like Dr Forrest who did the blood alcohols,              to sit

here for every Inquest,       so what I intend to do is to ask Dr Forrest to come along on Day

1 and to prove formally       tothe Court, his evidence and to explain as far          as is necessary,

the method used for the test.          We also want to have Inspector Leighton and may be one or

two others, who will explain the anna-cappas,          the codings,   etc.   I am also considering

asking probably Professor Usher to give an overview of the pathology of the type of

 injury which occurred.
}
We are aiming to hold eight Inquests per day.          We want to have enough time so that each

individual family can feel that their particular loved one has been given full

consideration.      This means the duration is likely to be 2% to 3 weeks of sittings.

Clearly for each Inquest,      i t ’s a relatively short period of time but for me and the lega]

 representatives and for the Jury,      i t ’s weeks of stress and i t ’s not   fair   to them to make

 this longer than it has      to be.    But I d o n ’t intend to rush it, they have    to be as

thorough and sympathetic wit h i n the limits       I have indicated to you.     I want people    to be
able to leave at the end of the day and be          able to say, well we know we h a v e n ’t heard al!
the answers,     but we kn o w more than we did when we started.
The Inquests will not be held in numerical or alphabetical order.               The listing of the

cases is a very difficult p r o b le m and I d o n ’t think we have solved it.       I had made up my

mind that we were going to do t h e m .in Pathologist order,       in a sense that is still the

order.    But in a few cases, more than one person died in a family,            and because of the way
their identifications were done and the w a y the post m o rt e m was done,        it w a s n ’t always

the same Pathologist who dealt w i t h family units.       For that reason alone, we will have to

break the general order because I d o n ’t want to deal with the same family on different

days.    There are other factors that come into play.
I
I appreciate that it may be important to you, but £he decision as to wh i c h order we are

going to take the cases is going to be mine and my Officers.            We will certainly not want

to inconvenience anybody deliberately,       I think it will be an impossible task to try and
take individual preferences     into account,   or if we do take them into account,         they would

come at the bottom of the list.       We are conscious of where people live and that they have

to come a long way in many cases.



My initial intention was     to hold the limited Inquests,       assuming that    we proceed, without

a Jury being present.     I have reflected on this and despite the fact that the Jury at

this stage will not have very much to do other than to listen,            I feel that we will have

to have a Jury present for each Inquest.        I think you should assume that we will be

dealing with a Jury.     Even if this were an Inquest      from start to finish,      an Inquest    is

not an adverserial procedure.        The job of the Jury   is to reach a verdict      on the evidence

which they hear in the C o u r t .



I intend,   assuming that we proceed, holding the Inquests here at the Medico-Legal Centre.

I intend to arrange for the proceedings to be transcribed so that transcripts will be

available in a reasonable time.        I d o n ’t think there is any need for them to be available
on a next-day basis.     Of course,    they will have to   be paid for.



Do any of the lawyers think this is a non-starter?



Mr Fraser - in view of your opening remarks, we have had an opportunity to discuss these

proposals at some length     and there is a general     ......    towards the    idea and you are to
be commended for putting     forward the suggestions you have.
Are there any other legal representatives who have any other comments as to whether we

should proceed on this basis?                          J



I am well aware that there is a Hillsborough Support Group and I want you to feel that I

w o u l d n ’t do anything to h a r m or hinder your endeavours.    On the other hand,   I think we

have got to have correct lines of communication.           Probably the right way of looking at

this is to say the support groups are really family orientated.             I k n o w that you have

^thought of other groups,    for example the Jury, who may need some support at some point in

"the future, but I am talking about the families now.          What I intend to do is, we will be
listing hopefully w h e n we anticipate the Inquests will be held and what we will probably

do* is give you a provisional date and try and confirm as soon as possible.              If somebody

could be nominated from the Hillsborough Support Group,            I or my Officers would endeavour

to inform you of the dates wh e n a particular family will be involved.           Once we have done

that, we would expect the solicitors to liaise w i t h the Support Group.          The lines of

communication should be through the solicitor rather than through the Coroner to relieve

me of a certain amount of work.       It may well be if time allows that we will arrange for

an informal meeting w i t h the Hillsborough Support Group and myself and maybe the
Officers.   If a family is informed of the Inquest and they do not arrive, we will proceed

with the Inquest.



iWe will try to have refreshments available in the building.



The press will be entitled to be present at these Inquests.            It is public Court and they
punching people to get over the barriers’



                                                                                                                                                                                              DOWN
                                                                                                                                                                                              KILLER
                                                                                                                                                                                              GAGES
                                                                                                                                                                                            THE man la charge of safety at tbe Hillsbor­
                                                                                                                                                                                            ough stadium today called for afi the security
                                                                                                                                                                                            fences around pitches at British soccer grounds
                                                                                                                                                                                            to be polled down.
                                                                                                                                                                                               “I h m always recommended that they shosld Dot
                                                                                                                                                                                            have been pot op, now they should be paDed down,”
                                                                                                                                                                                            said coBsaltant engineer Dr Bill Eastwood.
                                                                                                                                                                                               “There are two problems in football grotmds, bool-
                                                                                                                                                                                                      and safety. Perimeter fencing only helps with
                                                                                                                                                                                            the first problem.**
                                                                                                                                                                                               His call came as aa international search for com­
                                                                                                                                                                                            mon solutions to crowd control problems was urged
                                                                                                                                                                                            today by FIFA, the game’s world governing body.
                                                                                                                                                                                               Dr Eastwood has been responsible for research into
                                                                                                                                                                                            safety at Sheffield Wednesday’s ground since 1979.
                                                                                                                                                                                               And after Saturday’s disaster be was adamant that
                                                                                                                                                                                            everything possible had been done to make Hffisbor-
                                                                                                                                                                                            oogh safe.
                                                                                                                                                                                               “The testing proce-
                                                                                                                                                                                            dares bwe aeMtyfe^e* a t
                                                                                                                                                                                            ahy 1 g j i t is the
                                                                                                                                                                                            safest ground in England,
                                                                                                                                                                                            1 have always said that,”
                                                                                                                                                                                               Five Football League




       to save
                                                                                                                                                                                            dobs employ Dr East-
                                                                                                                                                                                            wood-to carry oat safety'
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ■> at tbetr grounds. .

                                                                                                                                                                                               He revealed that Home
                                                                                                                                                                                            Office rales require all
                                                                                                                                                                                            barriers at soccer stad­
                                                                                                                                                                                            iums to be checked once
                                                                                                                                                                                            every fire years.
                                                                                                                                                                                               The barriers in tbe
                                                                                                                                                                                            Lepptngs      Lane    End
                                                                                                                                                                                            where tbe fans were




y.girls-father
                                                                                                                                                                                            crashed to death had
                                                                                                                                                                                            passed afl tbe necessary
                                                                                                                                                                                            tests last July.
                                                                                                                                                                                               He said the force push­
                                                                                                                                                                                            ing tbe fans on to the
                                                                                                                                                                                            barriers would be equi­
                                                                                                                                                                                            valent to almost half a
                                                                                                                                                                                            ion — equal to tbe
                                                                                                                                                                                            weight of a car.                <T- .      Eastwood:
                                                                                                                                                                                              A set formula b used          "Everything     pos­
ier who battled in vain                                                                                                                                                                                                       sible w as done"
SDSBarougti Is thinking                   POLICE TO FACE                                                           was on top of the world at getting a ticket — and the
                                                                                                                   next thing, he’s dead.”
                                                                                                                                                                                            to calculate bow many
                                                                                                                                                                                            fans are allowed into tbe         iums should now become
Bon against the police
                                                                                                                                                                                           ''SETgSL'T?.                                            bare to
polities.
,• Hicks, 43, helped to give
.citation to his daughters
                                             LEGAL ACTION?
                                          They were there in good time, which meant they were
                                                                                                                    s o n T f a t h e r of*            , ? 0m br° ,h' r Da"iel Joh"-
                                                                                                                                                                                              **Tbe autom atic count-
                                                                                                                                                                                            teg system on tbe turn­
                                                                                                                                                                                            stiles showed there was
                                                                                                                                                                                            stiH   room    for   another
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                come to        terms with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               smaller capacities than
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                they have been used to.”
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                he said,
j, 15.                                                                                                                                                                                       WOO people,” he added,
                                          down the front — and that was the problem.                                                                                                                                               “ It is undoubtedly the
 r L i v e ^ B supporters who                                                                                                                                                               “ It’s Dot for me to say            c*se that you have more
i A n N B fd ied .                    „ 2 . A ° f d, 5e! ,ha' whcre the girls were was getting very                 h^w/S,                                                  10,dmnry        what went wrong. ’*                tensioo and pressure in
jisidering taking legal action        «ODle w '                    10        of the senior officers that         terrace wt „ ° " h^                            - " * middle of the            Dr Eastwood doubts             standing         areas    of
per on his own or with other          S  £ r The officer £ ' " 8 was
                                                                 Crus5-ed--  I . didn't 8 " a " O ' P olite                                                                                 that easily collapsable            grounds.
                                      answer.                         dismissive   of me.                                                                                                   security fences around the
                                                                                                                 beiterget M e V ' ’1 f'1K" 6 “» ,0°                      ~                                                     . “ If )oo do put in seats
: the one thing we did as a             "I saw Victoria being passed over the heads of people                                                                                               pitch       would        hive      ®*re is a reasonable
 a family any more.”                 and over the fence and on to the pitch. I managed to get                                                                                              prereoted the disaster,            expectation        that you
 also at the match and had a                                                                                                                                                                   "As     an   engineer    I     would not need perimeter
                                     there°’’        P" Ch a" d ,her' was Sarah and vict°n a lying                                                                                         would say that it h                safety fences, which con­
                                                                                                                                                                                           Wghly Improbable that              tributed so oucb to the
,ho was reading chemistry at            He said both girls has been given mouth-to-mouth                                                                                                   one could design collaps­          loss of life at HOisbor­
 9 last Monday and the trip to       resuscitation and that he had also tried to revive Victoria                                                                                           able feoces that would             ough.”
    for her.                         as he travelled in an ambulance with her to the Northern                                                                                              not lead to fans getting
                                    General Hospital.                                                                                                                                                                             And former sports
, a pupil of Haberdashers*                                                                                                             ‘Disgraceful’                                       caught     in the mechan­          minister Denis Howell
jt London, were Kop season                                                                                                                                                                 ism,” he said.                     said; “ Having 10,000
                                     h o s p i l a f ^ th3t    &lrah  mUSt   haCe   dicd  heforc rcaching         Mr Wilfred Whelan, the father of victim Ian Whelan
md saw all home matches.                                                                                        a 19-year-old office clerk of Warrington, said: “ I think                     Horne    Secretary Doug­        [ m s standing together on
                                                                                                                  a disgraceful the way the police reacted to the violence                las Hurd was also facing            the terraces has got to he
v his shouted warning that              Mr Hicks said: “ I think the fence was partly to blame.                                                                                           urgent demands from
   was dismissed by a senior                                                                                    omside the ground, letting them come in and pu h fo“                                                          a thing of the past.”
                                    It was too strong. Aiso, 1 think the police were so busy                                                                                              MPs to order the imme­
i was done to get spectators                                                                                   ward. It s wrong that that can happen."                 .                                                          Many safety measures
                                    trying to prevent a pitch invasion that they didn’t see                                                                                               diate provision of escape           were Introduced after the
Trace.                             what was happening.”                                                        at Hilldhllrla"'i,a 47' y' 1ar'°!d P™ Kr' witnessed the scenes             routes from the “killer            disaster at Ibrox Park in
   Middlesex, his wife and the                                                                                 ^H illsborough on television and feared at once for his
                                       Mr Ronnie GilhooJey, father of the youngest of the                                                                                                eages” at English football           Glasgow In 1971 »hea 66
 good time for the match,                                                                                                                                                                grounds.                            people died.
                                   victims so far named, ten-year-old John Gilhooley, cried                       He could not get any definite information and ran t
ing director of a West Mid-        as he said at his home in Radway Road, Huyton, near                         round hospitals, learning Ian was not on any of their                         One MP said that If it              Further improvements,
  and I got into the ground        Liverpool:*! carl’t face talking about it.”                                                                                                           had beeo possible to dis­           mainly covering fire pre­
i a different section to me.           A neighbour said: ’’John went out with his unde. He                           put two and two together and got the obvious,” he                   mantle      the cages, those        cautions, were demanded
                                                                                                                                                                                           penned Inside like ani­           tfter the blaze at Brad­
                                                                                                                                                        "This morning, police            mals” at Hillsborough               ford City In 1985 when
                                                                                                                                                     told me my son’s descrip­           might hart be** iWc io              53 fans died.




 H IS GUTTED
                                                                                                                                                     tion fitted s i r o f their                                                 The trust receives over
                                                                                                                                                    ^ d ie s , «xl I'M been to                      move «fi
                                                                                                                                                                                                      «    Hr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         year from the
                                                                                                                                                    Sheffield and identified                                                                 >ters, over
                                                                                                                                                    him. They tell me be was             wire, be m et, f t , T«ry                           foes to the
                                                                                                                                                    asphyxiated,"                                                                                 Ground
                                                                                                                                                        Relativist      «f     i$ .                                                           k TnKf to
                                                                                                                                                    yfar-old ^             fU Hip                                                             j e tiubs.
                                                                                                                                                    Hammond                   to o
                                                                                                                                                                                            Mr       T«Uy                                        "Executive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -------- '* * d : “ We
                                                                                                                                                    upset to {g& fe •»—
                                                                                                                                                    home in Fun-mum 1                    **<&"»«. pSt            .                                 «er foot-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    cfobs to get to their
                                                                                                                                                    Aigburth, Urcrpoot.                       ®M Hfc l*» IWf oeen
                                                                                                                                                                                        done before and that wire              supporters and sav: ‘Are
                                                                                                                                                       But neighbour M n               cotters had to he used.                 yoo sure that la this day
                                                                                                                                                   D on Willis said: *'He was                                                  and age, you want to go
                                                                                                                                                   a lovely, polite boy from                “We must ensure that
                                                                                                                                                                                       such      killer  barriers   can        through turnstiles and a
                                                                                                                                                   a very nice family. He                                                      tunnel and stand in a
                                                                                                                                                   was football mad and                be dismantled hy the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               place like that?*"
                                                                                                                                                   was always playing foot-            authorities if they see an
                                                                                                                                                                                       emergency looming, hy                  l»*e     to be a re­
                                                                                                                                                   ball • with his younger                                                   assessment of safety
                                                                                                                                                   brother Graham,                     toning a key or some
                                                                                                                                                                                       other device,”                        fences    in fIOnt of tei-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             races.
                                                                                                                                                            ‘Playing’                      Labour MP Mr David
                                                                                                                                                                                       Blunkett, whose Sheffield                 •Nottingham         Forest
                                                                                                                                                                                       constituency includes the             fans had a choice of three
                                                                                                                                                      "He had a full Liver­                                                  exits from the M l, to
                                                                                                                                                  pool strip and we would              Hillsborough           ground,
                                                                                                                                                                                      said: "There were an                   take them to tbe ground,
                                                                                                                                                  often hear them laughing                                                   but travelling Liverpool
                                                                                                                                                  and playing in the back             enormous number of
                                                                                                                                                                                      people arriving in the last           fans    all arrived by tbe
                                                                                                                                                  garden."                                                                  same route leading to
                                                                                                                                                      Christine Jones, 27, a          20     mioutes,    which   in  a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            greater congestion.
                                                                                                                                                  hospital        radiographer,       game of this importance
                                                                                                                                                                                      is quite unacceptable.”                   Graham MackreN, sec­
                                                                                                                                                  died in the crush, while                                                  t a r y of Sheffield Wed­
                                                                                                                                                  her husband, Steve sur­                Many observers believe
                                                                                                                                                                                      grounds will have to be               nesday,    said: “The prepa­
                                                                                                                                                  vived without serious                                                     rations we made were
                                                                                                                                                 injury.                              converted to all-sealer
                                                                                                                                                                                     stadiums to avoid a repe­              exactly    the same as last
                                                                                                                                                    Together, they had fol­                                                 year, but Liverpool fans
                                                                                                                                                 lowing Liverpool all over           tition        of     Saturday’s
                                                                                                                                                                                     tragedy.                              for    that   section of the
                                                                                                                                                 the country, sharing a                                                    ground were very late
                                                                                                                                                 fanatical passion for the               The move would dras­              arriving.
                                                                                                                                                 dub.                                tically reduce the capac­
                                                                                                                                                                                     ity of grounds and radic­                  A steward supervising
                                                                                                                                                    Neighbours of the                                                      the entrance* of fans at
                                                                                                                                                couple in Marsh Way,                 ally alter football spectat-
                                                                                                                                                                                    ing^habits.                            ,h* Lepping Lane End
                                                                                                                                                Preston, were stunned by                                                 r saidt “There were fans
                                                                                                                                                the news.                               - - Richard Faulkner,
                                                                                                                                                                                    deputy chairman of the                 climbing over the wall
                                                                                                                                                    One said: "They were                                                   *nd I shouted to the
  t will grieve for the football families of Liverpool who                                                                                      Liverpool nuts. They                Football Trust, which
  ive lost (oved ones.”                                                 at   Hillsborough    with  his  children,     said:  "How      <-.n                                         gires grants to dubs for               police   not to let them in,
                                                                        an,™ *.justify t o ? It-50nly a               “ ^ 1. H° W               seemed     to  go  everywhere                                              but one constable said
                                                                                                                                                                                    safety work, said he
                                                                            I m il never, erer, watch , fo o tb tll m atch a fl„ thb. >• together.”                                                                       they     were    better inside
                        Meeting                                            Liverpool manager Kenny Dalglish said; « j,
                                                                                                                                                                                    believed all-seater stad-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          the ground than out"
   And M r Graham Kelly, the FA Chier Executive, sheer numbers o f people, sheer volume that caused It
   ded; “M r Clough has indicated that he will do There was nothing we could do.”                                                       ’
  latever we deride about the semi-final,”                                                                                                          E 'a i n ^ P ^ c h a T d * ^ S t e w a ^ D a v i d ‘'paul°peaul m " 1" '
  ■niere "ill be a meeting on Tuesday to make a the^Heysel £ £ £ * "                                      11 « “ « *• compared with                 Jenn y McE hatton Natalie Mar*;* i u li au * Myers,
  cision on Die future of this season's FA Cup in light of
  ! disaster,                                              ‘                                                                                         S K T & r ■’ s°"                                                      Br
 Former Notts County and Scotland star Don Masson,
                                                                                                                          •   r~ i H P t >



                                                                                            pjc i > 6


      First aid volunteers struggle to c o m e to term s w ith h o rro r
Si

     Angels of
     mercyin

         disaster
  H A R R O W I N G scenes o f despair amid the
  carnage o f th e H illsborough disaster will be
  etched forever in to the m emories o f Sheffield’s
  St Jo h n A m bu lan ce Brigade volunteers.
     T h e 30 -strong Si J o h n ' s co ntin g en t at the fateful semi­
  final were all set for ju st a n o t h e r big game
      ■P ien c a t a s t r o p h e stru ck         Bv N jge] Morris
  a t tne L epp m gs L a n e End.                            p
    lie cheers a n d smiles t u rned
                                              Royal Hallamshire
0 b scre am s o f terro r.
                                              H o s p i t a l s in t h e i r
      F o r Pete Allen. Divisional            am bulance's.
  S u p e r i n t e n d e n t fo r the
                                                  T e e n a g e c a d e t s a n d Si
  W o o d sea t5 Div ision it was
                                              J o h n veterans alike helped
  the beginning o f th e w orst
                                              stricken fans, they did no t
  d a y tn his life
                                              leav e th e g ro u n d unt i l
      S tan din g by the bar rier s           7.3 0pm when there was no
  with a n oxygen cy linder he                m o r e to be done.
  gave i m m e d i a t e as sistance               Sheffield St Jo h n A m b u ­
  t o those whose very lives                  lance volunteers go to every
  were being squeezed o u t of                sp ortin g event in the city, be
  t h e m in the surge.                       it t h e C r u c i b l e o r
                                              Hillsb orough.
              Survivors                            Pete said: “ I d o n 't things
        H e said: “ I thin k I m v            will ever be the same again.
   m i n d j u st went b la n k a t this      H illsb o ro u g h can never be
   p o in t I just d id w h a t ! co uld      f orgotten. All the m e m o n e s
   t o give oxygen t h r o u g h the          will k e e p f l o o d i n g b a c k
   fencing, they j u st c o u l d n 't        e v e ry tim e we are a t the
   b r e a t h Y o u c o u ld n o t c o m ­   ground."
  p re h e n d ex actly w h a t was                A week o n an d the v o lun ­
  happening "                                 teers are j u st starting t o get
       As po lice s u p p o r te r s          o v er the su fferin g they
  p ulled survivors over the                  witnessed.
  b a r ri e r St J o h n v o lun teers           M a n y have had expert
  b e g a n g iv in g m o u th to             c o u n s e l l i n g t o h e l p th e m
k m o u t h t r y i n g t o s a v e as        co m e to terms with the t r a u ­
J m a n y lives as possible.                  m a On S atu rd ay they
       T h e y m a n n e d th e first aid
  p o s ts for th e wa l k i n g
  w ou n d ed a n d eventually
  b e g a n to ferry the in ju re d t o
  th e N o r t h e r n G e n e r a l a n d
                                              atten d ed th e service at the
                                              Bram all L an e ground.
                                                  Pete said: “ I d o n 't think
                                              th ere w as one o f us w h o
                                              d i d n 't cr v
                                                                                         v
                                                                                         A volunteer helps a stricken fan hurt during the disaster
                                                                                                                                         NB   T h is d r a w i n g h a s been p r e p a r e d
                                                                                                                                              b y r e fe r e n c e to
                                                                                                                                              E as tw o o d & P a r t n e r s d r a w i n g 8 9 4 5 /1 A
                                                                                                                   NORTH STAND
                                                                                                                                               R a lp h     B r a d e & A s s o c ia te s d r a w i n g              134 0 /0 5 A




                                                                                                                                              For       the    purpose    of            th is   ex ercise    tu rn s tile
                                                                                                                                              requ irem en ts    are   based            on    I p e r 700 s p e c t a t o r s
                                                                                                                                              ra th e r     than   the   less            d em and ing    1  per         750
      o                                                                                                                                       sp ectators.


      S:                                                                                                                                                                                                           Sh ow n on
                                                                                                                                              S p ec ta tor A rea/N o s          1 :7 5 0       1 : 70 0           d raw in g

                                                                                                                                              1      2600                        3.4 6            3.7
                                                                                                                                              2

                                                                                                                                              3
                                                                                                                                                    2200                         2.9              3.14
                                                                                                                                              4
(i
                                                                                                                                                    5300                                          7.5
                                                                                               ^ (p o lic e   access w a y o n l y )

                                                                                                                                              West S t a n d
                                      T errace    .6 ,7                                                                                       Total              4465            5.9              6.3                  8   (4+4)
                                      8t
                                                                                                                                              North Stand        9700           12 .9           13.8                 14

                                      West Stand
                                      At                                                                                                                       24265            32.16           34.44               38
     rHIS   AREA WOl      ACCOMMODATE 7000                                                                                                    A v e r a g e o f 638 p e r   tu rn s tile

                                       T errace 3 ,*                                                                                          The      p la n    shows     that    w ith     the    tu rn s tile    lay ou t
                                       4t                                                                                                     m o d ified     to   m axim ise     th e    q u euin g    area      between
                                                                                                                                               L ep pin gs       Lane      gates       and      the     tu rn s tile s     a
                                                                                                                                              crush       of    7000    sp ectators        can    b e ac c o m m o d a t e d
                                                                                                                                              (p lu s      1600    in     th e   re lie f     zone)     compared          to
                                        West Stand                                                                                            th e    existing      ca p a city    of     4860.       F ig u re s    based
                                        4t                                                                                                    on 54 p e o p l e p e r 10mJ .
                                       T errace I & 2
                                                                                                                                              Q ueuing    b a rrie rs     sh ould      b e m o v e a b l e to p r o v i d e
                                       4t
                                                                                                                                              m aximum       fle x ib ility   d ep en din g      on t h e     fix tu re ;
                                                                                                                                              and    to e n a b l e     m axim um        space    to b e     p ro vid e d
                                                                      WEST STAND                                                              in th e e v e n t of a n i n c i d e n t .

                                                                                                                                              E a c h set o f t u r n s t i l e s h a s i t s   own        ex it   c a lc u la te d
                                                                                                                                              in a c c o r d a n c e w i t h th e G u i d e .




              R E L IE F ZONE WOULD A C C O M M O D A T ^ I600




                                 SUGGESTED S EC URITY GATES                                                   SOUTH STAND


                                                                                                                   I I                   HILLSBOROUGH S TEERING C O M M IT T E E

                                                                                            H o lfo rd     A s so ciates                                                                             Drawing N u m b e r
                                                                                                                                         A L T E R N A TIV E ENTRANCE
                                                                                            Chartered Architects &Planning Consultants
                                                                                                                                         ARRANGEMENT AT LE P PING SLANE
                                                                 V IS IT O R S TEAM COACH   Queen Building, 8 Dale Street
                                                                                            Liverpool L2 4TQ
                                                                                            Telephone 051 2 2 7   2881                   Date I1-6& 9     Sc al e l '500      Dr aw n ICmc-T
                                                                                                                                                                                                           HU          -      1
      THE
HILLSBOROUGH
    INQUIRY
                                          Department of Land & Planning,

                                          Building Surveyor's Division,

                                          Town Hall,

                                          Sheffield.

                                          SI 2EH




HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB




BENJAMIN JAMES GORDON LEVERS will say:-




I am a Corporate Municipal Building Surveyor, a Fellow of the

Incorporated Association of Architects and Surveyors.      From 1955 - 1962

I was employed as a District Surveyor in the office of the City

Engineers,   Surveyor and Planning Officer of Sheffield.     Since 1962 I

have held the position of Principal Surveyor [Dangerous Structures] in

the Department of Land and Planning.
Following the events of 15th April 1989 at the Sheffield Wednesday

Football          Ground,          a detailed survey was                        carried out on            the       enclosure

wall adjoining the West Stand and the structure forming the cluster of

turnstiles at the Leppings Lane entrance to the ground.



ENCLOSURE W A L L              -    has     been    constructed                 in    common       red    bricks      set     in

black ash mortar.                    The wall averages 2^41 metres high and 82.4 metres

long, with 325 mm. piers at 6.95 metre centres.                                                 At a point,         approxi­

mately       47     metres          from     gate       "C"     the        wall       forms       a    dog-leg       for    its

remaining length.                    The wall was visibly out of plumb,                                  the section of

wall    from gate          "C"        to    the dog-leg              leaned inwards               to varying degrees

between       25 mm.       - 65 mm.           and the plumb measurement                               for the remaining

length       of     wall           varied     between           15        mm.    -        110    mm.     in    an    outward

direction,           Appendices 1 & 2,Vhen slight pressure was exerted on the

wall it rocked from its base and there was a distinct ripple down the

full    length       of    the        enclosure wall.                 Electric             pendant       light      fittings

secured to the brickwork and projecting two and one-half metres higher

than the coping stones highlighted the movement.

The    condition          of       the wall was           found to be in reasonable repair with

pointing       having              been    carried        out        as    and       when       necessary.           At     the

time of my inspection there were                              small areas                 of brickwork in need of

pointing in the lower and upper sections of the wall.

It    was    noted,       where           the wall was          in need              of    pointing      the black          ash

mortar       joints    were exposed,                and    this           revealed the mortar having lost

much    of    its    consistency             and to have              converted             into a powdery state.

There was evidence of a building having been demolished adjoining Gate 1

the rear wall of this building,                           which abutted the enclosure wall, had

been left but there was no evidence of this wall having been tied into

the    enclosure wall                and was       found to be in a loose condition.                                   There

was    evidence of what                   could have been a single width door having been

blocked       up,    in    brickwork,              at   a point            23    metres          from    the    Gate       "C".
T O K N S T IT -K S    -    structure         has       been    formed      out     of    common           red    brickwork

set in black ash mortar and reinforced concrete.                                              The structure is of

a    complicated                design       and       unless     opened       up       would        be    difficult       to

assess.           There are two batches of turnstile,                               one group of sixteen and

the other of seven.                         Principally,         the structure is of brickwork with

strengthening               piers       with       a reinforced          concrete         roof       and openings          of

pairs of single doors for access purposes.

The main          group         of    turnstiles          has    been constructed in a curved form,

with       a      central            panel     of       brickwork           supported           on        steelwork       and

projecting in front of the turnstiles to form a permanent parapet name

sign       "HILLSBOROUGH".                    The       parapet        stands       2.080       metres           above    the

reinforced             concrete        roof       to    the rear of          the     front elevation.                   Plumb

measurements               taken      from a point              1.8 metres         from the roof level gave

readings of between 65 mm. - 70 m m . , with the parapet leaning into the

site.          When        slight      pressure was             exerted no          significant            movement was

noted.

On    either          side      of    this     central parapet              feature       a low wall              had    been

constructed             with         elevated       piers       with    wrought          iron    railing          between.

This     form of            construction            also    applied         to the       second group of seven

turnstiles.                 There was         evidence          of    repairs       in new brickwork                   to the

parapet        and turnstiles                in specific areas.                   Maintenance work had been

carried         out        as   an when        necessary         along with             modifications             to    these

cluster         of      turnstiles.                There       were    areas      of     brickwork           in    need    of

pointing.               Three        brick     piers       were       loose       and    on     others       the       coping

stones         could be          removed;         one was        found on the floor and the railing

disturbed.



CONCLUSION

The Leppings Lane entrance                             to the Football Ground is probably a part

of the original and, therefore,                            the oldest areas of construction.                              The

enclosure wall                  is very       long      and has        been subjected to wear                     and tear

over      the         years.          Due    to     its     length,         the     enclosure             wall    has    been

affected          by       thermal       movement          which       is    highlighted             where        the    wall
changes direction;                 there is a distinct movement in the horizontal bed

joints of the brickwork just above ground level and slight fracturing

of the wall.            The blocked up doorway would have no adverse effect on

the     stability       of    the wall,          as    it    had been bonded into                 the    existing

satisfactorily.              With the black ash mortar losing its consistency and

becoming pliable this would, in time, affect the stability of the wall

and any undue lateral pressure placed against it would cause movement

and affect the bonding of the whole structure - this would account for

the rocking effect at this time.                            Immediate steps were taken to fence

off this wall on both sides and at a later date the wall was shored

in the interest of public safety.

With regard to the cluster of turnstiles,                                  these had been modified and

repaired as necessary.                    There was          evidence of maintenance work being

necessary        but    this       was     only       of     a     minor    nature.            Adjoining       Gate

"C",    two     brick piers         had    broken          their horizontal             bond at their base

with    the     parapet       brickwork          and       were     in   danger     of       falling,    and    the

brickwork on a third pier was loose.                               One coping stone was missing and

was found on the floor at the rear of the structure.                                          Of the fourteen

piers, ten coping stones could be lifted off and were not secure.                                               The

wrought       iron     parapet       railings          were        found    in    an    unstable        condition

adjoining Gates           'B'      and    'C'.        All     loose      brickwork and coping stones

were     removed       after       details       of        their    condition          had    been   noted      and

before    the     ground was             opened       to    the     general      public.          Appendix       3.

My     survey    and     assessment          of       the     situation          were    carried        out    from

16th    April     1989       and    I    have     had       no     other    involvement         as   a   Council

employee in inspections for the licence of this Sports Ground.
                       PHOTOGRAPHS




Front and rear elevations of enclosure wall.

Plumb details of brickwork to enclosure wall measurements
ranged between 15 m m - H O m m .

Fractured brickwork In enclosure wall.

Elevated pendant electric light fitting.

Front elevation of main cluster of turnstiles showing
support to high parapet brickwork.

Details of brick piers adjoining gate "B".     New and existing
brickwork repairs.

Plumb details of brickwork forming sign parapet over turnstiles
numbered 7-12; measurements ranged between 65 mm-70 mm.




                                                     MLAAAS
                                             :    j   <         x
                  f C M   !

                                      APPENDtX 1




/   . .,- r > /
      -S/'

»



    I

    P


                              READINGS           OiRECTtoM oF LeAM.--"
                                  llO n m
                                      mm


                                      mm
                                      mm                               ■ sr


                                   4-5m(TV
                                                          - 5 ' ■ " 3>.


                                                                    f: —
                                                                      APP£MDI>t 2




                                                              R e a d in g s       D   ir e c t io n   !   o   F   LCAM


      Sicfiou     A- A                                        A

I                                                             B        £5™'
                                                                       25rnm
                                                    .[I1Omm
I                                                                     < O 0t


                                                                      50i

a                                                                      I5"mm.
                                                                      4-5m^ .


a
i
i
i
i                 fefiOiiaGi D
                'fftKCi'J otvi 8o'M /?i=S5
                  U°-S
i
i                                            /'/'




! •


I
I




                                                                      '(a'n)L LCt-frif - ? > 1 <MC)m
                                                                  /■                                              Lepplngs Lane




                                                                                                                 \0-r},es          r
                                                                                                                 /                A
Scale 1:200                                                    B ric k p te f t

                                                                                  B ric k p k rk W M
                                                                                  f tr e r n o w tn
                                                                                        p a rt
                                                                                         C o p in g s Io o m
                                                                                               rtm o v a d *




              ENCLOSURE WALLy
                                  Shoring to •nck w ure w an




                   Refreshments                                   Ladies                         Gents Toilets
                                                                  Toilets




                                                         WEST                              STAND

                                                                                                                                                           CITY OF SHEFFIELD
                                                                                                                                                                  METMPOUTAN OISTMCT

                                                                                                                                                               DEPARTMENTOF
                                                                                                                                                              LAND & PLANNING
                                                                                                                                                                   R.D. JO N E S , M A X PL




                                                                                                                                                           ■APPEm'p w . '3 ;r


                                                                                                                                                           nk: WEST STAND
                                                                                                                                               ' ' .           Existing Plan
                                                                                                                                       v:;


                                                                                                                                                                   12.00     ,

                                                                                                                                             -■ ~   -V -

                                                                                                                                                                                 -iei.
                                                                                                                                                           A1 /              /            /
                                                                                                                   Form No. DSI 1 (12/84)

City of Sheffield                        Metropolitan District

  BUILDING ACT 1984, Section 78(1)
  NOTIFICATION THAT EMERGENCY MEASURES TO DEAL
 WITH A DANGEROUS BUILDING OR STRUCTURE
  HAVE BEEN CARRIED OUT

  To:
        r                                                                      n
         The Secretary,                                                                                      BY HAND
         Sheffield Wednesday Football Club PLC. >
         Hillsborough,
         SHEFFIELD.
         S6 1SW
        L                                     _J


 Whereas you are the ( o w n e r ^ ^ j ^ J g g g g ^ ^ g ^ ^ g g g ^ r ) of a building or structure

 a t W e d n e s d a y . - F o o t b a l l . . C l u b - PlQ-,--Hillsborough,..S6..1SW.                                           Sheffield
 and whereas it appears to me that part of the said building or structure, namely:

        Enclosure- •wall-•to--west--stand.--as.-dndicat ed--on..enclosed..................

        site ■-plan-•and- -marked ••in •-red..............................................


 was in such a state or was used to carry such loads as to be dangerous and that immediate action should
 be taken to remove the danger.

 TAKE NOTICE that I have exercised the powers conferred by section 78 of the Building Act 1984 and
 taken such steps as were necessary to remove the danger presented by that part of the building or
 structure described above, and more particularly set out in the Schedule below,

 and TAKE NOTICE that the City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council may recover from the owner of
 the building or structure the expenses reasonably incurred by it or its officers in acting under the
 provisions of the said section.
 DATED t h i s ..................... .............................day of    May.................................... 1989




BUILDING SURVEYOR'S DIVISIO N
DEPARTMENT OF LAND & PLANNING
TOWN HALL, SHEFFIELD S 1 2 HH                                                                                   Th^ Building Surveyor
                                                                                                         Proper Officer for the purpose
SCHEDULE of works or measures carried out:

        Sappi cade --defecti-v-e•-©oclosupe--wal 1--as••indicated --above--with.............

        ae-fea-l-•barriers •-and•c-hes-tnu-t-•i'encingv...................................


These works were the minimum necessary to remove the danger and where necessary should be
followed up by works of a more permanent nature.



The officer dealing with this matter is MrB—-J                             -Levers                                 .Tel. No.T3Al68....".U;
                                                                                                                                        L
REF:-x x x /BSD/BJGL/MMP
B8206
                    •
                    > in ( rHif
                    \i» • »i V'teW'
                              X%}2                                                                                                                                                    fVorksM
                     \       \
                      1    : '. UtfVj                                                                                                                                        i
                                                                                                                                                                             .j.

                                                                                                                                                                             ft



                                     64J * . •>*''“


                     / >
    _\      » a/, v / .. \ >3iT”                                                         7.‘7 W
                                                                                       Terraces                                                                                    O ra n d ita n d . V
                .            *         te
            \                                                                                 Terraces
                                  Lcppmgs
                                                                                                                        j*     - ;'i’Vtn '\)v* '


                                                                                                                                                                  i.   Twr



                                                      %• •         .i*IXM trthi'Mi*.
                                                                : \ S M W m
                                                                            *                                                Sheffield Wednesday
                                                                                                                              Football Groi\nd



r,l»5l5\i^V
                                                         \^%>J 7'>•>'-*.lN
                                                    i- ' \o - < J
                                                                           yr.
                                                                      i. *>^*'*
                                                         .V a v Ughtlng Towtr
                                                                       y*                                •djL^i >••■<t? »»
       \                   overnoK                                                  m m $ m
            S^- i ^ G ai'(
                    \jus uw rr»
                      ■fCuufe                                                   y - m m m m
                                                                                       vmmts

                                                                                                                         Ji-             AteiV*'
                                                                                                                                               fr*•
                                           •••?.:    N    . \

i^\ , | H illsbo roug h                                                                                          OehliitnJQ
                C oun ty
           P rim ary School
                                                                                  m                                                                   Bnn®D3aDllllI                     j| l|h   O rid f
                                                                                                                   Form No. DSI 1 (12/84)

City of Sheffield                 Metropolitan District

 BUILDING ACT 1984, Section 78(1)
 NOTIFICATION THAT EMERGENCY MEASURES TO DEAL
 WITH A DANGEROUS BUILDING OR STRUCTURE
 HAVE BEEN CARRIED OUT

 To:
       r                                                                     n                               xS 5l£jffiB B B 6B cS ik!^8f
        The Secretary,
                                                                                                                   BT HAND
        Sheffield Wednesday Football Club PLC.,
       Hillsborough,
       SHEFFIELD.
       ^ 6 1SW



 W hereas you are the (ownerbdx»X5WW^k^aSBOtxfcXXSb*XJi*!^^                                                   of a buildin9 or structure

 a t .Sheffield.Wednesday..Football.Club.p l c ,.,...Hillsborough,.,S6..1SW                                                     Sheffield
 and w hereas it appears to me th a t part of the said building or structure, namely:

       Enclosure..wall.,t.o..west,..3tand..aa..indicated..oxl .enclosed..................

       alte..plaa..aad.mar}fceidi..in..rsd..........................................


 was in such a state or was used to carry such loads as to be dangerous and that immediate action should
 be taken to remove the danger.

TAKE NOTICE that I have exercised the powers conferred by section 78 of the Building Act 1984 and
taken such steps as were necessary to remove the danger presented by that part of the building or
structure described above, and more particularly set out in the Schedule below,

and TAKE NOTICE that the City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council may recover from the owner of
the building or structure the expenses reasonably incurred by it or its officers in acting under the
provisions of the said section.
DATED th is          5th.............................. ...day of............ May................................... 1£09




BUILDING SURVEYOR'S D IVISIO N
DEPARTMENT OF LAND & PLANNING
TOWN HALL, SHEFFIELD S1 2HH                                                                                     The Building Surveyor
                                                                                                         Proper Officer for the purpose
SCHEDULE of works or measures carried out:

    Xe®R9.r.a.ry.. $horin& . i n .g c s f £Q id in s ..to.. .atoo.Y.?.-rnxen.tioned............................................
    defective enclosure wall.


These works were the minimum necessary to remove the danger and where necessary should be
followed up by works of a more permanent nature.



The officer dealing with this matter is M r3^..J«..G*.. Levers.................................... Tel. Ne£34.l63-

REF:~XSR/ BSD/BJGL/MMP
                                                                                                       •;   ft V ii!' !vS‘ r ■• 7»Ti>
                                                                                                       *U V « T : . ' K( ii'Vfc i S t:
                                                                                                                                                                                i        *'
                                                                                                                                                                       6161m
                                                                                                                      »Y'r’                                   \6IU\\
          n ,ik
     6 5 2 J ..N
                                                                Itw r
                                                             Terraces
                                                                                                                         $.i)i.•?.\*vik.»j                                     G fa n d tto .n d V

                                                                    Terraces
                            Leppings
                            liridgc


                                                                        i                       1.'*




                        \                                                                                                                                     L Twr




                                                                                      Sheffield Wednesday
                                                                                       Football Groi\nd


 lv
.® S
    (rr


                                           ^^Ughilng Tower
J.«V6m \ \                                  K ' "w'y
                                                   x   -
      %■
       -fi i}as'(iovernoc                   -6:.



                                                                                                                                             JfAffnjf \Towe
                        M \ s s
      ,           • .   %r r » .«,         N
      'H ills b o ro u g h •s\ ' v.       ' s »>                               Clghthij(
      r * : C o u n iy .                                                         owrr
      Primary School                  A . vj"
                                                       FIRST OF S.L. POPPER
                                                       SWORN
                                                       O N BEHALF OF RESPONDENT


IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE                               Case CQ/1009/92

QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION

CROWN OFFICE LIST



IN THE MATTER of AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW                       '


BETWEEN:             •

                           \
                                      REGINA

                                       - and -

                         HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR
                              SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                  Ex parte
                            STRINGER and OTHERS




                                 AFFIDAVIT



I, STEFAN L              POPPER, of                                           , MAKE

OATH and say as follows:



1.     I hold the following qualifications and post:    LLB. D.Med.Sci. BM. BS.

MRGCP.     [to be completed].   For 7 years I was one of Her Majesty's Coroners

for South Yorkshire (West District).      On [             ] I retired.   At various

dates between the 18th April 1989 and the 28th March 1991 I conducted Inquests

into the deaths of 95 individuals as a result of an incident at Hillsborough

Stadium on Saturday the 15th April 1989. In total I sat for [ ] days.
2.     I make this Affidavit in response to those swom by Jeremy Hawthorn on

the 5th May 1992 and the 11th September 1992 filed on behalf of the 6

Applicants.     I have no partisan interest in the outcome of the application and

in that sense I am neutral with respect to the various arguments that will no

doubt be advanced.        I make this Affidavit so that the Court may have the
benefit of      my reasoning in acting in the way that I did.   Accordingly, what

follows is      put forward by way of explanation only and is not intended to be

argumentative.     I am content to leave all matters of legal argument to Counsel

instructed upon my behalf.


3.     My attention has been drawn to the 7 grounds raised by the Applicants in

their Form 86A dated the 5th May 1992 and I will attempt to deal with each of

those matters. I will commence by providing a summary of the form an nature of

the Inquests.     There is now produced and shown to me and marked "SLP.l" a

paginated exhibit bundle to which reference is made in the body of this

Affidavit.


4.     Immediately following the Hillsborough tragedy it fell to me to conduct

the Inquests into the deaths of the 95 individuals who died on that Saturday on

the 15th April 1989.      In compliance with my usual and well-established practice

I considered that the questions to be answered for each of the 95 Inquests

within myinquisitorial jurisdiction     and within the parameters of the Coroners'

Act 1988 were: Who? When? Where?and How? - in other words who the person was,

where he/she was when they died; when he/she died and finally how he/she died.



5.     I opened the Inquests on the 95 deaths starting on the 18th April 1989.

At the initial hearings the bodies were identified and the Inquests then
adjourned.   Even at that very early stage there were certain features of this

tragedy which were bound to impact upon the nature of the Inquests; namely


(1)    The appointment on the 17th April 1989 of the Right Honourable Lord

       Justice Taylor by the Secretary of State for the Home Department to

       carry out an Inquiry:



              "To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday football
              ground on the 15th April 1989 and to make recommendations about
              the needs of crowd control and safety at sports events."




(2)   The involvement      of the Director of Public       Prosecutions     and the

       possibility of criminal proceedings against those responsible for crowd

       control and safety on that Saturday afternoon which would deal (if

       necessary) with any criminality and appropriate punishment.



(3)   The very high likelihood of civil proceedings which would deal (if

       appropriate) with the apportionment of blame and any compensation.



(4)   The very large number of deaths which would involve very large numbers

       of witnesses to deal with every piece of information.     Coupled with this

       would be the extreme distress involved for relatives and friends of the

       deceased if they were requested to give evidence.



6.    I was acutely aware of attempting to balance the practical imperatives

for my inquisitorial purposes and the eminently understandable desire on the

part of all of the relatives and friends of the deceased to know every single

piece of information concerning the lives of the deceased on that fateful
Saturday afternoon.


7.       Following the identification carried out in April 1989 there followed

the Interim Report by Lord Justice Taylor in August 1989 and the Final Report

in January 1990.      The Inquiry was assisted by an independent Police Force - the

West Midlands Constabulary - who investigated the incident and gathered

evidence for the Inquiry.        In order to complete my statutory function I

determined that the factual evidence concerning the questions of who, when and

where,    could and should be met by officers of this independent force

summarising in each of the 95 cases the effect of the evidence they had

gathered and collected.     On the same questions, the forensic pathology evidence

would be dealt with mainly by Professor Alan Usher - the Professor of Forensic

Medicine at Sheffield.      He was a pathologist of international repute.     He and

his team had completed all the autopsies within 48 hours of the tragedy.



8.       Further, although the Final Report from the Inquiry was completed in

January     1990,   at that stage the possibility       of criminal proceedings and

disciplinary proceedings still remained open against (in particular) certain

police officers o f the South Yorkshire Constabulary.



9.       Accordingly, I decided that the questions of who, when and where should

be decided at a preliminary part of the Inquest for each of the 95 individuals

with the issue of how being held over until the criminal proceedings (if any)

were determined.



         The same jury were empanelled to deal with each of the 95 Inquests and

the preliminary Inquests were held at the Medico-Legal Centre in Sheffield.
IThe fu ll   list    o f representation fo r     this part    o f the    Inquest   was    as

follows:]



10. The Preliminary Inquests

       This part of the Inquests was held in April and May of 1990.                      The
sittings took some 2lA weeks.        At that time all 95 families were represented by

the Hillsborough Steering Committee.           The agent instructed for the families was

Mr Fraser and he was present when I led the relevant evidence.



11.    I would emphasise the following points as to the procedure I adopted:



(1)    The pathological evidence was taken mainly from Professor Alan Usher but

       in addition Dr Slater (a Consultant Histopathologist) and Dr John Clark,

       a Pathologist from Glasgow, were also called to give evidence.                    My

       understanding of the overwhelming pathological evidence was that the 95

       victims died as a result of crushing or traumatic asphyxia and that the

       pathological evidence available to me was that the cause of death was

       crushing.

       At no stage during this part of the Inquests was the evidence of

       Professor Usher, Dr Slater or Dr Clark challenged by Mr Fraser.



(2)    I adopted the approach of asking West Midlands officers to summarise the

       evidence, because the account often involved the evidence of up to 15

       witnesses.        It included the results of extensive and exhaustive study of

       video and photographic evidence and was intended inasmuch as was

       possible (for reasons of humanity) to avoid the need for relatives and

        friends     of   the   deceased   to   have   to   re-live   acutely   painful   and
        distressing events.


(3)     At the reconvened hearing of every Inquest, I started by explaining the

        method I proposed to adopt to the members of the families present.        Mr

        Fraser was always present.          There was no objection from him as to the

        proposed procedure.       Further, insofar as I can recall, there was no

        substantial challenge by way of cross-examination to the summaries

        provided by the officers of the West Midlands Force.            Most families

        through Mr Fraser expressed their thanks for the work carried out by

        those officers.


12.     In    every   one     of the   95     cases the uncontested   evidence of the

pathologists was that the pathological cause of death was traumatic asphyxia

and that within a matter of seconds the individual would have been unconscious

and unaware of anything further and would have died within a matter of minutes

thereafter.



13. The "How** element of the Inquests.

        Following the conclusion of the Preliminary Inquests on [                ], I

was informed in September 1990 that the Director of Public Prosecutions had

decided not to prosecute anyone in respect of the disaster.            Accordingly, I

made arrangements for the "How" part of the Inquests to be held.           Although I

was aware that the South Yorkshire Constabulary had agreed to make payments to

those injured, I treated that information as irrelevant for the purposes of

this part of the Inquest.



14.     [Please deal with the business meeting held before the start o f this
part o f the Inquest.]


15.     On [                 ] I made a preliminary ruling that in considering the

question of "How" I would be concerned with events up to and including the time

of 3.15pm on Saturday the 15th April 1989 but not thereafter.          It was clear to

me that an important issue for the "How" question was the manner in which the

crushing on the terraces had come about.          I picked on the time of 3.15pm

because on the overwhelming weight of the pathological evidence available to

me, this was the last time permanent damage was done.               In addition, as a

marker, 3.15pm was also the time the first ambulance arrived on the pitch.           I

felt it right to draw a line in that regard and I had in mind the approach

adopted by the Coroner in the Zeebrugger Inquest.         However, my decision was

based mainly upon the expert pathological medical evidence.



16.     Representation for this main part of the Inquest was as follows:



        Mr Timothy King (Counsel): for 43 of the families.

        Mrs McBrien: lay representative for the McBrien family.

        Miss Hampton (Counsel): Sheffield City Council.

        Mr Hale (Counsel): [             ].

        Mr Manning (Counsel): Superintendent Murray.

        Mr Payne (Counsel): Chief Constable South Yorkshire.

        Mr Isaacs (Counsel): Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.

        Miss Sinclair:

        Mr Catchpole (Counsel): Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.

        Mr Callaghan (Solicitor): Ambulance Service.

        Miss Addelmann (Counsel): Police Federation.

        Mr Russell (Counsel): Superintendent Greenwood.
17.    On Monday the 19th November 1990 I heard further argument from Counsel

instructed for the families of the deceased about the way in which the

answering of the "How" question was to be approached.              On that day and

subsequently 43 of the families were represented by Mr Timothy King of Counsel

who had been Junior Counsel instructed to represent the families before the

Taylor Inquiry.    In summary, Mr King made the following points to me in order

to persuade me to a different view to the preliminary ruling I had made:



(1)    Up to this point there had been no investigation or systematic analysis

       of what was the organisation of the rescue, what it might have been and

       whether it would have made a difference.             In that regard he was
       concentrating on that period of time after the individuals had been

       brought off the terraces and before death was certified.



(2)    By reference to the case of Richard Jones he contended that there was

       material to support the general proposition that not all of the victims

       were necessarily dead by 3.15pm on that Saturday afternoon.



(3)    There was material (in particular from Dr John Ashton) that the medical

       and rescue attempts were disorganised.



18.    I think it right to record that Mr Hale (and possibly Mr Isaacs) were

not entirely supportive of Mr King's submissions and Mr Callaghan was against

his approach.       The remainder of the legal representatives present adopted

essentially a neutral position.



19.    Having listened very carefully to these submissions I was not persuaded
from my preliminary view.              I reminded Mr King that the Inquest was not a

Judicial Inquiry.      In answer to the seven matters raised in the Form 86A and

the six cases the subject of the application I deal more particularly with my

reasoning.


20.        On that first day of the resumed Inquests into the 95 deaths there was a

good deal of legal argument (in the absence of the jury) about the rules

against      self-incrimination   as     they   apply   to      Police     witnesses.        Those
representatives also strongly urged me to consider whether the representations

of the families at the adjourned Inquests was to elicit evidence in order to
persuade the Director of Public Prosecutions to reconsider his decision not to

prosecute any of the officers and for the jury to bring in a verdict of

unlawful killing.



21.      I was well aware of the emotions of the families, of the concerns of the

police     officers   and   of    the particular    interests     of     all   other    represented

parties.     Although I had determinedly avoided reaching any conclusions as to

the possible verdicts that might be open to the jury (preferring to wait until

the conclusion of all the evidence) I could not but fail to be aware of the

views of the interested parties.



22.        Following the 19th November 1990 the Inquests proceeded on the "How"

question for [to be completed utilising the number o f days and the order o f

the issues and evidence led].



23.      The summing-up and submissions on the verdicts available I dealt with in

the following way:

           [To be completed].
24. The Seven Grounds of Criticism in Form 86A

       With respect to the separate arguments made in respect of each of the 6

applications I have set out my decisions (and where necessary reasoning) by way

of separate commentary in the exhibit to this Affidavit.


       I direct my evidence on this aspect specifically to the 6 Inquests the

subject matter of the application.



Criticism (1)
       I have set out above the reasons why I adopted the procedure I did for

the Preliminary Inquests held in April and May 1990.           I do not believe that

there was any practical alternative to the procedure I adopted.           There was

something in the region of over 3,000 statements taken.         If I had called every

witness, this aspect of the Inquest would have taken very much longer.       In each

of the 6 Inquests the subject of this application, the families were each

represented by Mr Fraser.            At the outset of each Inquest I explained the

procedure that I proposed to adopt to the families.        No objection was taken by

Mr Fraser and there was very little questioning of the officers giving the
summary.     I believe that in each instance the summary was a fair and accurate

statement of the evidence then available.



Criticism (2)

       This is in effect the same criticism as in (1) above.



Criticism O')

        The responsible and relevant expert medical evidence available to me

from pathologists of high renown which had not at any stage been challenged
during that part of the Inquests held in April and May 1990 was overwhelmingly

to the effect that each of the 95 victims were dead by 3.15pm.                  Where

appropriate, the pathologists were invited to consider lay evidence relevant to

each particular case. At no time did the pathologists alter their opinions.



       My task was to call relevant evidence to put before the jury.            In the

light of the unchallenged expert testimony of the pathologists, there was

nothing that could have been done by way of medical or rescue intervention that

would have been of any help to any of the deceased, let alone have had any

impact upon the cause of death.



       I set out in the exhibit my comments upon the evidence of Dr Bums.


Criticism (4)

       I did not call either Dr Ashton or Dr Phillips.               I considered the

statements from both of these doctors.             In the light of the uncontested

pathological evidence I did not consider their evidence to be relevant to the

issue of "How" in any of the 95 Inquests.        I had noted that Dr Ashton and Dr

Phillips had both given oral evidence to the Taylor Inquiry.           I had read the

Interim Report in particular paragraphs 296 to 298. They provided as follows:



        "No Fault bv the Emergency Services

       296. I say at the outset of this chapter that no valid criticism can
       be made of the response by the St Johns Ambulance Brigade by SYMAS or by
       the Fire Brigade on 15th April. Indeed, no represented party ventured
       any criticism of them. The onlyH attack on SYMAS came from 2 Liverpool
       doctors.    One claimed that ambulances did not arrive swiftly or with
       sufficient equipment and that there was a lack of triage. He was proved
       to be wrong in all 3 respects. Unfortunately he had seen fit to go on
       television on 15th April when he said more lives could have been saved
       if staff and equipment had arrived earlier. Apart from being proved
       wrong in fact as to the times of arrival of ambulances, he conceded in
       evidence that it was not possible to say whether lives could have been
       saved. His comments on television were irresponsible. The other doctor
       complained of the absence of defribillators.    I am satisfied on the
       overwhelming evidence that to attempt to use a defribillator on the
       pitch with people milling about would have been highly dangerous owing
       to the risk of injury from the electric charge.
       297. I find that all 3 of the emergency services named above responded
       promptly when alerted, that they brought appropriate equipment and that
       their personnel operated efficiently.
       298. It would be unreasonable to expect, at any sports stadium,
       medical facilities capable of dealing with a major disaster such as
       occurred.    To have in advance at the ground, oxygen, resuscitators,
       stretchers, other equipment and medical staff sufficient to deal with
       over 100 casualties is not practicable."




At paragraph 301 the Report stated:


       "There was insufficiently close cooperation between the police and the
       emergency services. It is clear that SYMAS and the Fire Brigade should
       have been called earlier than they were. However, in view of the nature
       and extent of the crushing, the time when police rescue began and the
       pathetically short period for which those unable to breathe could
       survive, it is improbable that quicker recourse to the emergency
       services would have saved more lives."




       I was aware that Dr Phillips and Dr Ashton were the doctors concerned in

the observations made at paragraph 296.



       I emphasise, however, that it was my opinion on relevance based upon the

unchallenged and overwhelming pathological evidence which influenced my

decision.



       [Who made the application to call these witnesses and when?]
Criticism (5^
       Again, this criticism is really a repeat of the point made in (3) above.



Criticism (6)
       On the relevant evidence that I had led I directed. the jury upon the

verdicts that were in my opinion open to them.           I had invited and obtained

detailed submissions from all interested parties on what verdicts (on the

evidence that the jury had heard) were available.



       [This has to be very considerably expanded by illustration.]



Criticism (7)
       I am confident that the summaries were accurate and fair summaries on

the evidence then available.


25.    With respect to the matters exhibited to Jeremy Hawthorn's second

Affidavit sworn on the 11th September 1992, then I comment as follows:



(1)    At the time I gave an interview to the makers of the television

       programme, I had retired from the office of Her Majesty's Coroner.

       However, the transcript accurately sets out certain of my answers

       (plainly with editing not all of the information I gave was broadcast).



(2)    I confirm that the views I expressed in those interviews represent my

       opinion.



(3)     I have read and considered the 6 page report of the well known
     pathologist, Dr Iain West, dated the 20th August 1992.       He is an eminent
     man and well-respected in his field - but then so is Professor Usher and

     so are Doctors Clark and Slater.        In certain instances he expresses a

     different view or opinion to the pathologists who gave evidence at the

     Inquest.   He has had none of the post mortem photographs available to

     him.    For my part, I can see no reason to prefer Dr West's opinion to

     the evidence given by the pathologists who carried out the autopsies.



SWORN etc.
                   FIRST OF S.L. POPPER
                   SWORN
                   ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENT

Case CO/1009/92
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE

QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION

CROWN OFFICE LIST

IN THE MATTER of AN APPLICATION
FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

BETWEEN:

                  REGINA

                  - and -

   HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR
        SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             Ex parte
      STRINGER and OTHERS




            AFFIDAVIT




                        CO




              The Solicitor,
          Sheffield City Council


      Counsel's ref. PR/C/SHEFFCC/1
                              R -v- H.M . CORONER FOR

                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE Ex parte STRINGER and ORS




                                       ADVICE




        I have already spoken to my Instructing Solicitor in giving some general

advice about the points numbered 1 to 7 in my Instructions.     In compliance with

our agreed timetable I have settled draft Affidavits for consideration in

Conference.       It is plain to me that a significant amount of work remains to be

done.   With some reluctance I have come to the conclusion that I will have to
see the 19 A4 boxes of the transcript before the Conference.      I hope that I can

extract some of the relevant information required to complete Dr Popper's

Affidavit.    It must be appreciated that without any instructions from him I

have extrapolated what I have read as falling from his lips in the transcript

material selected by the Applicants.     However, the Affidavit is to be sworn by

him and he must be satisfied that what is set out in the Affidavit accurately

and properly reflects his own views.




        (c> • $   <\Z
1 Crown Office Row,
Temple,                                             __________________
E .C .4.                                                  PAUL REES
 R -y- H.M . CORONER FOR
    SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                 \
Ex parte STRINGER and ORS




            Ih J l
          ADVICE




        The Solicitor,
    Sheffield City Council.


Counsel's ref. PR/C/SHEFCC/1
/




EXHIBIT "SLP.l"
                          PAUL CARLISLE



I opened the Inquest on Paul Carlisle on 19th April 1989 when evidence

of identification was taken.     The autopsy was carried out by Professor

Alan Usher.



On 3rd May 1990 the Inquest on Paul Carlisle was reconvened. Mr Fraser

appeared for the deceased's family.        I explained the procedure I was

proposing to adopt. No objection was made by Mr Fraser.



Professor Alan Usher gave evidence and in answer to me stated:



"The typical signs of traumatic asphyxia were present both externally
and internally."

"... I gave his cause of death as traumatic asphyxia".




Mr Fraser put one question to Professor Usher who answered as follows:



"... The reason for Paul's death was that his chest was held so tightly
that he could not breathe in or out and, once that had happened, then he
would have been unconscious in a matter of seconds, between 10 to 20
seconds. He would have died within a few minutes but at the time, of
course, subsequent to his unconsciousness, he would not have been aware
of any pain."




There was no other challenge to the pathological evidence.



WPC Geraldine Evans provided the summary of the evidence collected

relating to Paul Carlisle.   She summarised the evidence of 15 witnesses.
Mr Fraser neither objected to this procedure, nor did he wish to ask any

questions of WPC Evans.


Detective Inspector Layton summarised the visual evidence available.

Again, Mr Fraser neither objected to this procedure nor did he have any

questions of the officer.



At the conclusion of this part of the Inquest on the 3rd May 1990

relating to Paul Carlisle, Mr Fraser read a note from the family:



"The note is from the family in general, Sir, and I read it out as it
stands. They want to thank Michael Layton and Peter Hogan who, I
understand, is an officer who assisted Inspector Layton, Sir, for their
help throughout the Inquiry.         They want to thank the two officers,
Goulding and Pont, for the assistance which they gave to Paul on the
day, together with the ambulance man whose name has not been traced.
Sir, they want to thank Maureen Rowe and Peter Hyde from Moseley Social
Services and they have been, in the family's words, Sir, a 'lifeline for
us throughout the last year'.            Sir, they want to thank Michael
Hollinghurst for trying to save Paul.           They say, 'Words will never
express how we feel but knowing that he was with Paul, we are all
grateful.' Finally, Sir, they want to thank you for being, again, their
words, 'so thorough and a gentleman' as you have been throughout these
Inquests and, in particular, the Inquest into their loved one."




The evidence relating to the final part of the Inquest commenced on the

19th November 1990. Much of that evidence was common to all of the 95

Inquests.    With particular respect to Paul Carlisle, I called Michael

Hollinghurst and Ian Feams.       Mr Timothy King who appeared for the

family during this part of the Inquest had the opportunity to question

both of them and did so.      He had also seen all the statements collected

by the West Midlands Police Force.
(9)    At no stage during this last part of the Inquest was it suggested on
       behalf of the family that Professor Usher's evidence was inaccurate or

       wrong.


(10)   There was no further responsible or relevant medical or other evidence

       available to put before the jury to suggest that in Paul Carlisle's case

       (in terms of medical or rescue efforts) that anything different could

       have been done which would have had an impact on the cause of death.



(11)   There was plentiful evidence before the jury for this Inquest and the 94

       others concerning the acts of those responsible    for crowd control and

       safety.



(12)   The only formal request I received in relation to the evidence of Dr

       Phillips, Dr Ashton and Mr Eccleston

       [This requires to be completed.]




                                          4
                                  IAN GLOVER



(1)   I opened the Inquest on Ian Glover on [                  ], when evidence of

      identification was taken. The autopsy was carried out by [       ].



(2)   On [       ] the Inquest on Ian Glover was reconvened.

      [ The remainder o f this commentary requires to be completed.]




                                         5
                          RICHARD JONES



I opened the Inquest on Richard Jones on the 18th April 1989 and
evidence of identification was taken.      The autopsy was carried out by
Professor Alan Usher.


On the 3rd May 1990 the Inquest concerning Richard Jones was

reconvened.      Mr Fraser appeared for the family.    I did not in this case

specifically explain the procedure I was to adopt, since Mr Jones (the

father) had been present on the previous day when I had gone through the

explanation.     I reminded him of this.   Mr Fraser made no objection to

the procedure.


In answer to me Professor Usher stated:



"There were obvious signs of traumatic asphyxia both externally and
internally."

"This young man died essentially because he could not move his chest in
or out and that meant, of course, he could not breathe and that meant
oxygen was cut off to his vital organs and, once that chest was fixed,
he would have been unconscious in a matter of seconds, probably between
10 and 20 seconds, and he would be completely unknowing of anything that
happened subsequent to that, though he would take a matter of minutes,
perhaps between 4 and 6 minutes, to die".




Whilst Mr Fraser did ask some questions of Professor Usher directed

towards a blood alcohol measurement, the pathological evidence relating

to the cause of death was not in any way challenged.



Police Sergeant Killock provided the summary of the evidence collected
and relating to Richard Jones.          He summarised the evidence of 9

witnesses.    Mr Fraser neither objected to this procedure, nor did he

wish to ask any questions of Police Sergeant Killock.



Detective Inspector Layton summarised the visual evidence available.        Mr

Fraser neither objected to this procedure and nor did he have any

questions of this officer.



The evidence relating to the final part of the Inquest commenced on the

19th November 1990.          Much of the evidence was common to all 95

Inquests.    With particular reference to Richard Jones I called Stephanie

Jones (his sister).   Mr Timothy King who appeared for the family during

this part of the Inquest took the opportunity to question her.



At no stage during this last part of the Inquest was it suggested on

behalf of the family that Professor Usher's evidence was inaccurate or

wrong.



There was no further responsible or relevant medical or other evidence

available to put before the jury to suggest that in Richard Jones' case

(in terms of medical or rescue efforts) anything different could have

been done which would have had an impact on the cause of death.



It is correct that Mr and Mrs Jones wrote to me asking me to call Dr

Phillips, Dr Ashton and Dr Bums and Mr Eccleston.           I did not do so for

the reasons set out in the body of the Affidavit.         In short, they could

not add anything of relevance to the Inquiry before me.              It is also
correct that they submitted a report from Dr James Bums which contained

a letter dated the 11th March 1991 addressed to a Liverpool firm of

solicitors.     This was received by me [include the date].               By this

stage all of the pathological evidence had been given.                None of the

matters contained in the report had been put to any .of the pathologists.

Furthermore, it appeared to me on a careful reading that Dr Bums did

not suggest any particular or identified case in which he challenged the

evidence      given.    In     those   circumstances,   I   did not    consider   it

appropriate to call Dr Bums.
                                   MICHAEL KELLY



    (1)   I opened the Inquest on Michael Kelly on the 18th April 1989          and

          evidence of identification was taken.    The autopsy was carried out by Dr

          Clark.



    (2)   On the 1st May 1990 the Inquest concerning Michael Kelly              was

          reconvened.   Mr Fraser appeared for the deceased's family.    I explained

          the procedure that I was proposing to adopt.    No objection was made by

^         Mr Fraser.



    (3)   Dr John Clark gave evidence and in answer to me stated:



          "Cause of death was crush asphyxia. This was based on findings of signs
          of asphyxia in his face. His face was rather congested and had a bluish
          discoloration.   These changes, I have to say, were fairly mild in
          comparison to a lot of the other people and one of the other features of
          asphyxia is to find little haemorrhages on the skin. These were not in
          fact present."

          "... In any event there was nothing to indicate he suffered for any
          great length of time.       He probably lost consciousness within a short
          period of time, 10 or 15 seconds or so, and then knew nothing about it
£         after that. As I said, there were not any major injuries internally."




          Mr Fraser had no questions for Dr Clark.



    (4)   Dr Clark was a Forensic Pathologist from the University of Glasgow who

          had been in Sheffield on the weekend of the tragedy. Towards the end of

          my questioning he said in an entirely unsolicited comment after I had

          thanked him for his invaluable assistance:



•
                                             9
"Can I say in turn as someone dealing with this sort o f work and
investigation of death very regularly how impressed I have been with the
professionalism and sensitivity with which the proceedings have been
carried out here, in particular your handling and explanations to the
relatives of the bereaved people.      I think it has given comfort to
everyone who has worked here and I felt it a very appropriate
atmosphere".




Inspector Sawers presented the summary o f evidence collected which

related to Michael Kelly.       He summarised the evidence of 9 witnesses.

Mr Fraser did not object to this procedure.     He had one question to ask

Inspector Sawers relating to the likelihood of whether Michael Kelly had

a ticket for the match.


Detective Inspector Layton summarised the visual evidence available.

His answers relating to the observable condition of Michael Kelly on the

photographic evidence were the result of questions from me.           The

relevant exchanges were as follows:



"Sir, on a photograph referenced PR2/21 which is timed at15.08 that
shows Michael in Enclosure No. 3 and whilst the detail again is not
great it appears to show him certainly alive at that time but I cannot
say at what stage of the process medically he is at."

"Question: He looked a bit distressed you think in that? - Answer: That
is my impression".

"Question: You can't say whether he is conscious or unconscious, alive
or dead at that particular point? - Answer: It is difficult.     I would
say he is probably still alive, Sir, but certainly in distress."




There was no objection from Mr Fraser to these questions. Mr Fraser had

no questions of this officer.
At the conclusion of this part of the Inquest on the 1st May 1990 Mr

Fraser said:



"Again, Sir, before you conclude the evidence in this case, Michael's
mother who as it were is the head of the family, is unable to be with us
today.     She is in Liverpool but through her son and daughter they
specifically want me to thank through you everybody who helped Michael
on the day obviously. Everybody's efforts are very much appreciated and
they want to offer their thanks to the officers of the West Midlands
Police as well."




The evidence relating to the main part of the Inquest commenced on the

19th November 1990.         Much of the evidence was common to all 95

Inquests.      With particular reference to Michael Kelly, I called Police

Constable John Maughan.



There was no further responsible or relevant medical or other evidence

available to put before the jury to suggest that in Michael Kelly’s case

(in terms of medical or rescue efforts) anything different could have

been done which would have had an impact on the cause of death.
                          PETER TOOTLE



I opened the Inquest on Peter Tootle on 19th April 1989 when evidence of
identification was taken. The autopsy was carried out by Dr Slater.


On the       18th May   1990 the Inquest concerning Peter Tootle was

reconvened.    Mr Fraser appeared for the deceased's family.        I explained

the procedure I was proposing to adopt.          No objection was made by Mr

Fraser.



Dr Slater in answer to questions from me stated:



"My examination of Peter showed that the general findings were those of
asphyxia.     These were indicated by extensive blueness on the face
extending to the upper part of the chest."

" ... I submitted my cause of death, Sir, as traumatic asphyxia."

" ... Sir, unconsciousness occurs very rapidly, normally within 3 to 5
seconds, and after that there is no awareness of any pain or discomfort
and death supervenes after another 3 to 5 minutes".




Mr Fraser had no questions for Dr Slater.



Police Sergeant Killock presented the summary o f the evidence collected

which related to Peter Tootle.         He summarised the evidence of 8

witnesses.    Mr Fraser neither objected to this procedure nor did he have

any questions to ask Police' Sergeant Killock.



Detective Inspector Layton summarised the visual evidence available.         In

answer to a question from me Detective Inspector Layton stated:
"That photograph is timed at 15.03 and my perception of the photograph,
Sir, is that Peter is at that time still alive although it is not
possible to say at what stage of the medical process he has reached."




Mr Fraser did not object to the above procedure, nor the specific

question and had no questions for this officer.



At the completion of this part of the Inquest on Peter Tootle on the

18th May 1990 Mr Fraser said:



"Sir, Mr and Mrs Tootle simply want to express their gratitude to
everybody who helped Peter on the day. They recognise that everybody
did everything they could and they are only sorry their efforts were
unfortunately unsuccessful. They recognise that everybody tried their
very best."




The evidence relating to the final part of the Inquest commenced on the

19th November 1990.        Much of the evidence was common to all 95

Inquests.   There was sufficient evidence from this source to deal with

the "how" question in the case of Peter Tootle.       The jury had been

present throughout the hearings in April and May of 1990 (including the

18th May 1990) and from the 19th November 1990 onwards.



There was no further responsible or relevant medical or other evidence

available to put before the jury to suggest- that in Peter Tootle's case

(in terms of medical or rescue efforts) anything different could have

been done which would have had an impact on the cause of death.
                         KEVIN WILLIAMS



I opened the Inquest on Kevin Williams on the 18th April 1989 when
evidence of identification was taken.    The autopsy was carried out by Dr
Slater.


The Inquest concerning Kevin Williams reconvened on the 2nd May 1990.

The family of the deceased were represented by Mr Fraser.      I explained

the procedure I was proposing to adopt.      No objection was made by Mr
Fraser.



Dr Slater in answer to me stated the following:



"My examination of Kevin showed that the main finding was that of
asphyxia. This opinion was formed through the extensive blueness on the
face and other part of the chest.           In addition there were small
haemorrhages in both the face and internal organs including the brain,
heart and lungs. This asphyxia had clearly resulted from compression of
the neck and chest and this opinion was supported by the presence of 3
small scratches on the left side of the neck and also over the front of
the voice box. This had also resulted in 4 fractures to the small bones
in the actual voice box. In addition there was evidence of bruising to
the lungs, again supporting compression of the chest."

" ... In terms of the mode of death the compression of the neck or chest
has occurred here and unconsciousness occurs very rapidly, certainly
within a few seconds ...       Following unconsciousness there is no
discomfort and no pain. Death then occurs after approximately 3 to 5
minutes, Sir."




I was very well aware of the evidence of Debra Martin and I put her

evidence specifically to Dr Slater for him to deal with.   His answer was

as follows:
"Well, Sir, I was aware of this statement and therefore I have clearly
given this matter considerable thought, Sir. I think there are several
comments to make but on the moderately large number of autopsies I did
from this incident, Sir, this was certainly the most severe case of
traumatic asphyxia that I actually dealt with. This was both in terms
of blueness of the face and also the area of pallor whiteness around the
mouth. Sir, it was a very very severe form of asphyxia. I do not think
that unconsciousness would have been quicker than 3 or 5 seconds. I
have no reason to alter what I have already said on that aspect."




The evidence of Dr Slater in commenting upon Debra Martin's evidence was

not challenged by Mr Fraser.        I explained to the family that I had
specifically taken the course of referring to this evidence so that
nothing of relevance was hidden or concealed.           After the summary of

evidence set out in (6) below, which covered the evidence of P.C. Bruder

about convulsions, Mr Fraser put the following question to Dr Slater

(relating to the convulsions):



"It is difficult to find the phrase to sum the situation up. Kevin at
that stage was beyond help. He was as good as dead? - Answer: Yes, that
is right, absolutely.
Question:   And would feel nothing and know nothing? - Answer:
Absolutely. He would know nothing."




Police Sergeant Killock presented the summary of the evidence collected

relating to Kevin Williams.         He summarised the evidence of 15

witnesses.   No objection was taken to this procedure by Mr Fraser and he

did not ask any questions of Police Sergeant Killock.



Detective Inspector Layton summarised the visual evidence.       No objection

to this procedure was raised by Mr Fraser and he asked no questions of
       this officer.


(8)    I explained to the family present why I felt it important that             the

       evidence of P.C. Bruder and Debra Martin be commented upon by Dr

       Slater.   However, I continued to be concerned about the evidence of a

       convulsion and later of a word spoken and so I invited the Police to

       further investigate these aspects of the evidence and for Dr Gumpert to

       attend the Inquest.    I understand that Dr Slater contacted P.C. Bruder

       direct to ask him in detail about what he saw.



(9)    I must emphasise that at no stage did I speak directly to either P.C.

       Bruder or Debra Martin.        Dr Gumpert, a Consultant Neurologist and

       Clinical Neurophysiologist, made himself available for the 5th May 1990.



(10)   On the 5th May 1990 Inspector Sawers reported the results of his further

       enquiries. Mr Fraser raised no questions on behalf of the family.



(11)   Dr Slater in an effort to explain his evidence on the 2nd May 1990 and

       incorporate his evaluation of the further evidence of P.C. Bruder and

       Debra Martin said:



       "Death is a sequence of events. It is not one set of events and the
       sequence I will put to you is an individual becoming unconscious; whilst
       they are unconscious they quickly lose all sensation of pain and
       discomfort; then there is a period of various tissues in the body which
       are susceptible to a lack of oxygen, dying. The most important one of
       these is, of course, the brain and after about 3 to 6 minutes the brain
       undergoes irreversible brain damage. There is then a point which we
       call brain death.      This is a difficult concept, but by this I am
       implying that the brain is irreversibly damaged. The brain is no longer
       able to control respiration and in fact that person, for effective
       purposes, is dead, irreversibly.       That is a medico-legal definition, at
       least one medico-legal definition, of death."



                                          16
*
           "... Having said that, Kevin had extremely severe asphyxia. I have no
           doubt in my own mind that he had suffered irrecoverable brain damage and
           death within the 3 to 6 minutes that I said."




    (12)   Dr Gumpert having listened to the evidence said:



           "It seems clear to me, Sir, in this case that poor Kevin was probably
           dead before he was got out of the area in which he was standing."

           "I cannot explain the Liverpool Police Constable's term 'convulsion'
           because to me a convulsion is a major epileptic attack and he has quite
           clearly said he does not mean that, so I don't know what he does mean".




    (13)   I did what I felt was necessary to put before the jury at the conclusion

           of this part o f the Inquest into the death of Kevin Williams all that

           was relevant on the issues of who, when and where.              I must emphasise

           that I was then and remain today wholly unaware of any allegations of

           improper pressure applied to witnesses.        I must say that in the light of

           all that I knew of those officers who investigated the tragedy, I find

           such allegations highly improbable.



w   (14)   The evidence relating to the final part of the Inquest commenced on the

           19th November 1990. Much of the evidence was common to all 95 Inquests.

           I   specifically   called   Andrew    Duncan    in   relation    to   the   Inquest

           concerning Kevin Williams.



    (15)   There was no further responsible or relevant medical or other evidence

           available to put before the jury to suggest that in Kevin Williams' case

           (in terms of medical or rescue efforts) anything different could have

           been done which would have had an impact on the cause of death.



                                                17
  Dear Sirs,


               I was     surprised          and rather          saddened       to read       the     article   by Mr.        Norman Bush

  in    the Municipal          Journal        on        the     18th August         1989- In        commenting        upon    the interim

  report of Lord Justice Taylor and in suggesting the                                       approach which should be adopted

  in the future          to the safety of sports grounds he                              suggests     that the members of local

  authorities and          the administrators                   should delegate what               he describes as,           ''The real

  technical ta s k ' ' to the building surveyor.


               Mr.   Bush directs fierce criticism at Sheffield City Council for not involving

  a    building      surveyor         in    the     discharge         of     its   licensing         functions    under       the     Safety

^ b f Sports Grounds Act 1975•                     He says,


               ''The Health and Consumer Services officer (presumably an expert on the price

                 and     freedom       from        food       poisoning      of    the   meat      pies    consumed     at    half     time)

                 was involved, but no building surveyor.1'


               The Building Surveyor was and still is one of the members of the multi-disci-

  linary advisory group which performed inspections of sports ground                                                  in this    area and

  which       reported    its    findings           and made          its    recommendations          to   the elected members               of

  the local authority.                To suggest that the building surveyor was not                                   involved is quite

  simply wrong.           To     go    on     to    say        that    the    Sheffield City         Council's        evidence did not

  even    get    the     title    of        the    building       surveyor         right    unfortunately        displays        the       fact

^ t h a t Mr. Bush has simply not read the City Council's evidence.                                         The mistake in termin-

^^>logy was not a mistake made by this Council.


               The     interim        report        recommends,            inter    alia,    that      local     authorities          should

  ensure that an accountable                       administratrive           structure exists,             ''whereby the functions

  of    the    local     authority          are     regularly         and effectively           supervised       by    senior officers

  and    elected       members        and    decisions          are    properly      taken      in    accordance       with     the    local

  authority's r u l e s . 1'           The general proposal made                     by Mr.        Bush    seems directly        contrary

  to    that    recommendation.                   The    dangers       of    delegating      the      functions       involved        to    one

  party must         surely be obvious.                   The Fire Service,                the Police,       the Ambulance Service

  and the Environmental Health Officers all have a part to play in what Mr. Bush describes

  as,    ''the real technical ta s k . 1'
             The Environmental Health Officers of this authority are certainly not responsible
^HPor     meat   pies   as    Mr.    Bush    somewhat   facetiously      remarks.           They,    together with        the

  building       surveyor's     department,      the police     and the      fire and ambulance               services join

  forces to make up the advisory group.                   The administration of the system rested within

  the     Administration       and    Legal    Department     under    the   auspices        of    the    Chief     Licensing

  Officer.       To say that officers were not accountable is erroneous.


             The    tragedy     of    Hillsborough      did   reveal    shortcomings          in    the       administrative

  system operated in Sheffield.                  The City Council,       no doubt like many other Councils,

  has taken fully into account the recommendations made in the interim report.                                       Already

  changes have been made and this Council intends to build upon and improve its existing

  administrative arrangements.                  Safety Management is, we believe,                  a multi-disciplinary

  matter and no one profession has all the necessary expertise.                                   The building surveyor

^^rf.11    continue     to be   one     of    several   experts whose        views    are    taken       into   account   but

  I would suggest that the Council must use all the skills available to it rather than

  attempting the kind of delegation suggested by Mr. Bush.                            I sincerely hope that other

  authorities       will     exercise    caution    before    considering       the    adoption          of   the   procedure

  suggested by Mr. Bush.             They are a recipe for disaster.




                                                  Yours faithfully,
             (on     behalf         of    the    South       Yorkshire             Police          Authority)




                                                              v   .


                           Sheffield           United        Football          Club          Limited


BOREHAM        J:                                          JUDGMENT



        In     this       action         the    plaintiff             (the    Authority)             claims           the



sum    of    £5 1 , 6 9 9 . 5 4 p    which       is    alleged          to    be       due    from     the       defendants

                 #     -
(the    Club)        for    police         services          provided             by    the    Authority              at



the    Club's        football            ground       at    Bramall           Lane,          Sheffield           on    dates



between       August        14th         1982    and       November          1 3 th     1983-        The     Club



admit       that     the    services            were       provided          but       deny    their       liability


to    pay.      They       counter-claim               sums       paid       to    the       Authority           for



similar       services          rendered          prior       to      August           14th    1982.         I    am



told    that        the    outcome         of    these       proceedings                is    of    great        importance



to    police        authorities            and    football            clubs        throughout           the       land.




        The      essential           facts       are       short       and    are       not    in    dispute,but



to    understand           some      of    the    arguments             it    is       necessary        to       review



those       facts     in    the      light       of    recent          history.              The    Club     was       founded
in    1889,         was       elected             a    member       of    the    Football             League       in       1892



and    has     been           a    member             ever       since.     It       is    now    one       of    five       football



league       clubs            within             the        Authority's          area.           Its    ground          at



Bramall             Lane,          Sheffield                is    well    known       to       soccer       enthusiasts.

                                                                                                                                 •>

At    one    time         it       was       equally             well    known       as    a    test    and       county



cricket       ground,but                     in       recent       years    its       use       has    been       restricted


to    soccer.




        For         as    long          as       can    be       recalled       the       d e f e n d a n t s ’ home         fixtures



have    been         policed             inside             the    ground       by    the       local       police          authority.



With    the         passing             of       the    years       the    number          of    police          officers



involved            in    this          duty          has    increased.              At    the    same       time,          as



in    the    case         of       many          another          club,    the       number       of    spectators



at    each    match               has    decreased.                 For    instance,             in    the       twenties



and    thirties               when       large          gates       were    recorded, (sometimes                        over



40,000)       policing                  within          the       grounds       was       carried       out       by    a    very



small       body         of       officers.                 In    the    fifties          and    sixties, when               large
              *#»




gates       were         still          being          recorded,about                twenty       officers             were



normally            required;                a    few       more    when    the       ground          was    full       to       capacity.
Their        main    concern             at    that       time       was    to    ensure          that       spectators


were        able    to    watch          in    safety          and    comfort          and       that    both          entry



to    and     egress          from       the    ground          were       smooth       and       unobstructed.



There        were    other          subsidiary                 duties       such       as    supervision                of



the    takings           at    the       turnstiles             and    ensuring             that       there       was       no



entry        onto    the       pitch.           With       the       seventies          two       unhappy          features



coincided.               First,          the    crowds          decreased          markedly             to    a    maximum



of    20,000-30,000;                 secondly,             their       behaviour             deteriorated, with



the    supporters              of    some       clubs          being       particularly                unruly,          aggressive



and    disruptive.                  As    a    result          the    number       of       officers          required



for    duty        within       the       ground          increased          to    a    figure          varying          between



about        thirty       and       eighty          or    more,       according             to    the    opposition.



In    addition,detective                       officers          infiltrated                the    crowd          in   order


to    reduce        such       crimes          as    picking          pockets.              In    the    eighties             things


have        not    improved.              Gates          have    declined          to       between          5,000       and



25,000        with       a general             level       of    about       12,000.              At    the       same       time



the    number        of       uniformed             officers          on    duty       within          the    ground



has    varied        between             thirty          and    ninety       with       an       average          of   about

       /'


sixty.
             More       significantly                     for    present          purposes          the       emphasis



of    the     policing          has       changed:               the       prime    duty       now       is    the       enforcement



of    law     and       order.           There        are       still       other    duties          such          as    crowd



management              and    control            and      the       enforcement          of    the       C l u b ’s      ground



regulations              but    the       maintenance                 of    law    and    order          has       become



the        main    function.              To      this         there       have    been    two       contributing



factors.            First,          and       obviously,             the     deterioration                in       the    behaviour


of    spectators.               As       M r.    Goslin,             the     Assistant          Chief          Constable



of    South        Yorkshire             at     the       relevant          time,    said:-



           "Things       have       changed           a    great       deal       since    the       fifties.

            Now    there       are,on           o c c a s i o n s ,s i t u a t i o n s    which          are       very
            close       to    riot."



This        has    been       the    experience                 of   clubs        throughout             the       land,although



the        supporters          of    some        clubs          have       established          a    far       worse



reputation              than    others.               The       most       serious       incident             occurred



at    Bramall            Lane       in    March           1985,when          supporters             of    the       visiting



team        ripped       out    seats           and       threw      bottles,        iron       bars          and       snooker



balls        at    the       police.            To    combat         such     behaviour             and       to    protect



players           and    officials              and       to    prevent       the    pitch          being          used    as

       /


a    battleground,              high          and     substantial             fencing          was       erected          around



three.sides              of    the       ground           to    contain       the    standing             spectators.
The    second       reason       is    that       from       about          1979    the      Club,        which    has



been    acknowledged             at    all       times       as       safety       conscious,             have    increased



their       safety    measures.              They          have       installed         crush        barriers



adequate       in    strength          and       numbers          to    mitigate          the      potential

                                                                                                                  -N
crushing       effect       of    the       movement             of    large       bodies       of      excited



spectators.           In    addition,             by       the    careful          siting       and       construction



of    gangways       they    have       ensured,             as       far   as     possible,            that     the



gangways       and    the    exits          are    at       all       times      kept     unobstructed


and    accessible.           All       this       has       been       carried       out      under        the    supervision



of    Dr.    Wilfred       Eastwood,an             experienced                consulting             engineer,



who,for       many    years,has             made       a    special         study       of    safety        precautions'



at    football       grounds.           The       result          of    these      and       other        measures



has    been,    as    the    Authority             readily             acknowledges,               to     make    Bramall



Lane    one    of    the    safest          of    soccer          grounds.




        In    addition       to       the    very          subsantial            police       presence,the



Club    has,for       some       years,employed                   a    number      of     part-time            stewards



to    assist    in    crowd       management,                the       securing         of    exits        and    the



enforcement          of    the    Club's          ground          regulations.                It     is    acknowledged,



however,       by    the    Club       that       in       cases       of   difficulty             the     stewards
rely        heavily          on    the    police        who    are       in    uniform,              who       are     younger,



fitter           and    better        disciplined             and    trained             to    act        collectively



and    who,as           a    result,have           more       authority.                 In    addition,               every



uniformed              police       officer        on    duty       is    trained             in     first        aid.



Thus,        whilst          I accept       Mr .    Griffiths'                contention               on      behalf        of    the


Club,that              the       predominant        purpose          of       uniformed              policemen              inside



the    ground           in       recent    years        has    been       to    deter          breaches              of     the



peace        and       unruly       behaviour           and    to    maintain             or,        if     necessary,



restore           law       and    o r der, it     would       be    wrong          to    overlook               their



contribution                 to    crowd    management              and       safety          and      the       enforcement



of    the        Club's          ground    regulations.                  Indeed,          there           might        be    occasions



such        as    the       dramatic       and     disastrous             fire       at       the     ground           of



Bradford              City       Football       Club,when           the       overwhelming                  priority


would        become          crowd safety           and       rescue.




            As    a    first       essential        step       towards          the       maintenance                  of    law


and    order           it    is    necessary        to    keep       the       supporters                 of     the      rival



clubs        segregated             at    all    times.         To       achieve          this        the        police

       /'


have        mounted          a    combined       operation           at       all    home          m a t c h e s ,b e t w e e n



the    officers              on    duty    outside        the       ground          and       those         on    duty       inside.
First,      the     club    supporters             are    admitted          through          particular



turnstiles          to   terracing           at    the    end    of       the    ground       known          as



The    Kop.       Secondly,           the    visiting          supporters             are    met       at    the



railway       station       or    their       coach       parks       and       escorted          to    turnstiles

                                                                                                                  -N


at    the   opposite         (B r a m a i 1 L a n e )      end       of    the    ground.              At    the



turnstiles          they    are       relieved       of    drink          and    c o n t a i n e r s ,such             as


bottles       and    glasses;          those       already       under          the    influence             of



alcohol       are    refused          admittance.              The    remainder             are    then       admitted



to    the   Bramall         Lane       terraces          and    there       overseen          by       uniformed



officers.           Their    duty       is    to    prevent          or    deter       provocative,



disruptive          or   violent        behaviour.              At    times       they       are       called



onto    the    terraces          to    separate          warring          fans.        Without          them           an



exciting       game      might        very    easily       become          an    ugly       and    frightening



spectacle.           The    final       phase       of    the    operation             comes       at       the        end



of    the   game     when    the       visiting          supporters             are    held       on    the       terraces



whilst      the     home    supporters             disperse.              They    are       then       escorted



by    the   officers        on    duty       outside       back       to    the       railway          station



or    their    coach       parks.
             All       this    has       called          for         very    considerable             organisation



and         close       liaison          between          the       Club    and    the    police.           For          as



    long     as    memory          can    recall          the       procedures          have    been       in       essence



the         same,       although          with          refinements          dictated          by    experience


and         extra       demands.              In    recent          years    standard          instructions                   have



been         in    force       (they          are       before       the    court)so          that    in    substance



the         same       methods       of       policing          have        been    applied          to    all       five



clubs         within          the    Authority's                area.        Briefly          what    has       happened


is     this.            In    July       or    August          of    each    year       the    senior       police



officer            responsible                for       the    policing          operations          meets          the



Chairman               and    Secretaries                of    each    of    the    five       clubs.           Together
r



they        review           the    policing             arrangements             made    during          the       previous



season,            discuss          problems             which       have    arisen       and       consider             the



policing               requirements                for    the       forthcoming          season.           When          the



season            begins       the       divisional             commander          in    whose       area       a    particular



ground            is    situated          discusses             with       the    club    the       number          of    uniformed


officers               required          for       each       home    game.        Those       numbers          depend



in    part         on    the       expected             size    of    the    crowd       and    in    part          on    the

       /'

number            and    reputation                of    the    visitor's          supporters.              There             has



been        admirable              co-operation                between       the    Club       and    the       police
and       an    equally       admirable          understanding                by       each    of    the       problems



of    the       other.        Happily       that       good       will       has       survived          this       litigation.




                                                                                                                      -N


           At    the    beginning          of    each       week    an       operation          order          is    compiled



by    the       police       and    circulated             within       the       Force       and    to    the       Club.



Such       an    order       is    before       the    court.           It    contains          detailed             instruc­



tions          for    policing       each       particular          part          of    the    ground,          for



crowd          control       and    for    the    enforcement                of    the       Club's       ground



regulations.                 They    can    be    summarised,                therefore,             as    they       were



by    Mr.       Goslin        and    Chief       Inspector          Payne, as            providing             for.*..



(a)       the    maintenance          or    enforcement             of       law       and    order;



(b)       the    enforcement          of    the       Club's       ground          regulations,                many



     of    which       are    concerned          with       law    and       order;



(c)       the    safety       and    comfort          of    the    spectators,                officials             and


players.




           The       manpower       required          for    these       operations             is,       as    I    have

     I
indicated,             considerable.                  It    cannot       be       provided          by    officers



who       would       normally       be    on    duty       at    the    relevant             times,without
adversely            affecting                normal          policing             requirements               elsewhere



in    the    Authority's                     area.           It    is,     therefore,              provided          by    extending



the    shifts            of    those          involved             and     by      calling         on    officers          who


would       otherwise               have          been       on    rest       day.       This          involves       the



payment       of         substantial                   overtime.



        For         as    long          as    memory          can       recall,        the        Club    has    paid          for


this    service               of    uniformed                officers           within        the       ground       and       until


the    1 9 8 0 's        they       paid          without          demur.          They           have    never       been



called       upon         to       pay       for       the    police          on   duty       outside          the    ground



nor    for    the         detective                officers             within        the     ground.           Of    course,



over    the         years          the       charges          made       by     the    Authority              have    increased,
               ■t



mainly       because               of    the       rises          in    police        officers'           pay    and       the



need    for         increasing                numbers.                 This     has    coincided              with    rises



in    other     expenses                 and       with       diminishing              gates.            The    increases



are    well     documented                    and       are       not    in     dispute.               Some    indication



of    their     impact              on       the       Club       can    be     given        by   a     couple       of    examples:



in    the    season            1979/80             the       cost       to t h e    Club      for        policing          a    crowd



of    16,000        was        £600;          in       1981/82          it h a d    risen         to     £1,990;          the



figures       relating                  to    a    crowd          of    22,000 showed              even       larger       increases



from    £742        in        1979/80             to    £2,635          in 1 9 8 1 / 8 2 .
        In    1981       Mr.    Reginald             Brealey           became         the    Club's          Chairman.



At    that    time       the    Club       was       losing          nearly       three-quarters                  of    a



million       pounds       per       annum.              He    ordered       drastic         curbs       on       expenditure


These       were    successful             and       within          three     years        the    Club       was       breaking



even.        One    of    the. m a t t e r s         he       investigated            was    the       ever-increasing



cost    of    police       services.                 His       enquiries          led    him      to    believe



that    the    charge          made       to    the       Clubs        in S o u t h     Yorkshire            were       out



of    scale    with       those          made       to    clubs        in o t h e r     areas,         and    so       he



took    various          steps       in    the       hope       of    reducing          that      burden.              First,


in    May    1982    he    wrote          to    the       Home       Secretary;          the      reply       was       not



very    encouraging,but                   at    least         some     misunderstandings                     were       removed.

                     T

For    instance,          it    came       as       some      comfort        to    learn       that      soccer



was    not    the    only       sport          to    face       this     particular            expense.                In



addition       the       legal       position             was    clarified            and   Mr.        Brealey



became       aware       that       police          services         were      only      provided            at    the



Club's       request.           In       December             1982    negotiations             were      commenced



between       the    representatives                      of    the     Authority           and    the five             clubs



in    the    hope    of    reducing             the       level        of c h a r g e s .      These         discussions



were    successful.                 In    March          1983    new     scales         were      agreed;          they


were    calculated             on    a    new       basis,which            was     related         to    the       size
of    the    crowd        and       hence        to    the       gate       money       and       not    to    the       number



of    police     officers                employed.               This       was    e n c o u r a g i n g ,but        the



Club's       hopes        that        the       new    rates          would       be    backdated             to    the


commencement              of    the        1982/83          season          were       not    realised.              They

                                                                                                                              -N


came    into     effect             on     April       1s t      1983-




        Pending           the       agreement              of    the    new            rates paymentshad                  been



suspended.            By       April        1st       1983,          therefore,             the    arrears          were



substantial           -    in       the     case       of       the    Club         about £55,000.                  The



Authority        demanded                payment.               In    August       they           agreed       to p a y m e n t



by    instalments.                  By     the    end       of       August       the       Club    had       paid       just
                                T


over    £14,000.               It    has        paid       no    more.           The    amount          of    the    arrears



was    too     much       for       M r.    Brealey              who,       in    about       May       1983,       turned



for    support        to       the       Minister           of       Sport.        He       did    so    partly          in



the    belief     that          since           June       1982       the    Club       had       been        making



specific        requests             for        police          services          for       selected          games.



He    was    wrong        about          that;        in    fact       no    such       request          had       been       made.



The    time     honoured             practice              of    weekly          discussion             between          the



C l u b /and    the       police           as    to    next          Saturday's             requirements             had



been    followed.               The        Minister             was    unable          to    assist.           As    a    means
of    reducing       expense              there          was    discussed             at    the     pre-season



meeting       in    July        1983            between        the    plaintiffs             and    the    representatives



of    the    five    clubs           the         possibility              of    making       increased          use    of



stewards       for       crowd        control             so,       hopefully,             reducing       the    police

                                                                                                                       >
presence.           It     was. t h e            unanimous           view       of    the    meeting       that       this


was    undesirable.                  Their          view       was    that       the       stewards       lacked       the


necessary          authority.




        There       is     no    doubt            that        all    the       clubs       welcomed       the    police



to    their    grounds.               As         M r.    Brealey          had        readily       conceded,          he



has    never       denied        the            benefit        to    the       Club    of    having       the    police

                                           •r



in    the    ground;         they         have a         deterrent             effect       on    the    unruly       element



and    he    considers               it         likely        that    spectators             were       more    likely



to    come    if    they        knew            that     the    police          were       there.        Indeed,       he



agreed       that    if     the       police             were       not    there       his       Club    would       not



be    taking       the    reasonable                    precautions             necessary          to    comply       with



the    Football          A s s o c i a t i o n s 's           regulations             and    in    particular



Regulation          31(a) . But he                      insisted          that       the    cost    was    too       high.



In    October       1983        he    asked             for    the    debt       to    be    cancelled          on    the
        I


ground       that    there           had         been     no    request          for       police       services.
This      request           was       refused.                 He       then        suggested             that    th e    Club


might         instal        close-circuit                      television                 and    so       obviate        the    need


for     police            within          t he    ground;               any     trouble          or       problem        would


be     revealed            on    the       screen             and       the     police          could       then     be    called


in     from     outside.                  T h i s,     not         surprisingly,                 was       not    acceptable.




          By    December              1983        th e        Club        was       heavily          in   arrears         with


the     instalments.                      The     plaintiffs                   issued          their      writ.          The    Club


then      made        a    fresh          effort         to        r id    themselves                of   the     burden, by


intimating                that       for       the     game         against              Bolton       Wanderers           due    to


be     played         on    December              31st         they        did       not       request       police        services.
                                                         ■r


T he    police            were       so    concerned                that        they       threatened             proceedings


before         the        local       justices                under        the       provisions             of    Section        10


of     th e    Safety           of    Sports           Grounds             Act       1975.           By   Decemember            21st


the     Authority               authorised               such           proceedings              but      advised         the    Club


that      this a uthority                      would          be    withdrawn              if   the       Club    made         a request   for


these         services           under           Section            15(1)           of    the    1964       Police        Act.
                 •m




The     Club     relented                 to     the     extent            of       requesting            and     I quote:-


        "Police            services              in    such         numbers              and    at    such       times
          as    the        Chief          Constable                might        direct."




                                                                    -     14    -
They     made       it    clear         that        the       request          was     not      for      special          police


services           nor    was      it      made        pursuant           to     Section           15(1)       of    the        1964    Act.


This     was       not    good        enough           for     the       Authority.                As    a result          it


was     agreed        that        the      Club        would        request           and      again      I quote:-

                                                                                                                           -\



        "Special          police           services            from       th e    Chief         Constable            under
         Section          15(1)         of      t he     Police          Act     1 9 64     fo r    the    Bolton
         Wanderers              match        on     December             31st     and       all     subsequent
         home       matches           for       the      1983/84          football             season."


T he    request          wa s     expressed              to    be       without        prejudice           to       the    matters


raised        in    t h is      action.             Thus       honour          and     goodwill           were       preserved


pending        t he      outcome           of     these        proceedings.




         Against          this          background                 and    in     these         circumstances               Mr.     Bently,


on     behalf       of    the      Authority,                 contends           that       the     sums       claimed


in     this    action           are     du e      under:


(1)     Section          15(1)        of     th e      Police           Act    1964       which         provides:


        "The       chief        officer           of     police          of    any     police           force       may
         provide          at      the      request            of    any       person        special        police
         services            at    any       premises              or    in    any     locality           in    the
         police          area      for       which         the      force        is    maintained,subject
         to    the        payment            to     th e      police          authority            of    charges          on
         such       scales         as      may      be     determined             by      that      authority."


Alternatively,                  (2)     the       terms        of       contract          between         the       Authority


an d    the    C l u b.         The     Club        denies          liability             on   the       following              broad


grounds :
(1)      The    services        provided          were     not       special          police       services.


They     were, or       at    least       they    were     predominantly,ordinary                         services,


that     is    services        provided          within        the    scope       and       in   pursuance


of     the    Authority's           absolute       public        duty       to    maintain          law       and


order.         The     essence       of    special       services           is    that       they       are    different


in     kind    from     ordinary          services       and     the       services          provided          by


the     Authority        were       not    special       in     that       regard.


(2)      That    t he    Club       made    no    request        fo r      special          police       services;


such     request,        if any, as         they       made    were        for    ordinary          police


services.


(3)      That    th e    Authority          is,    therefore,              not    entitled          to    charge
                                                          ■r




fo r    such    services.


It     follows,        therefore,          that    the    main        thrust          of    counsel's          sub­


missions        ha s    been    directed          to    the    question           whether          or    not    the


services        provided        by    the    Authority           for       the    Club       were       special


police        services.         However,          a number           of    subsidiary            points        have


been     taken.         It    will    be    convenient           to       deal    with       these       here


and     now.     First,        it    will    be    recalled           that       Mr.       Bently       bases


his     case    in     the    alternative          on    Section           15(1)       of    the    Police


Act      1964    an d    on    contract.           I should           make       it    clear       that       I approach
the     plaintiff's             claim        as    one     for       breach          of       contract-               Whilst


Section        15(1)       of    the       1964     Ac t    recognises                a       practice           which           has


been     followed          for       very     many       years        and       gave          statutory           power


to     provide       special           police       services           for       payment             on    request               it d o e s

                                                                                                                            •N



no t    of    itself       provide           a cause        of       action;          it       is    merely           an    enabling


provision.            To    succeed           the       Authority              must       prove       (1)        a request             for


and     a promise          to    pay       for     the     relevant             services;             (2)        that       the


services           sought       an d      provided         were       special             police          services.




         As    to    (1)    it       is    not     disputed           that       the          evidence           of    th e


course        of    dealing          between        the     parties             could          justify           the       inference
                                                                           r


of     a request       for       services           and     a    promise             to       pay.        T he    course


of     conduct              commenced              at    a time        which          was       long       beyond          th e


memory        of    living       persons           and     has c o n t i n u e d              unbroken           over      the


succeeding           years.            Having           regard        to       the    nature          of     the       services


and     the        status       of     the    premises           in    which          they          were    provided,


namely        a private          sports           ground        of    large          capacity,             it     is,      I


think,        highly       probable           that       the     course          of       dealing          commenced


with/an        express          request           from     the       Club       for       a    police       presence


and     an    express       promise           to    pay.         But, be         that          as    it    may,        for


as     long    as   memory           can     recall       th e       procedure                has    remained           substantially
th e    s a me,          namely       a pre-season              meeting           between          senior        represen­


tatives             of    the       parties        to    discuss          in    general         terms       th e      Club's


requirement                   for    the     ensuing          season.           Particular            matches,when


trouble             was       most    likely, w e r e          i d e n t i f i e d , in      the     knowledge             t^hat


the     Club         would          then     be    expected          to    receive           and     the    Authority


to     provide            additional              officers.           Then        at    t he    beginning             of    each


week          the    Club's          requirements              for    the       next      home       game       were       appraised


in     greater            detail        and       always       on    the       understanding               that       the


Authority                expected           payment.           Until       the        1982/83        season          it    was


also,on             the       understanding              that       the    Club        expected        to       pay.


To     adapt         th e      words        of    Sir    Wilfred          Greene,,        Master       of       the       Rolls,


in     In      re:       Cleadon        Trust       Limited          [1938]           4 A.E.R.        518       at    page       525.


the     Club         knew       that        services          were    being           provided        for       their       benefit


with          an    expectation              that       the    Club       would        pay     for    those          services;


at     th e        very       least     they       acquiesced             in    the     provision           of       those


services             and       took     th e      benefit       of    them.            They     must       be    taken


impliedly                to    have     requested             those       services           and     thereby          promised


to     pa,y for           t h em.       I do       not    overlook             th e    fact     that       in    19 8 3     the
         /'




Club          challenged             th e    plaintiff's             right        to    payment        first          on    th e
ground       that    they          were     liable        only        if    they    made        an      express         request


for    a particular                match     and     that        they       had    made       few       such        requests.


This    was    based          on    a misunderstanding.                       They       ha d      made        no    express


requests;          they       had     followed           the     time       honoured          procedure.                In


any    event       their        complaint           at    that        time    was       about        th e      amount


claimed       not    th e       propriety           of    th e    charge.           Later          they        challenged


the    propriety          of       th e    cha rge, bu t         I have       no    doubt          that        they    requested


the    services          which        were     in    fact        provided          and       expected           to    pay


for    them    if    th e       plaintiffs           were        entitled          to    charge.               Whether


or    not    they    were          entitled         to    charge           must    depend          on    whether


or    not    what    they          provided         were       special        police          services.               T hu s
                                                                                         *




I do    not    accept           Mr.       Gr iffiths1submission                    that       during           the    relevant


period,       or    at    least           during     part        of   that        period,          the      Club's       requests


were    limited          to     the       provision        of     ordinary          police           services.


Neither       side       wa s      concerned         with        labels;          each       knew       th e    kind


and    the    extent          of    th e    service        expected           by    the       Club       and        provided


by    the    Authority.               It    was     for    that       service           that       requests           were


made.        The    crucial           question,           as     I have       said,          is:    Were        they


special       police          services?
          Then       Mr.    Bently           submits          that     where,as         he r e ,       in    a course


of dealing           over     many       years,services                 have      been       provided             at    the


express, or           implied           request          of    the    Club,in          the    knowledge                that


th e    Authority           expected           p a yme nt, t h e n         the    law    will          imply       a    promise


to     pa y    and    the     Authority             is,       therefore,          entitled             to    payment.


In     such     circumstances,                 he    contends,             it    does    not       matter          that


the     plaintiffs            were       providing             no    more       than    it    was       their          public


duty     to     provide.            Th e      performance             of    a    public       duty          is    good


consideration               for     a    promise          to    pay    and       there       is    no       principle


of     public        policy       which        precludes             the    recovery          of       the       agreed


price.          T h i s,    I think,           is    the       least       impressive             of    Mr.       Bently's
                                                                                                   *

submissions            and,it           is    fair       to    say, it      was       presented             rather         more


tentatively            than       the        rest.        Its       support       is    said       to       come       from


two     comparatively               recent          decisions          in       the    Court       of       Appeal:


Ward     v.    Byham        [1956]           2 A.E.R.          318    and       Williams          v.    Williams


[1957]         1 W.L.R.        148.           In    my    view,       they       do    not provide               support


fo r     Mr.    Bently's            submission. They                  were       both    concerned               with


the     duty     of    on e    individual                to    another.           They       were       not      concerned


w i t h ,public        duty       in     the       wider       sphere,          namely       the       duty      of    a


public        body     to     the       public       at       large.        Applied          to    th e      latter
category          of    case       they        would          run       counter           to       a    long          line       of    authority


to   th e     contrary.            Sse        for       instance             th e    observations                      of    Lord


Ca ve,      the    Lord       Chancellor,                 in       Glasbrook                  v.       Glamorgan             County


Council        [19253         A.C.        270       at    page          277-         I quote:-


      "No      doubt         there        is       an    absolute             and        unconditional
         obligation               binding           the       police          authorities                    to       take
         all      steps       which           appear          to    them        to       be    necessary                for
         keeping            the    peace,           for       preventing                 crime          or       for
         protecting               property              from       criminal              injury             and       the
         public,who               pa y    for       this       protection                 through                the    rates
         and      taxes, c a n n o t           lawfully             be       called           upon          to    make       a
         further            payment           for       that       which       is        their          right.              This
         was      laid       down        by    Lord       Justice             Pickford                 in    the       case
         of    Glamorganshire                      Coal       Co.       v.    The        Glamorganshire
         Standing            Joint        Committee                in    the        following                terms:
         'If o n e          party        to    a dispute                is    threatened                    with       violence
         by    t he     other          party        he    is       entitled              to    protection                   from
         such      violence,whether                       his       contention                 in       th e      dispute             be
         right         or    wrong,and              to    allow          the        police             authority             to
         deny      him       protection                 from       that       violence                 unless          he    pays
         all      the       expense           in    addition             to    th e       contribution                      which
         with      other          rate        payers          he    makes           to    the          support          of       the
         police         is    only        one       degree          less       dangerous                    than       to
         allow         that       authority              to    decide          which           party             is    right
         in    the      dispute          and       grant       or       withhold              protection                accordingly.
         There         is    a moral           duty       on       each       party           to       the       dispute          to
         do    nothing            to     aggravate             it       and    to        take          reasonable                means
         of    self-protection,but                            the       discharge              of       this          duty       by
         them      is       not    a condition                 precedent                 to    t he         discharge
         by    the      police           authority             of       their        own       duty.'                 With       this
         statement            of       th e    law       I entirely                 agree          and       I think             that
         any      attempt          by     a police             authority                 to    extract                payment
         for      services             which        fall       within          the        plain             obligations
         of    the      police           force          should          be    firmly           discountenanced
         by    th e     courts."
In    my    judgment,               if    the    Authority              was    not       providing          special


police          services            for    the       Club.it        is    not       entitled          to    payment.




           Mr.     Griffiths              has    contended              that       if    I were       to    find       that

                                                                                                                           "N



the    services              provided           by    th e    Authority             were       in    part       special


services           and       in     part       services           which, in         accordance             with       their


public          duty,they               were    bound        to    provide,the             Club       should          bear


the    cost        of       th e    former       but    not        of    the       latter.           I think          there


are    two       answers            to    that       submission:              first,       in       deciding          whether


or    not       th e    services           were       special           services          I think          the    services


must       be    viewed            as    a whole;       to        break       them       down       into    their          constituent
                                                                                                                      *

parts       is     unrealistic;                 secondly,           even       if       that    exercise          could


realistically                      be    achieved        it       would       be    impossible             to    sever


them       in    order         to       price    them.




           With        that        I turn       to    the     question             which       is    central          to        t his


litigation.                  The        expression           "special          police          services"          is       now


enshrined              in    Section           15(1)    of        the    1964       Act    but       it    is    probable


that       it    is     as     long       established              as    the       practice          itself.           Certainly


the    expression                  was    current        in       the    1920's,but             nowhere          in    the
1964    Act        or    in    relevant            judicial          authority           is     any       definition



of    its    terms        to     be    found.            That,       perhaps,           is     no t      surprising.


It    may    very        well       be,     as     Mr.       Bently       submits,           that        l ike    the       elephant


they    are        easier        to    recognise              than     to    define.            Both          parties


are    agreed,           however,           that        the    expression              relates           to    services


which       are     beyond          what        the     Authority           is    bound        by     its      public


duty    to     provide,             beyond         what       ordinary           members        of       the     public


are    entitled           to    expect.               What,        then ,    is    the       ambit        of     that       public


duty?        It     is    conveniently                  summarised           in    Halsbury's                 Laws     of


England,           4th    edition,              Volume        3 6 , paragraph            32 0       in    these        terms:-


       "General           functions              of     constables.
        The        primary          function            of    the    constable           remains,as               in
        th e       17th       C ent ury , the           preservation              of    t he    Queen's           peace.
        From        t hi s     general           function           stems        a number           of    particular
        duties           additional              to     those       conferred           by     statute           and
        including              those        mentioned              hereafter.            The        first        duty
        of     a    constable              is    always        to      prevent          the     commission
        of     a    crime.            If    a constable              reasonably              apprehends
        that        the       action        of     any       person       may     result        in       a breach           of
        t he       peace       it     is    his       duty     to    prevent           that     action.              It     is
        his        general          duty         to p r o t e c t    life        and    property.                The
        general           function               of c o n t r o l l i n g    traffic           on     the      roads
        is     derived           from       this        duty."


To    similar           effect                   is th e      law    relating           to     policeconstables


in    Scotland           which        is    se t o u t        in    the     Police       (Scotland)               Act       1967,


Section        17,       upon       which         Mr.    Griffiths           relied.            Subsection                (1)    provides
        "Subject             to       th e      provisions           of    this      Act       it     shall       be
            the    duty          of    the       constables           of       a police          force:
            (a)    to       guard,           patrol       and    watch          so   as
                   (1)       to       prevent          the     commission            of     offences;
                   (2)       to       preserve          order;        and
                   (3)       to       protect          life     and       property."


It     is    unnecessary                   to    quote       further.




            In    support             of     the      Authority's              case,that            t he    services           provided


by     them       to    the       Club          were    outside           the    sphere          of    their       public


duty,Mr.           Bently             makes        a number          of    points.             He     submits          first


that        th e -public              duty       of    a chief        constable             does       not      extend         to


protecting              every          citizen          completely              against          every         possible


or     even       anticipated                   crime.         His    resources             of m e n        and    money


are     limited             and       his       obligation           is    limited          by      th e m .      Moreover,


hi s    duty       is       to    be       carried        out    in       an    even      handed           manner       and


so     he    must       decide             fairly       and     reasonably             which          calls       he    will


answer           and    which          he       will    not     and       which      he     can       only      answer         if


the     services             are       paid        for.        Where       there       is      a threat           to    la w


and     order          on    private             land     he    has       a number          of      alternatives               open


to     him:       (1)       to    send          police       officers;           (2)      if     it    appears          that
        /



the     event          would          be     productive          of       disorder,            take        steps       to   prevent   it
 (3)    at    sports           grounds          make       application              under       Section           10    of


the     Safety          of    Sports          Grounds        A ct      1975;        (4)    to    say       "My    resources


in     men    and       money        are      limited,           I cannot           afford       to    provide           the


services           unless           you      pay     for    them".            He    is    not    bound       to        adopt

                                                                                                                         >

the     alternative                 most      favourable            to      the     persons          staging           the


event.         Secondly,                he    submits        that        the       Club    seek       to    interpret


th e    expression                "special           police       services"              too    narrowly.               His


case     is    that          police          services        may       be     special,not             only       when        they


are     different             in     kind       but       also    when        they       are    more       extensive


than     it    is       the       Authority's              duty     to      provide.            For    instance,


whilst        it    is       t he    duty       of    the    police           to    prevent          threatened              or


apprehended              breaches             of     the    peace,the              ordinary          citizen       has


to      wait       until          danger        is    upon       him     or    is    threatened             before           he


is     entitled          to       call       fo r    assistance             from     the       police.           Here        what


is     called       th e      la w      and     order       protection              is    more       extensive           and


is     committed             in     advance          of    threatened              danger       or    threats          of


breaches           of    the        peace.           Thirdly,          here        the    police       were       not        dis­


charging           their          own     duty       to    the    public;           they       were    in    fact        discharging


the / C l u b ' s       duties          to    the     spectators              whom       the    Club       invited           to


the    ground.             The       Club      chose        to    invite           large       numbers       to    their
private          premises;        it    was        the    Club's       duty       to    provide          fo r      their


safety,          health    and     comfort.               They    could       have employed                   a security


firm    as       banks    and     others           have    to    do    to    protect          their          interest;


they    chose       to    request         th e      police       to    perform          those          duties       knowing


that    the       police     expected              payment.           Fourthly,             the    police          within


the    ground       provided           services           which       it    was    not       within          the    scope


of    their       public    duty        to     perform.           For       instance,             they       assisted


in    crowd       management           an d    in    the       enforcement             of    such       ground


regulations          as    refused            entry       to    those       who    tried          to    enter       without


paying       or    prohibited           spectators              encroaching             on    parts          of    the


ground       *     which     their        entry          fee    did    not    entitle             them       to    enter.


It    may    be,    submits        Mr.        Bently,          that    the    maintenance                of       law


and    order       was    t he    predominant              aim    but       there       were       other          services


performed.           The     services              must    be    viewed       as       a whole;          they       ar e


not    severable.




        The       case    for     the     Club       is    that       the    services             provided          by


the    Authority          were     within           the    scope       of    their          absolute          public


duty    an d      were    provided            in    pursuance          of    that       duty.           Special


police       services        on    th e       other       hand    are       services          in       the    nature
of     a luxury         or    beyond        what       is    necessary          in    the    circumstances,


beyond         what     it    is    the     Authority's             duty       to    supply,         for    instance,


th e    provision            of    a police        presence          at    a    large       wedding        in    order


to     keep     surveillance               over    th e      presents.              Here    th e    police       presence


was     no     luxury;        it    was     clearly          regarded          as    a necessity.               The    Club';


case      is    really        this:        in    recent       years       the       problems        facing       clubs


and     the     police        have       changed.            In    the    thirties,when              much       larger


crowds         were     attracted           to    matches,only             a very          small     body       of


police         was    required           within        the    ground,because                there     was       virtually'


no     la w    and    order        problem.            That       situation          was    substantially


unchanged            until        the    mid-fifties.               Since       then       lawlessness,


hooliganism             and       aggression           have       moved    inside          the     ground       and


onto      the    t e r r a c e s (c a u s i n g    a    serious          law    and    order        problem          and


the     need     f or    more       an d    more       officers          inside       the    ground.            Now,


unless         the    police        are     present          in    numbers,          very    serious        breaches


of     the     peace     are       probable -          if    not    this       week    then        next w e e k       - and


are     virtually            certain        on    many       identifiable             occasions         when         clubs


whose         supporters           have     a particularly                bad       reputation        visit


Bramall          Lane.            That     this    is       the    predominant             reason,if        not


really         the    sole        reason,for           providing          the       police       service
within           the    ground            is,    says       Mr.       Griffiths,             confirmed           by       a number


of     matters.              First,          the      combined          operation             between           those        inside


and     those          outside            the    ground          in    respect          of    th e    visiting             supporters.


They        perform          the       same      function,             namely       the       preservation                 of


the     peace.              No     charge        is     made      for       those       outside           the    ground


because           they       are       providing            ordinary             police       services,              so    it


is     said       are       those         within        the      ground.           Indeed,           this       is    recognised,


it     is     submitted,               in    the      briefing          instructions                 given       to       t he    officers


on     duty       inside           the      ground.             Secondly,          the       Authority's              reaction


to     th e      Club's          decision          to      do    without         a police            presence             inside


the     ground          for        t he     Bolton         match       on    December          31st         1983,         namely


to     apply       to       th e      justices          under         the    provisions              of     Section          10


of     th e      Safety          of    Sports         Grounds          Act       1975    on    th e       ground          that


without           a police             presence            serious          breaches          of     th e      peace       were


likely.            Thirdly,               with     th e     reduced          attendances              in       recent       years       and


th e    increased                safety         features          installed,crowd                    management             and


safety           are    no       longer         problems.              There       have       been        no    injuries


or     danger          to    spectators               on    this       account.              Fourthly,           the       enforce­


ment        of    the       Club's          ground         regulations             is    no    longer           of    any        real


significance,save                         only     in      respect          of   those        regulations                 which
relate        (as    the    majority           of       them     do)        to    the    preservation                   of


law     and    order.           Mr.    Griffiths            submits              that    every        chief         constable


has     a duty       to    the    public           which        must        be    carried          out    in       as    fair


and     even    handed          a manner           as    hi s    resources              in    money       an d      manpower


will     allow.           The    Chief        Constable              in     this       case    wa s      faced          in


respect        of    each       home       fixture        with        tw o       simple       questions.                 Fi r s t ,


is     there        a threat          to    law     and    order            which       I ought          to    meet?


Secondly,           have    I the          resources            in    manpower           to    meet       it       without


depriving           others       of    th e    protection                 to     which       they     are      entitled?


If     the    answers       to    both        those       questions               are    in    th e      affirmative,


as     Mr.    Griffiths          submits           should        be       the     case       here,       then       the


duty     to    meet       the    threat        is       absolute            and    the       services          so       provided


are     ordinary          services         within         the        scope        of    ordinary          duty          an d


th e     community          must       pay.         What        happened           here       was     that         instead


of     addressing          his    mind        to    the    problems               on    a match-by-match


basis,in        the       light       of   competing             priorities,                 the    Chief          Constable


made     a    blanket       decision           covering              t he      whole     season.              He    must


have     concluded          that       certain           steps        were        necessary           for      keeping


the     peace,       preventing            crime         and     protecting              property.                 In    that


e v e n t .it w a s       his    public        duty       to     provide           police          services             unless
 in      his       judgment           higher          priority       for    those       services             had       exhausted


 his      resources              in    manpower.              He    was    not    entitled             to    conclude,


 as      he    must       have        done,       that    there       was       a threat          to    la w      and     order


‘a n d    he       could     muster           the      manpower       to    meet       that       threat          an d    then


 because            of    hi s    limited             financial       resources          go       on    to     say       " b ut


 I must            charge        for       those       services".           That       was    wrong,           says       Mr.     Griffitl


If       the       Authority           is     correct         in    its    contention             then       lawful           enter­


tainment             may    be        prohibited          by       a combination             of    th e      breakdown


of       law       and    order        an d      the    inability          of    the    Club       to       pay    for        police


protection.                 The        next       step,       says    Mr.       Griffiths,             will       be     to


prohibit             public           or    political          meetings          by    the    same          process,


in       which       event       the        police       would       be    in    the    political              arena.


This,          he    contends,              is    entirely         unacceptable.




              In    support           of    their       respective          submissions,                counsel           have


relied             heavily       on        the    judgments          in    the    Court       of       Appeal          an d


th e      speeches          in     the        House      of    Lords       in    the    case       of     Glasbrook


Brothers             v.    Glamorgan              County       Council.           The    Court          of     Appeal


decision             is    reported              in    [1924]      1 K.B.        879.        The    headnote              reads:-
       "Where             under          particular               circumstances                   police          protection
          is    necessary,                    although            the    police          authority                are     bound
          to        provide             sufficient            protgction                without          payment,             if       the
          party           applying             for      it    requires             it    to       be    provided             in    a
          special              an d      particular               form    which          is       not    necessary                he
          may        be       required             to   pay       for    it.
                         On    the       occasion            of    a strike             a colliery                manager
          applied              for       police         protection             fo r      his       colliery             and        „
          insisted                 that       it    could         not    be    efficiently                   protected
          except              by    billetting               a certain             number          of    policemen                on
          the       colliery              premises.                The    police             authority             were       ready
          and       willing              to    provide            sufficient             police          protection                in
          another              way,       but       refused         to    billet             their       men       at     the
          colliery                 except          on   the       terms       of    th e      manager             agreeing             to
          pay        for       the       police         force       so    provided                at    a certain             specified
          ra te .             It    was       held      by    Lords       Justices                Banks       and       Scrutton,
          Lord           Justice          Atkin         dissenting,                that       there          was    nothing
          illegal              in       the    agreement            nor       was       it    void       for       want       of
          consideration.


It   is    clear,              therefore,               that       in    that       case          there       had       already


been      a threat                 of    violence,            an    emergency                had       arisen       an d      the       colliery


were,      it       was        not       doubted,            entitled          to       police          protection.                    The


sole      question                 in    the       appeal         was    whether             or    not       in    t he      particular


circumstances                      the    police         were       entitled             to       charge          for     the      protection


which      they           actually             provided.                Early       in       his       judgment           Lord         Justice


Banks      considered                    what       were      the       legal       duties             and    obligations
                •    ^




of   a county                 police          force      and       in    the       course          of    doing          so    he       had


this      to    say           at    page       886:-
       "There        is,       however,             no       absolute          standard             of       duty
        and     n o .d e f i n i t i o n           of    the       exact       of       amount          of    police
        protection                 to     which         an    individual                is    entitled.
        Every        case          must       depend          upon       its       own       circumstances."


A little        later          he       came       to    consider             an    argument             advanced              in


the     appeal           that        it      was    illegal             to m a k e       any       charge          for     police


services        of       any       kind^however                special.                 That,       of       course,           is


ah    argument           which          could       not       be    relied          upon          since       the       passing


of    the     Police          Ac t      1964.           In    the       course          of    dealing           with       that


submission               he    ha d       this      to       say    at    page          8 8 7 :-


       " To    test       this          last       contention             I pu t         the       case       of    an
        extremely              nervous             person          who    was       unable          to       sleep        fo r
        fear        of    burglars             a nd      who       therefore             applied             for    a
        constable              to       be    stationed             on    point          duty       all       night
        outside           his        house.             If    his       request          was       granted          on
        condition              that          a payment             could       be       made       for       this
        special           service             Mr.       Montgomery             contended                that       t he
        contract              to     make      the       payment          was       illegal.                 I cannot
        accept           that        view.          The       service          upon          which       th e      con­
        stable           would          be    employed             is    police          service             and,unless
        it     is    shown              that       the       granting          of       the       request          deprives
        other        people             of    a reasonable                amount             of    police          protection,-
        I can        see       nothing             objectionable,still                            less       illegal,about
        the     transaction.                       If    people          for       their          own    pleasure              or
        for     their          own        profit         or    because             in    special             cases        of     their
        peculiar              circumstances                   desire          special             police        service
        I see        no       reason          why       they       should          not       be    called          upon        to
        pay     for       i t ."


Lord /Justice             Scutton             dealt          with       the    same          point       in     this       way


at    page     890
      "Before        us    counsel              for     th e      colliery             company             argued        an
       important           point           that        had     not      been          argued          in    the        court
       below,        namely          that         all       charges          by       police          authorities
       for      performing               their         duty       of    protecting                the       public
       were      illegal.                There         is    no     doubt         that          for    many        years
       police        authorities                  have       furnished                for       payment           at    the
       request- of             individual               citizens             policemen                to    perform
       duties        in    the       nature            of    maintaining                   order       or     preventing
       crime.         Instances                 are     where          valuable             property              is    tempo­
       rarily        and       temptingly               exposed             to    mixed          a s s e m b l i e s ,as          at
       weddings           to    guard           th e    presents             or       sales       or       bazaars;or
       where       assemblies               are        likely          to    produce             disorder,as                 at
       races,or           football              meetings,or                 to    regulate             traffic           to
       private        f e s t i v i t i e s ,such              as      dances.              It    would           take       very
       clear       authority               to     persuade             me    this          is    illegal.
                 Obviously               the      police          authorities                   cannot        be       expected
       to    and     cannot          protect            every          citizen             completely              against
       possible,even                 anticipated*crime.                               The       cost       would        be
       prohibitive,                 t he    premium            of      insurance                would       be     over
       100%.         I am       excluding               cases          of    specific             information                 of
       definite           crime          and      only       referring                to    apprehensions                    of
       possible           crime.And               it    may       well       be       that       if    a citizen              is
       merely        apprehensive                  and       he c a n        be       given       at       hi s    request
       p.rotection             against            what       he     apprehends                  without           detriment
       to    more     reasonable                  police          duties,he                may    be       given        that
       protection              at    hi s       own     expense,             th e      money          paid        going       in
       the      first      instance               to    t he      police          authority."


Mr.   Bently       relies           on     those        observations                   as       giving            authoritative


 guidance       as   to w h a t            may     be       regarded             as    special             police        services.




       The      decision            of     t he    House          of    Lords          is       reported           in    C1925]


A .C . 2 7 0.      There        again           the     decision             was       by       a simple           majority.
In    th e    course          of h is      speech          the    Lord       Chancellor                highlighted


the     two       points          that    were       raised       in     the      appeal          before         their


lordships,                        I quote       from       page    277:-


        "First          it    was       argued       that       when    a subject             has       need      of
         police             protection          and       has    done       nothing          to    increase
         th e      risk       he,is       entitled          to    protection             without            payment
         and       an       agreement          to    pay    is    without          consideration                  an d
         contrary             to    public          policy.        Secondly             it    was       said,
         following                a suggestion             made    in       the    Court          of   Appeal,
         that          on    general       principles             the       police       authorities                  are
         not       e n t i t l e d ,e x c e p t      in    the    cases          specifically               provided
         for       in       the    statute,to             make    a charge             for    these         services.
         It       is    convenient             to    deal       first       with       the    latter         and       more
         general             contention."


That,        of    course,          is    a contention             that          can    no    longer         be


sustained              since       the    passing          of    the    1964       Police          Act.          However,


in    th e    course          of    dealing          with       that    point          the    Lord       Chancellor


gave     some          indication          of       the    sort    of       services          which,


in    his     view,might                amount       to    special          police       services;                I pick


up    his     speech          at    about       half       way    down       page       278:


       "It        has       always       been       recognised          that       where          individuals
        desire              that    services          of    a    special          kind       which,though
        not^within                 the    obligations             of    a police             authority, can
        most           effectively             be    rendered          by    them,should               be    performed
        by        members          of    the    police          force,           the    police         authorities
        may,           to    use    an    expression             which       is    to    be       found      in       th e
       /Police              Pensions       Act       1890, ' 1 e n d " t h e       services            of    constables
        for        that       purpose          in    consideration                of    payment.             Instances
        are        th e       lending- of           constables              on    the    occasions               of    large
        gatherings                 in    and    outside          private          premises,as               on    the
       "occasions          of w e d d i n g s ,          athletic             or       boxing           contests         or
        race    meetings            and       the      provisions                 of    constables              at
        large     railway           stations.                 Of    course,             no     such       lending
        could     possibly           take        place         if       the       constables              were
        required       elsewhere                f or     the       preservation                    of    order, but
        as    Lord    Justice            Banks         pointed           out, an            effective           police
        force     requiresa                margin         of       reserve             strength           in    order
        to    deal    with        emergencies                 and       to    employ           that       margin         of>
        reserve,when              not      otherwise               required,on                 special          police
        service       f or    payment,is                 to    the       advantage                 both    of     t he
        persons       utilising               the      services              and       of    the        public       who
        are    thereby        relieved              of    some          part       of       th e    police        charges."


He   then     went    on     to     deal        with      the       second             question,           namely          whether


in   the     particular           circumstances                    of    the       case        before          their       Lordships


what   had     been    provided               were       to    be       called          or     properly           to     be


called       special       police          services.                         In    the       course        of     dealing


with   that     there        came        a passage             upon          which          Mr.     Griffiths            places


considerable          reliance,               see      page        281:




       "The    question           fo r     the      court          was       whether           on       July    9th      1921
        the    police        a u t h o r i t i e s ,a c t i n g          reasonably                 and    in     good
        faith, c o n s i d e r e d         a police            garrison                at    th e       colliery
        necessary          for      th e      protection                of    life          and     property           from
        violence       or      in    other          words          whether             the     decision           of     the
        Chief     Constable              in     refusing            special             protection              unless
        paid    for    was        such        a decision                as    a man          in     his    position
        and    with    his        duties         could         reasonably                   take.         If    in     the
        judgment       of      the       police          authorities, formed                            reasonably
        and    in g o o d      faith,the               garrison              was       necessary           f or      the
        protection           of     life        and      property,then                      they        were    not
        entitled       to     make         a charge            for       it, for            that        would     be     to
        exact     a payment              f or    the      performance                   of     a duty          which       they
       "clearly        owed          to    the       appellants              and        their       servants.
        But    if     they       thought             the    garrison               a    superfluity              and
        only     acceded             to    Mr.       James'          request            with       a view        to
        meeting        his       wishes,             then       in    my     opinion           they        were
        entitled           to    treat          the       garrison           duty        as    special           duty
        and    to     charge          fo r      i t. "


Mr.    Griffiths           contends             that       in    th e       instant           case        the    Chief


Constable        must       have          come       to    the       conclusion               that        the    police


services       at     the       Club's          ground          were        necessary              fo r    the    protection


of    people     congregated                   in    the    s t a d i u m and           perhaps           for    the    protection


of    stadium        property             and,       therefore,               that was         a duty           which       was


owed    to    th e    Club       for       which          the    Authority               were       not     entitled


to    charge.




        With     all       these          matters          so    succinctly               and       helpfully           presented


by    both    counsel           in    mind,          I approach              the        question           in    this       way.


The    duty    of     the       Authority,                through           th e       Chief       Constable,           is    the


preservation           of       the       Queen's          peace        by     preventing                 crime       and    by    arrestin


and    prosecuting              those          who    break          t he    law,        and       the     protection             of    the


persons       and     the       property             of    all       citizens.                He    does        not    wait       for       th e


peace    to    be     broken;             if    he    reasonably               apprehends                 that    the       action          of


any    person        may    result             in    a    breach        of t h e        peace       it     is    his    duty           to


prevent       that     action             (see       for    example Duncan                    v.    Jones        [1936]       1        K.B.218
This       duty    must        be     carried        ou t    in     a fair       and       even        handed        manner.


Because       his       resources             are    finite         he    will       not     be    able       to     provide


perfect       protection               for     al l.        Even     if    he    has       available           resources            his


public       duty       is     not     boundless.             He     has       a duty        to    protect           against        crime


or    threatened             crime,         particularly             threatened              violent          crime.^         It    is


not    his    public          duty       to    protect        against           th e    mere       apprehension               of


possible          crime.            There      is    no     absolute           standard           of   duty        and   no


definition          of       the      exact     amount        of     police          protection           to       which      an


individual          is       entitled.              Every     case        must       depend        upon       its     own


circumstances.




           Special       services,             on    t he    other        hand,        are    services             which      are


beyond       the    call        of     public        duty,        bu t    which        are    within          th e    powers


of    the    police          and      can     most     effectively              be     rendered          by    them,


provided,          of    course,            that     the     services           can     be    provided          without


prejudice          to    their         public        duty.         The     mere        fact       that    the        services


are    of    a kind          which       is    similar        to     those       which        they       provide


in    pursuance          of     their         public        duty,        for    instance           the    maintenance


of    law    and    order,            does     not     preclude           those        services          from
       /


being       special          ( s ee    G l a s b r o o k 's c a s e ) .        All      must      depend
on    th e   scope        and    extent         of     the    services         and     the    circumstances


in    which     they       are       provided.




         The    relevant             circumstances             I find       are      that     fo r      each    home


fixture        the    Club       invited          large       numbers       of    people       to       congregate


on    their     own       premises          for      their     own    purposes;            people        who    in


the    course        of    a game          might       become       very    excited.           It       is    accepted


that    at     some       fixtures          violence          was    almost       certain          if    the    police


were    not     present          in    substantial             numbers         - that        was     well      known    to    the


Club    and     to    the       police.           It    created       problems          in    two       areas:       first,


outside        the    ground,          in     th e     public       domain,       where       the       police       gave


protection           as    part       of    their       public       duty.        That       alone       must    have       put


a    severe     strain          on    normal         policing.         The       second       area       was    inside       the


ground,        which       was       a private          domain.        There         the     potential          trouble­


makers       were     not,       as    in     G l a s b r o o k 1s c a s e ,     intruders.              They    were


invited        to    enter       on    payment.              Thus, the      Club       had    created          for    them­


selves       and     on    their       own     property,            albeit       unwittingly,                a special       risk


of    trouble        and    breaches           of      the    peace,       and    thus       a special          need    for


protection;           which          nee d,    in      practical       terms,          they    could          only    meet    by


engaging        police          service's.             As    Mr.    Bently       has    put    it,       the    police
inside        the    ground        were     no t    carrying         out       their    own       public          duties


They     were       carrying        ou t    the     duties         owed    by    the    Club       to    those


whom     they       had    invited         onto     their      premises.




         Whilst       it    is     the     duty     of   the       police       to    keep    the       peace


and     to    prevent       threatened             breaches         of    the    peace       it    is    not       their


duty     to    give       protection          where      possible          future       breaches             of    the


peace        were    apprehended            (see     per      Lord       Justice       Scrutton          in


G l a s b r o o k 1s c a s e ) .     It     was     this      latter       protection             to    which


t he    police,       at    the     request         of   the       Club,       were    committed             in    advance


each     week.        In    this     way      the    Club      obtained          a service             which       the


ordinary        citizen          would      not     expect         and    to    which,       in    my    judgment,


he     was    clearly       not     entitled.            This       is    not    a case       where          breaches


of     the    peace       were     actually         threatened            at    the    time       the    provision


of     police       services        was     made.        At    most       there       was    the       possibility


in     some    cases,       indeed         t he    probability,            of    a breach          of    the       peace;


but     no    more.        Breaches         of     the   peace       were       not    inevitable,                nor


did     they    invariably           occur.          Furthermore,               in    addition          to    what


may     be    called       their     law      and    order         role    the       police       were       expected       ijo




                                                     -   39    -
and    did       take       part       in    crowd           management               , ensuring              the    safety


of    spectators,                the    enforcement                  of     the       Club's          regulations               and


to    be    on    hand       to    assist           in       th e    event        of       some       emergency            such


as    fire       or    accidental              injury.

                                                                                                                                •v




           The    numbers          considered                 necessary               to    carry        out    these           services


could       only       be    provided              by    calling            on    officers              who,    at     the


material          times,          would       otherwise               have        been       off        duty.        The        scope


and    extent          of    those          services           and        their        impact           on    the    Chief


Constable's             manpower             resources               put     them          beyond        what       th e    Club,


in    the    circumstances,                   ware           entitled            to    have       provided           in     pursuance


of    the    Chief          Constable's                 public        duty.            He    was        entitled           to    provide


those       services             because           he    was        able     to       do    so    without           depriving


other       people          of    police           protection.                   In    other          words     the        services


provided          were       within          his        powers;           they        were       no t    within        the       scope


of    his    public          duty.           I am        satisfied               that       they        were    special


s e r v i c e s _ as    I understand                    that        expression              to    have        been     used


in    G l a s b r o o k 's c a s e          an d    within           th e    meaning             of     Section        15(1)


of    the    Police          Act       1964.            It    follows            that       he    was        entitled           to


provide          them       on    condition              that        they        were       paid        for.
I have       already      given     my   reasons     fo r    concluding     that    the   services


were    provided       at   t he    request    of    the     Club   and   upon   the    Club's


promise       to   pay.     In     the   result     t he    Authority's     claim      succeeds


an d   the    Club's      counterclaim        must     fail.
                                                       KEEBLE HAWSON
                                                                               SOLICITORS
                                                       I n c o r p o r a tin g B ra n s o n B ra m le y & Co.

A   H.   GREGORY        N . T. H A W S O N                                                                                         OLD CATHEDRAL VICARAGE.
C.   J. P R VC E        G. C O N N E L L
A. J. C O O M B E       C. M. M. A Y R E
J. M. KI LN ER          H J. M O O R F I E L D                                                                                                  ST.JAMES' ROW.
D . A. D EE N E Y

                                                                                                                                                               SHEFFIELD.
C onsultant:            P ractice M an ag er
A. H. C O N N E L L     D.    PA RK IN
                                                                                                                                                                    S1 1XA.

Mrs. E. Bashforth,                                                                                                                 TELEPHONE 0742 - 722061
Adminstration & Legal Department,
Town Hall,                                                                                                                          MDX NO. 10527

SHEFFIELD.                                                                                                                          FAX NO. 0742 - 700813

S1                                                                                                                                  FAX NO. 0742 - 750243




                                                                                                                                     5th June 1991
                                                   YOUR REF:                                                                        WHEN YOU TELEPHONE OR C A L L PLEASE ASK FOR:
OUR REF:



AAW/MRK                                             AH/EB                                                                            Mr. Watt




Dear Liz,

Re : H ills b o ro u g h In q u e s t

Thank you for your letter of the 3rd June 1991.

Herewith transcript days 71-79 as requested.

I spoke to                                        regarding                                     s car park pass and
he said he will remind                                                             Jagain to return it.

    A
Yoiirs singgrelv.




A . rA.          Watt




                             T H E F I R M IS R E G U L A T E D B Y T H E L A W S O C I E T Y IN T H E C O N D U C T O F I N V E S T M E N T B U S I N E S S
NOTE


                                       DELAY




Facts on the Core Bundle

On 5th June, 1986 a letter was sent to the Chief Fire Officer and others
indicating that the redrafting would shortly be completed (312).              The
report to the Panel on 6th May says that the conditions are "a cause for
co n c e r n .......inadequate or inappropriate in some a r e a s ......" (314).

On 7th July, 1987 (387) the Fire Service was written to with a copy of          the
new draft Conditions and they replied on 13th August (409).

In September 1987 (417) the Panel received a report saying that the new
draft Conditions were progressing steadily and it was hoped to submit them
to the Panel for final approval in October.

On 30th March, 1989 copies of the final draft circulated (481).          Therefore
the apparent delay June 1986 to April 1989.

Questions

Why the delay?  Do we accept "inordinate delay"? Why were the Club not
involved earlier? Why did we not notify the Club that the conditions were
subject to review?  How far do we now think the draft is satisfactory?
Any further review?

Comments

The wording of the report in June 1986 was unfortunate it would be more
accurate to say that the conditions whilst giving no serious cause for
concern did contain some matters which required looking at.

The reviewing task took much longer than I originally anticipated owing to
a number of factors

(a)    Between January 1986 and   December 1988 there was an unusual amount
        of legislation giving rise to complex issues in the field of
        licensing.  Dealing with new legislation led to work over and above
        routine work.  Further, even with established legislation complex
        and unusual problems can arise from time to time.   For the sake of
        convenience I take such work as "exceptional" and it is that
        "exceptional" workload which was increased substantially not only
        in relation to Safety of Sports Grounds Administration but from
        other matters (see Chronology).

(b)    I expected to receive atany time some indication of draft model
        conditions probably via the Home Office which would have helped in
        the drafting task.  I finally confirmed at a Seminar organised by
        the Institute of Building Controls entitled "Safety at Sports
        Grounds" on 15th October, 1987 that the Home Office was not taking
        any role in the drafting of model conditions.
      CHRONOLOGY OF "EXCEPTIONAL" EVENTS IN ADDITION TO USUAL WORKLOAD


Six Month                                           Event                                 Safety
Period                                                                                    Certificate
                                                                                          C o nd iti on s
                                                                                          Sc he d u l e

April-December        1986   (a) Spion Kop Develo pm ent
                             (b) Pro bl ems at Sh ef f i e l d U ni te d
                             (c) R e v i e w of the h a c k n e y car ria ge
                                     byelaws.
                             (d) Ju ne to August Home Offic e
                                     c o n s u l t a t i o n on pr op ose d
                                     l e g i s l a t i o n (SOSG)
                             (e) Tra nsp or t Act 1985 reports
                                     (i) 3rd N o v e m b e r 1986 -"Use
                                             of taxis in p r o v id in g
                                             local/services"
                                   (ii) 1st D e c e m b e r 1986 -
                                             "P ro visional app li c a t i o n s
                                             for taxi licences and
                                             legal advice".
                             N . B : - R e v i s e d G r oun d Guide
                                         rec eiv ed 13th November, 1986

J a n ua ry 1987 to          (a) Futur e a d m i n i s t r a t i o n of S a fet y
June 1987                         of Sports Grounds. M e e t i n g s and
                                  letters
                             (b) R e v i e w of the taxi and priv at e
                                  hire drivers li ce nsi ng s y st em
                                  (2nd March, 1957)
                             (c) H i r i n g of taxis and priva te hire
                                  vehi cl es at S e p ar ate Fares
                                  Report (5th M a y 1957)
                             (d) R e v i e w and r ep lacement of the
                                  S e x Shop Re gu la t i o n s
                                  (5th M a y 1987)
                             (e) L i c e n s i n g of Cinemas - F ilms/
                                  V i de os in the R e s t r i c t e d 18
                                  Category
                             (f) D r a f t i n g of N e w S afety C e r t i f i c a t e
                                  Co nd iti on s
                             N.B. The Fire Safet y and Safet y of
                             Places of Sport Act received R oy al
                             As sent on 15th May, 1987.

July 1987 to                 (a) C o m me nts and c o l l a ti on on
December 1987                    on O w l e r t o n from Officers
                                 co ns ist in g of 19 pages w i t h some
                                 200 comments ( De signated 23rd
                                 July 1984)
                             (b) P r o b l e m at S h e f f i e l d U n i t e d on
                                 5th August, 1987 (Press Box)
                             (c) 10 pages of c omments w h i c h w e r e
                                 c o l la te d from Officers
                                 about Sh eff ie ld United
                            (d) The Local Gov er n m e n t (Miscel la neo us
                                Pr ov is i o n s ) Act 1982 - I nve st i g a t i o n s
                                into the C o u n ci l's p o s iti on in
                                co n n e c t i o n w i t h a pa rt ic u l a r
                                appl ic ant and see 4(b) and
                                5(d) b e l o w
                            N.B. M a t t e r n o w su bju di ce (Hearing
                            dated                 J ul y 1989)

                             (e) Sep tem be r 1987 final report to the
                                 Ge ne ral Pur pos es Panel on the
                                 future a d m i n i s t r a t i o n of the
                                 sy st em
                             (f) M a n a g e m e n t pr ob lem s w i t h i n the
                                 L i c e n s i n g S e c tio n (night
                                 enforcement)

J a n u a r y 1988 to        (a) The comments about O w l e r t o n were
June 1988                        co n s o l i d a t e d after d i scu ss ion
                                 at the A d v i s o r y Group (15 pages)
                             (b) 3(d) continues.
                             (c) R e v i e w of the Co unc il 's p os it i o n
                                 in r e l at ion to the issue of
                                 h a c k n e y car ri ag e l icences - The
                                 Tr an s p o r t Act 1985 - Report of
                                 4th January, 1988.
                             (d) P r e p a r a t o r y w o r k for the licensing
                                 of a Pop Concert at Sh ef fi eld
                                 U n i t e d on 9th and 10th July.

July 1988 to
De c em be r 1988

                             (a) Am us eme nt arcade p o lic y reports
                                 in July and S e p t em be r 1988
                             (b) In Sep te mbe r 1988 a report on
                                 di s ab le d access to li censed
                                 premises
                             (c) R e s p ons e to the " r eg ul ati on of
                                 ch ar i t a b l e appeals c o n sul ta tiv e
                                 d o c u m e n t " f rom the G overnment
                             (d) 3(d) continuing.

Ot he r C omments

The C l u b was not i n v o lv ed in the redraft of the c ert if ica te c ond it ion s as
there w o u l d be no point in doing so until they w e r e r e as ona bl y well
finalised.        I recall m e n t i o n i n g the r edr af tin g of the condit ion s at the
1986 inspec ti ons and i nviting the Clubs to m a k e comments on the e xisting
co nd it i o n s if they w i s h e d to do so a l t h o u g h I cannot find any re cord in
w r i t i n g of this comment.

The n e w draft w h i c h w as c i r c u l a t e d in 1989 needs by r efe rence to the
c omments m a d e by i n di vid ua l officers some further w o r k and it is likely
that no c er tif i c a t e s wi ll be issued until after the inte rim report of the
Inquiry.

The Council has authority and power to to take action immediately in the
event of a perceived serious risk to spectators.

HB4AAM/MA
NOTE


                                                   DELAY




Facts on the Core Bundle

On 5th June, 1986 a lett er was sent to the Chief Fire O f f i c e r and others
i n di cat in g that the r ed ra f t i n g w o u l d short ly be c o m p l e t e d (312).  The
report to the Panel on 6th M a y says that the c on dit i o n s are "a cause for
c o n c e r n ....... inadequa te or in app r o p r i a t e in some a r e a s ...... " (314).

On 7th July, 1987 (387) the Fire Service was           w r i t t e n to w i t h a copy of                 the
n e w draft C on di tio ns and they r e pli ed on 13th A ugust (409).

In September 1987 (417) the Panel received a report saying that the new
draft Conditions were progressing steadily and it was hoped to submit them
to the Panel for final approval in October.

On 30th March, 1989 copies of the final draft c i r c u l a t e d                    (481).      Therefore
the ap parent d el ay June 1986 to April 1989.

Qu es tions

Why the delay?  Do we accept "inordinate delay"?  Why were the Club not
involved earlier?  Why did we not notify the Club that the conditions were
subject to review?  How far do we now think the draft is satisfactory?
Any furthe r review?

Co mments

The w o r d i n g of the report in June 1986 was u n f o r t u n a t e it w o u l d be m ore
accu ra te to say that the c ond it ion s wh ilst g iv in g no serious cause for
c o nce rn did c o n t a i n some m a t t e r s w h i c h requ ir ed l o o ki ng at.

The reviewing task took much longer than I originally anticipated owing to
a number of factors

(a)    Betwe en J a n u a r y 1986 and D e c e m b e r 1988 there was an unusual amount
       of l e g i s l a t i o n g iv in g rise to c o m p l e x issues in the field of
       licensing.           Deal in g w i t h n e w l e g i s l a t i o n led to w o r k over and above
       routine work.            Further, even w i t h e s t a b l i s h e d l e g i s l a t i o n c o m ple x
       and unusual pro bl ems can arise from time to time.                              For the sake of
       conve nie nc e I take such w o r k as " e x c e p t i o n a l " and it is that
       "e xc ep t i o n a l " w o r k l o a d w h i c h w as in creased s u b s t a n t i a l l y not only
       in r elation to S a f et y of Sports Gro un ds A d m i n i s t r a t i o n but from
       other m a t t e r s (see Chronology).

(b)    I expec te d to rece iv e at any time some i n d i c a t i o n of draft mod el
       condi tio ns pro ba b l y via the Home O ffice w h i c h w o u l d have h e l p e d in
       the d rafting task.       I fina lly c o n f ir me d at a S e m i n a r o r g a n i s e d by
       the In sti tu te of B u i l d i n g Con tro ls en tit le d " S a f et y at Sports
       Gr o un ds " on 15th October, 1987 that the Home O f f i c e w as not taking
       any role in the d r a f ti ng of m o d e l conditions.
       CHRONOLOGY OF "EXCEPTIONAL" EVENTS IN ADDITION TO USUAL WORKLOAD



Six Month                                     Event                            Safety
Period                                                                         Cert if i c a t e
                                                                               Co nd iti on s
                                                                               Sch edu le

April-December 1986     (a) S pion Ko p D ev elopment
                        (b) Problems at S he ffi el d U ni te d
                        (c) R e v i e w of the hack ne y carri ag e
                                byelaws.
                        (d) June to August Home Office
                                c o n s u l t a t i o n on prop os ed
                                l e g i s l a t i o n (SOSG)
                        (e) T ran sp or t Act 1985 reports
                                (i) 3rd N o v e m b e r 1986 -"Use
                                        of taxis in p r o v id in g
                                        l o ca l/ s e r v i c e s "
                              (ii) 1st D e c e m b e r 1986 -
                                        "Pro vi si ona l a p p lic at io ns
                                        for taxi licences and
                                        legal advice".
                        N . B : - R e v i s e d G rou nd G uide
                                    r e c ei ve d 13th November, 1986

J a n u a r y 1987 to   (a) F u tu re a d m i n i s t r a t i o n of S afety
June 1987                      of Sports Grounds. M e e t i n g s and
                               letters
                        (b) R e v i e w of the taxi and private
                               hire d r ive rs li ce nsing s y st em
                               (2nd M arch, 1957)
                        (c) H i ri ng of taxis and pri vat e hire
                               vehi cl es at Separate Fares
                               Report (5th M a y 1957)
                        (d) R e v i e w and replacement of the
                               S ex Shop R egu la ti ons
                               (5th M a y 1987)
                        (e) L i c e n s i n g of Cinemas - Fi lms/
                               Vi deos in the R e s t r i c t e d 18
                               Category
                        (f) D r a fti ng of N e w Sa fety Ce rt if i c a t e
                               C o ndi ti ons
                        N.B. The Fire Safety and Safety of
                        Places of Sport Act r eceived Roy al
                        A s se nt on 15th May, 1987.

July 1987 to             (a) C om me n t s and c o l l a ti on on
December 1987                on O w l e r t o n from O fficers
                             co ns is t i n g of 19 pages w i t h some
                             200 comm en ts (D esignated 23r d
                             July 1984)
                         (b) P r o b l e m at Sheffield U nit ed on
                             5th August, 1987 (Press Box)
                         (c) 10 pages of comments w h i c h wer e
                             c o l la ted fro m Officers
                             about S h e f f i e l d U nited
                              (d) The L ocal G ove rn men t (Mi sc ell an eou s
                                    P r o v i s i o n s ) Act 1982 - I nv est i g a t i o n s
                                    into the C o u n c i l ' s p o s i ti on in
                                    c o n n e c t i o n w i t h a p ar tic u l a r
                                    ap pl ica nt and see 4(b) and
                                    5(d) b el ow
                              N.B. M a t t e r n o w s ub judice (Hearing
                              da te d                   July 1989)

                              (e) Sep te mbe r 1987 final report to the
                                  G e n e r a l Purp os es Panel on the
                                  future a d m i n i s t r a t i o n of the
                                  system
                              (f) Management problems within the
                                  Licensing Section (night
                                  enforcement)

J a n u a r y 1988 to         (a) The c omments about O wl er t o n wer e
June 1988                         c o n s o l i d a t e d after di scu s s i o n
                                  at the A d v i s o r y Gr ou p (15 pages)
                              (b) 3(d) continues.
                              (c) R e v i e w of the Co uncil's p o s i t i o n
                                  in r e l a t i o n to the issue of
                                  h a c k n e y carri ag e licences - The
                                  Tran sp ort Act 1985 - Re port of
                                  4th January, 1988.
                              (d) P r e p a r a t o r y w o r k for the lice ns ing
                                  of a Pop Concert at Sh ef f i e l d
                                  U n i t e d on 9th and 10th July.

July 1988 to
D e c e m b e r 1988

                              (a) A m u s em en t a rcade policy reports
                                  in Jul y and Se pt e m b e r 1988
                              (b) In S e p t em be r 1988 a report on
                                  d i s a b l e d access to licensed
                                  p r emises
                              (c) R e s p o n s e to the " r egu la tio n of
                                  ch ar it a b l e appe al s c o n su lt ati ve
                                  d o c u m ent " f r o m the Governm ent
                              (d) 3(d) continuing.

Other Comments

The C l u b was not inv olv ed in the redraft of the cer ti f i c a t e c o ndi ti on s as
there w o u l d be no point in d oin g so until they wer e re aso n a b l y well
finalised.        I recall m e n t i o n i n g the red ra f t i n g of the c on dit io ns at the
1986 in sp ec t i o n s and invit in g the Clubs to m a k e c omments on the exi st ing
co nd it i o n s if they w i s h e d to do so a l t h o u g h I cannot find any record in
wr i t i n g of this comment.

The n e w draft w h i c h was c i r c u l a t e d in 1989 n eeds by r e f e ren ce to the
co mments made by i nd ivi du al offi ce rs some further w o r k and it is l ik ely
that no ce rt if i c a t e s wi ll be i ssued until a fte r the i n te ri m report of the
Inquiry.

The Council has authority and power to to take action immediately in the
event of a perceived serious risk to spectators.

HB4AAM/MA
                                   Safety Certif ic at e C o n d i t i o n s Sc hedule



    A.                18.4.86      Letter from Liverpool City Council enclosing copies of
A pril to                          Certificate Conditions at our request.
Dece mb er
1986



                       6.5.86      At a m e e t i n g of the General P u r pos es Panel (Municipal
                                   En te r p r i s e and General Sevices Programme) on the 6th May,
                                   1986, it w as r esolved that the Head of A d m i n i s t r a t i o n a n d
                                   Legal D ep art me nt be r e q u e s t e d to draft new Safety
                                   Certif ic ate Conditi ons in c o n s u l t a t i o n w i t h other
                                   appr op ri ate a u t h o r i t i e s for approval by the Council .

                      29.5.86      Letters from Chief Executive to Chief Executive, Birmingham
                                   City Council, Chief Executive, Manchester City Council,
                                   Chief Executive, Leeds City Council asking for copies of
                                   conditions currently in force in respect of sports grounds
                                   in their areas.

                       5.6.86      Memo to Building Surveyor and letters containing the same
                                   comments to the Chief Constable, the Chief Fire Officer
                                   informing them that the Certificate Conditions were shortly
                                   to be redrafted when they would be asked for comments.

                      1 0 . 6.86   Letter from Birmingham City Council enclosing Certificate
                                   Condi tions.

                       4.7 .86     Letter Head of Administration and Legal Department to Chief
                                   Executive, Rotherham Borough Council, Chief Executive,
                                   Doncaster Borough Council, Chief Executive, Barnsley Borough
                                   Council regarding proposed drafting of new Certificate
                                   Conditions and inviting consultation.

                      29.8.86      Letter of response from Administration and Legal Department
                                   to the Home Office Consultation Department on Safety of
                                   Sports Grounds.  Copies of letter to the Under Secretary of
                                   State, Fire and Emergency Planning Department and the
                                   Association of Metropolitan Authorities.

                       2.9.86      Acknowledgement of letter in reply to consultative document.

                      24.9.86      Copy of Manchester City Council Certificate Conditions
                                   recei ve d .

     B.                            Drafting of Certificate Conditions.
January
to June
1987

     C.                7.7 .87     Memos to Director of Land and Planning, Director of Health
July to                            and Consumer Services, letters to Chief Constable South
De c e m b e r                     Yorkshire Police, Chief Fire Officer, enclosing copy of new
1987                               draft Conditions and inviting comment.

                       4.8.87      Letter, South Yorkshire Police to Admin, and Legal
                                   Department — Police comments on draft revised Safety
                                   Certificate Conditions.



H R i & AT, /.T.T.T
            13.8.87       Let ter , South Y o r k s h i r e Co unty Fire Service to
                          A d m i n i s t r a t i o n and Legal D e p a r t m e n t - Fir e Service's
                          com men ts on draft revised Safety C e rti fi cat e Co nditions.

            19.8.87      Me mo - Di rec to r of Healt h a nd Consumer Services to Head of
                          A d m i n i s t r a t i o n a n d L ega l D e p a r t m e n t . H. & C.S. c o m men ts on
                          draft revised Safety C ert i f i c a t e Conditions.

            16.1 2. 87   L e t t e r to Chief Con sta bl e from Admin, and Legal, new Safety
                          Certi fic at e Conditi on s taking account of the 1975 Act.

  D.                      Nil on C e rt if ica te C o ndi ti ons - see Chronology.
Janua ry
to June
1988

  g                        ii               ii               ii                   ii


July   to
A|cember
W88
  F.                     D ra ft i n g C ert if i c a t e Con ditions.
Ja nu ary
to 30th
March
1989

29 -3 0th                Letters a n d m e m o r a n d a to O f f i c e r s   re que s t i n g com men ts on n ew
Ma r c h                 C e rti fi cat e Conditions.
1989
NOTE


                                    DELAY




Facts on the Core Bundle

On 5th June, 1986 a letter was sent to the Chief Fire Officer and others
indicating that the redrafting would shortly be completed (312). The
report to the Panel on 6th May says that the conditions are "a cause for
concern..... inadequate or inappropriate in sane areas       " (314).
On 7th July, 1987 (387) the Fire Service was written to with a copy of the
new draft Conditions and they replied on 13th August (409).
In Septsnber 1987 (417) the Panel received a report saying that the new
draft Conditions were progressing steadily and it was hoped to submit then
to the Panel for final approval in October.
On 30th March, 1989 copies of the final draft circulated (481). Therefore
the apparent delay June 1986 to April 1989.
Questions
"Why the delay? Do we accept "inordinate delay"? Why were the Club not
involved earlier? Why did we not notify the Club that the conditions were
subject tp review? How far do we now think the draft is satisfactory?
Any further review?
Caitnents

The wording of the report in June 1986 was unfortunate it would be more
accurate to say that the conditions whilst giving no serious cause for
concern did contain seme matters which required looking at.
The reviewing task took much longer than I originally anticipated owing t<
a number of factors
(a)    Between January 1986 and Decanber 1988 there was an unusual amount
       of legislation giving rise to complex issues in the field of
       licensing. Dealing with new legislation led to work over and above
       routine work. Further, even with established legislation complex
       and unusual problems can arise from time to time. For the sake of
       convenience I term such work as "exceptional" and it is that
       "exceptional" workload which was increased substantially not only
       in relation to Safety of Sports Grounds Administration but in
       relation to other matters (see Chronology).
(b)    I expected to receive at any time some indication of draft model
       conditions probably via the Home Office which would have helped in
       the drafting task. I finally confirmed at a Seminar organised by
       the Institute of Building Control .entitled "Safety at Sports
       Grounds" on 15th October, 1987 that the Heme Office was not taking
       any role in the drafting of model conditions.
       CHRONOLOGY OF "EXCEPTIONAL" EVENTS IN ADDITION TO USUAL WORKLOAD



Six Month                                             Event                             S a fety
Period                                                                                  Certificate
                                                                                        Conditions
                                                                                        S c h ed ule

April-December          1986   (a) Spion Kop Dev elopment
                               (b) Problems at S h e f fi eld U nit ed
                               (c) R e v i e w of the h a c k n e y ca rr iag e
                                       byelaws.
                               (d) June to A ugust Home Office
                                       c o n su lt ati on on pro po sed
                                       l e g i s l a t i o n (SOSG)
                               (e) Tr ansport Act 1985 reports
                                       (i) 3rd N o v e m b e r 1986 -"Use
                                               of taxis in pro vi din g
                                               l o c a l / se rv ice s"
                                     (ii) 1st D e c e m b e r 1986 -
                                               "P ro visional a pp li c a t i o n s
                                               for taxi licences and
                                               legal advice".
                               N . B : - R e v i s e d G r o u n d Guide
                                          re ce i v e d 13th November, 1986

J a n u a r y 1987 to          (a) Fu ture a d m i n i s t r a t i o n of S af et y
June 1987                           of Sports Grounds. M e e t i n g s and
                                    letters
                               (b) R e v i e w of the taxi and p r i va te
                                    hire drivers l ic ensing s y s t e m
                                    (2nd March, 1957)
                               (c) H iri ng of taxis and priva te hire
                                    vehicles at Sepa ra te Fares
                                    Report (5th M a y 1957)
                               (d) R e v i e w and replacement of the
                                    Sex Shop R e gul at ion s
                                    (5th M ay 1987)
                               (e) L ice ns ing of Cinemas - F il ms/
                                    Vi deos in the R e s t r i c t e d 18
                                    C a t eg or y
                               (f) Dr afting of N e w S a fe ty C e r t i f i c a t e
                                    Co nd iti on s
                               N.B. The Fire Safety and Safety of
                               Plac es of Sport Act received R o y a l
                               Asse nt on 15th May, 1987.

July 1987 to                   (a) Comments and collation on
December 1987                      on O w l e r t o n from Officers
                                   co ns ist in g of 19 pages w i t h some
                                   200 comments (Designated 23rd
                                   July 1984)
                               (b) P r o b l e m at Sh ef fie ld U n i t e d on
                                   5th August, 1.987 (Press Box)
                               (c) 10 pages of comments w h ich were
                                   co llated from Officers
                                   a bout S h e f f i e l d United
                               (d) The Local G o v e r n m e n t (M is cel la ne ous
                                     Pr o v i s i o n s ) Act 1982 - I n v e s t i g a t i o n s
                                     into the C o u n c i l ' s p o s i t i o n in
                                     co n n e c t i o n w i t h a p a r t i c u l a r
                                     a p p l i can t and see 4(b) and
                                     5(d) b e l o w
                               N.B. M a t t e r n o w subj ud ice (Hearing
                               da te d                  Jul y 1989)

                               (e) Se pt ember 1987 final report to the
                                   G e ner al P u r po se s Panel on the
                                   f u tur e a d m i n i s t r a t i o n of the
                                   system
                               (f) M a n a g e m e n t pr obl em s w i t h i n the
                                   L i c e n s i n g S e ct ion (night
                                   enforcement)

Ja n u a r y 1988 to           (a) T he co mments about O w l e rto n we re
June 1988                          co n s o l i d a t e d after di sc us s i o n
                                   at the A d v i s o r y G roup (15 pages)
                               (b) 3(d) continues.
                               (c) R e v i e w of the Co unc il 's p o s i t i o n
                                   in r e l a t i o n to the issue of
                                   h a c k n e y c a r r i a g e lice nc es - The
                                   T r a n s p o r t Act 1985 - Re port of
                                   4th January, 1988.
                               (d) P r e p a r a t o r y w o r k for the lic ens in g
                                   of a Pop Conce rt at S h e f fie ld
                                   U n i t e d on 9th and 10th July.

July 1988 to
D e c e m b e r 1988

                               (a) A m u s e men t ar cade p o l ic y reports
                                   in July and S e p t e mb er 1988
                               (b) In S e p t e mbe r 1988 a report on
                                   di s ab le d access to licensed
                                   premises
                               (c) R e s p o n s e to the " re gul at ion of
                                   c h a r i t a b l e appeals c o nsu lt ati ve
                                   do c u m e n t " from the Gover nm ent
                               (d) 3(d) continuing.

O t h e r Com me nt s

The C l u b was not in vo lve d in the redraft of the ce rt if i c a t e co ndi ti ons as
there w o u l d be no point in do ing so until they w e r e r eas on abl y well
finalised.           I recall m e n t i o n i n g the r edr af tin g of the con di t i o n s at the
1986 i n s pe ct ion s and i n v it in g the Clubs to mak e comments on the exi sti ng
c o n d i t i o n s if they w i s h e d to do so a l t h o u g h I cannot find any record in
w r i t i n g of this comment.

The n e w draft w h i c h was c i r c u l a t e d in 1989 needs by r efe re nc e to the
co m me nt s m a d e by i nd ivi du al o fficers some furt her w o r k and it is likely
that no c e r t i f i c a t e s w i l l be issued until after the i n te ri m report of the
Inquiry.

The Council has authority and power to to take action immediately in the
event of a perceived serious risk to spectators.

HB4AAM/MA
NOTE


                                   DELAY




Facts on the Core Bundle

On 5th June, 1986 a letter was sent to the Chief Fire Officer and others
indicating that the redrafting would shortly be completed (312). The
report to the Panel on 6th May says that the conditions are "a cause for
concern..... inadequate or inappropriate in some areas       " (314).
On 7th July, 1987 (387) the Fire Service was written to with a copy of the
new draft Conditions and they replied on 13th August (409).
In September 1987 (417) the Panel received a report saying that the new
draft Conditions were progressing steadily and it was hoped to submit them
to the Panel for final approval in October.
On 30th March, 1989 copies of the final draft circulated (481). Therefore
the apparent delay June 1986 to April 1989.
Questions
Why the delay? Do we accept "inordinate delay"? Why were the Club not
involved earlier? Why did we not notify the Club that the conditions were
subject tp review? How far do we now think the draft is satisfactory?
Any further review?
Canments

The wording of the report in June 1986 was unfortunate it would be more
accurate to say that the conditions whilst giving no serious cause for
concern did contain some matters which required looking at.
The reviewing task took much longer than I originally anticipated owing to
a number of factors:-
(a)    Between January 1986 and December 1988 there was an unusual amount
       of legislation giving rise to corplex issues in the field of
       licensing. Dealing with new legislation led to work over and above
       routine work. Further, even with established legislation complex
       and unusual problems can arise frcm time to time. For the sake of
       convenience I term such work as "exceptional" and it is that
       "exceptional" workload which was increased substantially not only
       in relation to Safety of Sports Grounds Administration but in
       relation to other matters (see Chronology).
(b)    I expected to receive at any time some indication of draft model
       conditions probably via the Home Office which would have helped in
       the drafting task. I finally confirmed at a Seminar organised by
       the Institute of Building Control >entitled "Safety at Sports
       Grounds" on 15th October, 1987 that the Home Office was not taking
       any role in the drafting of model conditions.
     CHRONOLOGY OF "EXCEPTIONAL" EVENTS IN ADDITION TO USUAL WORKLOAD


Six Month                            Event                    Safety
Period                                                        Certificate
                                                              Conditions
                                                              Schedule

April 1986 to         (a) Spion Kop Development
December 1986         (b) Problems at Sheffield United
                      (c) Review of the hackney carriage
                          byelaws.
                      (d) June to August Home Office
                          consultation on proposed
                          legislation (Safety of
                          Sports Grounds)
                      (e) Transport Act 1985 reports               a
                          (i) 3rd November 1986 -"Use
                              of taxis in providing
                              local/services"
                         (ii) 1st Decanber 1986 -
                              "Provisional applications
                              for taxi licences and
                              legal advice".
                      N.B:- Revised Green Guide
                            received 13th November, 1986
January 1987 to       (a) Future administration of Safety
June 1987                 of Sports Grounds. Meetings and
                          letters
                      (b) Review of the taxi and private
                          hire drivers licensing system     .
                          (2nd March, 1987)                 '^
                      (c) Hiring of taxis and private hire
                          vehicles at Separate Fares                   n
                          Report (5th May 1987)             ^ u'   ®
                      (d) Review and replacement of the
                          Sex Shop Regulations
                          (5th May 1987)
                      (e) Licensing of Cinemas - Films/
                          Videos in the Restricted 18         .
                          Category                             ^
                      (f) Drafting of New Safety Certificate
                          Conditions
                      N.B. The Fixe Safety and Safety of
                      Places of Sport Act received Royal
                      Assent on 15th May, 1987.
July 1987 to           (a) Contents recevied and collated
December 1987              on Owlerton from Officers
                           consisting of 19 pages with sane   ^^
                           200 contents (Designated 23rd               _
                           July 1986)                                  C
                      '(b) Problem at Sheffield United on     .,
                           5th August, 1987 (Press Box)
                       (c) 10 pages of comments which were
                           collated from Officers             /^
                           about Sheffield United
                      (d) The Local Government (Miscellaneous
                          Provisions) Act 1982 - Investigations
                          into the Council's position in
                          connection with a particular
                          applicant and see 4(b) and
                          5(d) below
                      N.B. Matter now sub-judice (Hearing
                      dates 13th and 14th July 1989)

                       (e) September 1987 final report to the
                           General Purposes Panel on the
                           future administration of the
                           Safety of Sports Ground System.
                       (f) Managsnent problems within the          if u,
                           Licensing Section (night
                           enforcement)

January 1988 to        (a) The corments about Owlerton were
June 198.8                   consolidated after discussion
                             at the Advisory Group (15 pages)
                       (b)   3(d) continues.                       w/
                       (c)   Review of the Council's position
                             in relation to the issue of                   D
                             hackney carriage licences - The
                             Transport Act 1985 - Report
                             4th January, 1988.
                       (d)   Preparatory work for the licensing    u w
                             of a Pop Concert at Sheffield
                             United on 9th and 10th July.
July 1988 to
December 1988
                       (a) Amusement arcade policy reports    ^^
                            in July and September 1988
                       (b) In September 1988 a report on
                           disabled access to licensed
                           premises
                       (c) Response to the "Regulation of     ^^
                            Charitable Appeals Consultative
                           Document" fron the Government
                       (d) 3(d) continuing.
Other Corments
The Club was not involved in the redraft of the certificate conditions as
there would be no point in doing so until they were reasonably well
finalised. I recall mentioning the redrafting of the conditions at the
1986 inspections and inviting the Clubs to make comments on the existing
conditions if they wished to do so although I cannot find any record in
writing of this comment.
The new draft which was circulated in 1989 needs by reference to the
canments made by individual officers sane further work and it is likely
that no certificates will be issued until after the interim report of the
Inquiry.
The Council has always had the power to    take action immediately in the
event of a perceived serious risk to spectators.
 J4AAL/JJJ

                       Safety Certificate Conditions Schedule

   A.        18.4.86   Letter from Liverpool City Council enclosing copies of
April to               Certificate Conditions at our request.
December
1986


              6.5.86   At a meeting of the General Purposes Panel (Municipal
                       Enterprise and General Sevices Programme) on the 6th May,
                       1986, it was resolved that the Head of Administration and
                       Legal Department be requested to draft new Safety
                       Certificate Conditions in consultation with other
                       appropriate authorities for approval by the Council.
             29.5.86   Letters from Chief Executive to Chief Executive, Birmingham
                       City Council, Chief Executive, Manchester City Council,
                       Chief Executive, Leeds City Council asking for copies of
                       conditions currently in force in respect of sports grounds
                       in their areas.
             5.6.86    Memo to Building Surveyor and letters containing the same
                       corments to the Chief Constable, the Chief Fire Officer
                       informing them that the Certificate Conditions were shortly
                       to be redrafted when they would be asked for corments.
             10.6.86   Letter frcm Birmingham City Council enclosing Certificate
                       Conditions.
             4.7.86    Letter Head of Administration and Legal Department to Chief
                       Executive, Rotherham Borough Council, Chief Executive,
                       Doncaster Borough Council, Chief Executive, Barnsley Borough
                       Council regarding proposed drafting of new Certificate
                       Conditions and inviting consultation.
             29.8.86   Letter of response frcm Administration and Legal Department
                       Jto the Heme Office Consultation Department on Safety of
                       Sports Grounds. Copies of letter to the Under Secretary of
                       State, Fire and Emergency Planning Department and the
                       Association of Metropolitan Authorities.
              2.9.86   Acknowledgement of letter in reply to consultative document.
             24.9.86   Copy of Manchester City Council Certificate Conditions
                       received.
   B.                  Drafting of Certificate Conditions.
January
to June
1987
   C.         7.7.87   Memos to Director of Land and Planning, Director of Health
July to                and Consumer Services, letters to Chief Constable South
Decanber               Yorkshire Police, Chief Fire Officer, enclosing copy of new
1987                   draft Conditions and inviting comment.
              4.8.87   Letter, South Yorkshire Police to Admin, and Legal
                       Department - Police comments on draft revised Safety
                       Certificate Conditions.
           13.8.87       Letter; South Yorkshire County Fire Service to
                         Administration and Legal Department - Fire Service's
                         comments on draft revised Safety Certificate Conditions.
           19.8.87      Memo - Director of Health and Consumer Services to Head of
                        Administration and Legal Department. H. & C.S. comments on
                        draft revised Safety Certificate Conditions.
           16.12.87     Letter to Chief Constable from Admin, and Legal, new Safety
                        Certificate Conditions taking account of the 1975 Act.
  D.                    Nil on Certificate Conditions - see Chronology.
January
to June
1988

  E.                    Nil on Certificate Conditions - see Chronology.
July to
December
1988
  F.                    Drafting Certificate Conditions.
January
to 30th
March
1989

29-30th               ^ Letters and memoranda to Officers requesting comments on new
March                 ‘ Certificate Conditions.
1989
                                            Sheffield City Council



I n t e r p r e t a t i o n of G e n er al Safety C e rt if ic ate s   Issued by the Council

Wo r d / P h r a s e                                                     Mea nin g

The Act                             The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 i n c l ud in g any
                                    m o d i f i c a t i o n or re -en actment thereof and any s u b ord in at e
                                    le gi sla ti on made thereunder.

Authorised Officer                  Any po lice officer, any office r of the South Y o r k s h i r e
                                    Fire and Civil Defen ce Authority, or any o f f i c e r of the
                                    Shef fi eld City Council who is au th or i s e d in writing.

The C e rt ifi ca te                The w r i t t e n G e ne ra l Safety C e r tif ic at e issued by the
                                    Council u nd er the Act to the H o l d e r of w h i c h this
                                    i n t e r p r e t a t i o n do cument forms part.

The Counci l                        The S h e f f i e l d City Council.

The Guide                            The current edition of the "Guide to Safety at Sports
                                    Grounds" p ubl ished by HM Governme nt or any su cce ed in g
                                    code or gui dan ce pr od uce d by HM Government.

The H o l d e r                      The p e r s o n to who m the general s afety c ert if i c a t e has
                                    been issued.

Spec if ied A c t i v i t y         Any sporting event (including f ootball mat che s) and any
                                    religious event and any public e n t e r t a i n m e n t for w h i c h a
                                    licenc e issued by the Council is in force.

Spectator                           Has   the m e an ing as signed to it by the Act.

The S t a d i u m




BH19 /D B30 3
             Safety of Sports Grounds Certificate Conditions

General Safety



The Holder shall appoint in writing at least one Safety Officer who has
full authority to (a) take responsibility for safety at the ground and (b)
implement and supervise safety measures.  A Safety Officer shall (a) be in
charge of the Stadium and the Holders Employees and (b) be in attendance
at (or in direct personal communication with) a central control point
during a specified activity.



The Holder (and the Safety officer(s)) shall take all necessary
precautions for the reasonable safety of spectators admitted to the
stadium and shall ensure that all responsible persons (as defined in
Section 12(2) of the Act) are completely familiar with their duties under
that Act and this certificate.



Where for reasons of safety the Council gives notice to the Holder that
the stadium or any section or sections of it must not be used for the
accommodation of spectators the Holder shall not permit any areas so
indicated to be used.


The Holder shall provide such signs or notices of such type, size and
design as the Council may from time to time require for reasons of public
safety.  The Holder shall ensure that the signs or notices so required are
clearly legible so that they can easily be read at all times.



The Holder shall take all possible steps to ensure that no materials that
are capable of being used as missiles are accessible to spectators.



Without prejudice to the provisions of Section 8 of the Act the Holder
shall not cause or permit the stadium or any of its installations to be
altered (which term shall exclude minor remedial works which do not in any
way affect the safety of the stadium) in any manner whatsoever without the
prior written consent of the Council.  The Holder shall supply the Council
with copies of such plans and specifications as the Council may reasonably
require to enable any application for such consent to be considered and
shall comply with any conditions attached to that consent.



The Holder shall provide and maintain at the stadium to the satisfaction
of the Council a suitably equipped first aid room and shall arrange for
attendance of such number of qualified first aid attendants as the Council
may require.   The attendants duties shall only relate to the administering
of first aid.   The first aid room shall be capable of being lit by both
the general lighting and the emergency lighting and shall be easily
identified by means of signs.   The Holder shall also ensure that at all
times a doctor is immediately available to attend at the first aid room
when required.



Television cameras, cables and other portable equipment shall not be
installed in the stadium except with the prior written consent of the
Council.
9.   In the event of a spectator being injured in the stadium, the Holder shall
     (within 72 hours of the injury occuring) submit to the Council a full
     written report on the circumstances of the injury.  The Holder shall
     also supply such additional information as the Council may require.



10. The Holder shall arrange for the attendance at every specified activity of
    a Chief Safety Steward and such number of Safety Stewards as are specified
    in Schedule 1.



11. The Holder shall ensure that the Safety Stewards are:-
    (a)  fit and capable to carry out their duties;

     (b)   properly trained and instructed;

     (c)   readily identifiable by dress;

     (d)   provided with written instructions as to their tasks/duties.



12. The written instructions given to stewards must include the following
    tasks and duties.  Stewards must:

     (a)   Under the direction of the Safety Officer or the Chief Steward
           or an Authorised Officer prevent overcrowding by ensuring
           the crowd limits in various parts of the ground are complied with.

     (b)   Prevent spectators, as far as possible, from climbing fences and
           other structures e.g. floodlight pylons, and from standing on seats.
           Where by virtue of the scale of the incident stewards are unable to
           prevent this, they must immediately report the matter to the nearest
           authorised officer or to the chief steward or the safety officer.

     (c)   Ensure that gangways and exits are kept clear.

     (d)   Identify and investigate any incident or occurrence among spectators
           (which may affect spectator s af ety ), reporting their findings to the
           Chief Steward or the Safety Officer.

     (e)   Know the location of and be able to operate effectively the
           fire-fighting equipment at the ground.

     (f)   Know the location of the first aid room and any first aid equipment
           kept elsewhere.

     (g)   Be fully conversant with any methods or signals used to alert staff
           that an emergency has arisen.

     (h)   Be capable of recognising potential fire hazards and suspect
           packages, reporting such findings immediately to the nearest
           authorised officer or the chief steward or the safety officer.

     (i)   Comply promptly with any instruction given in an emergency by an
           authorised officer, the chief steward or the safety officer.

     (j)   Remain at their allocated posts as instructed unless authorised or
           instructed to do otherwise by an authorised officer, the chief
           steward or the safety officer.

     (k)   Report to the safety officer any damage or defect which is likely to
            pose a threat to spectator safety eg. a damaged crush barrier.

      (1)   Open the exit doors/gates and secure them in the open position on the
            initiation of the emergency proceudre or when instructed to do so by
            the safety officer, the Chief Steward or an authorised officer.



 13- Training exercises organised by the Safety Officer relating to the duties
     of stewards shall be held at least once every three months.  A written
     record of the exercises shall be kept.

14.   All exit doors and gates for use by spectators in both ordinary evacuation
      and emergency evacuation situations shall be manned by  stewards in
      accordance with schedule 2.  The other duties detailed in schedule 2
      shall be carried out by stewards.


      Spectator Areas

 15. The Holder shall ensure that all doors, gates and turnstiles throughout
     the stadium are maintained in good working order at all times.   Particular
     attention shall be paid to doors, gates and turnstiles in spectator
     ingress and egress routes and also to pitch perimeter gates.   The Holder
     shall not cause or permit any exit doors or gates to be altered in type,
     design or method of operation without the prior consent of the Council in
     writing.



16.   The means of ingress and egress and the gangways in the   stadium shall at
      all times be kept unobstructed.



17.   All floor surfaces and steps throughout the stadium which are available
      for use by spectators shall have even and non-slip surfaces.  Adequate
      drainage shall also be provided where necessary.



18.   The entrances to and exits from the stadium and the means of access to
      those entrances and exits shall be as specified in the plan which forms
      part of this certificate.


      Fire Safety

19.   The Holder shall provide a public address system which shall be audible in
      all parts of the stadium to the satisfaction of the Council.



20.   The Holder shall institute and maintain a fire warning system to the
      satisfaction of the Council.



21.   The Holder shall provide and maintain such fire fighting equipment     in such
      locations as the Council may from time to time specify.



22.   Except with the consent of the Council in writing the Holder shall not
      permit the storage in the stadium of any flammable, toxic or corrosive
       liquid or compressed substance (except fire extinguishing and drinks
      dispensing apparatus).   The Holder shall comply with any conditions
      attached to such a consent.
23.   Except with the prior written consent of the Council the Holder shall at
      all times maintain the stadium in a clean condition and shall not permit
      any accumulations of rubbish or any other materials whether combustible or
      not.



      Lighting and Electrical Installations

24.   The Holder shall ensure that all parts of the stadium to which
      spectators are admitted are illuminated to a sufficient standard to enable
      such persons to enter or leave the stadium safely.



25.   The Holder shall provide to the satisfaction of the Council a system of
      emergency lighting which shall, in the event of a failure of the general
      lighting be sufficient to enable spectators to leave the stadium safely.
      The emergency lighting shall (a) be powered by a source independent of the
      mains electricity supply and (b) come into operation immediately on the
      failure of the mains lighting and (c) remain in operation for at least
      three consecutive hours when activated.



26.   The electrical installation for the premises shall be constructed and
      maintained in a safe and satisfactory condition.  No alteration which
      significantly affects the installation shall take place without the prior
      written consent of the Council.



      Capacity

27.   The maximum number of spectators that may be admitted to each part of the
      stadium at any one time shall not exceed the number specified in schedule
      3.


      Inspections. Tests and Records

 28. Where any condition in this certificate requires written records to be
     kept such records shall be produced on demand to any authorised officer.



 29. The Council may at any time by notice in writing, for reasons of public
     safety, require the Holder to carry out such works and/or inspections as
     may be specified in the notice.  The Holder shall comply with any
     conditions specified in that notice.



 30. If a significant defect is discovered pursuant to any inspection or test
     carried out under the terms of this certificate the Holder shall
     immediately notify the Council and take steps to correct the defect.



 31. The Holder shall arrange for the tests and inspections listed in Schedule
     4, to be carried out and for records to be kept or reports to be supplied
     to the Council in accordance with the terms of the schedule.  Where
     reports are required to be supplied to the Council, they shall be supplied
     as soon as possible on completion of the inspections/tests.



 32. Without prejudice to Section 6 of the Act or any regulations made
     thereunder the Holder shall maintain written records showing:-
(a)   the number of spectators admitted to each part of the stadium for
      each specified activity;

(b)   the names and addresses of the stewards employed by the holder;

(c)   the names of the stewards on duty at each specified activity and
      details of their duties;

(d)   details of the training exercises organised by the Holder for
      stewards in accordance with Condition 13 - the record shall show
      which stewards attended each exercise and the content of those
      ex erc ise s.



Guidance to Holders

The Council may from time to time issue written guidance to holders on
safety matters.  The holder must pay due regard to any such guidance.




RP2ABM/JS
                                                                                so rc
                             SCHEDULE 1 - CONDITION N O . 10




The nu mber of Safety Stewards    on duty at each sp ecified                  activity shall not be
less than 66.

                             S CHEDULE 2 - C O N D I T I O N N O . 14

The Sa fety Stewards   carry out the duties        set    out b e l o w : -



No.   of St ew ard s          Duties
                              M a n n i n g of Fi nal Exi t Gates

26                           2 for each main exit

                              Cont ro l a nd D i r e c t i o n of S pectators

12                           1 per vomitory        in the South Stand

 8                           i                        "     "   West Stand

18                            1   "      "           "      "   N or th S tand

                              Patrolling      the S t a d i u m and D e a l i n g w i t h E m e r g e n c i e s
                              etc.

                              B e n e a t h S out h Stand




10/DMB232/MS
                                  SCHEDULE 3 - CONDITION NO.27



The number of spectators         admitted   to a s pe ci f i e d a ctivity shall not      ex ceed
54,324.

The n u mbe r of spectators admitted to each area of the stadium,                    listed   below,
shall exceed the m a xi mum numbers shown.

Area                                             M a x i m u m No.   of S pe cta to rs

L   P   : ry/   f)/_                             21 , 0 0 0


Sout h Stand           (Upper)                     5,567

Sout h Stand           (Lower)                     3,310

West St and                                        4,465

West T e r r a c e                                 7,200

N o r t h West T e r r a c e                       2,900

N o r t h Stand                                    9,882



                                                 54,324




10/DMB232/MS
                                   SCHEDULE 1 - CONDITION N O . 10



The nu mber of Safety         Stewards   on duty at ea ch specified                 activity shall not             be
less than 69.

                                   S CHEDULE 2 - C O N D I T I O N N O . 14

The S a f e t y   Stewards   carry out   the duties set           out below:-




                                    M a n n i n g of F i n a l Exit Gates

 1                                 'A'   ( S h o r e h a m Street)

11                                 'B' to     'L'    (John Street)

 2                                 'M' and     'N'       (Bramall Lane)

 2                                 'O'   (Bramall L ane )

 2                                 'R' and     'S'       (South Stand)

                                    Contro l and D i r e c t i o n s of Specta tor s

 6                                 B r a m a l l L a n e Stand

 3                                 "                 "    Terrace

 9                                 J o h n Street        Stand

 2                                 J o h n Street T e r r a c e    (Timber Section)

 Z                                 it                        tt      (Concrete Section)

 4                                 S p i o n Kop M a i n Area

 1                                 "             " Disaaled/Childrens              Area

 9                                 South Stand

                                    P a t r o l l i n g the S tan d i n g and D e a l i n g w i t h E m e r g e n c i e s
                                    etc._________________________________________________________

 2                                 J o h n Street        Stand

 1                                 Bram all L a n e Stand

 1                                 South Stand

                                    M a n n i n g Int er n a l Gates

 4                                 P i t c h P e r i m e t e r Gates to
                                     (Nos 1-4) J o h n Street T e rr ace

 4                                 Gates b e t w e e n J o h n Street Timber            Stand     and T e r r a c e
                                    (Nos 2-5)

 1                                 G a t e b e t w e e n the two parts of            the J o h n Stree t T i m b e r
                                     Stand and T e r r a c e (No.9)

10/DB232/MS
                                        SCHEDULE 3 - CONDITION NO.27



The number of spectators a d m itt ed           to a specified       activity shall not ex ceed
44,009.

Th e nu mber of spectators admit te d to each area of the stadium,                         listed below,
shall exceed the m a x imu m numbers shown.

Area                                                 M a x i m u m No.   of Sp ec ta t o r s

Sout h Stand        (Seats)                          7,948

Bramall      lane

    Seats                                            2,958
    Terrace                                          7,354

J o h n Street

    Ti m b e r S e c t i o n Seats                   1,200
    C o n c r e t e S e c t i o n Seats              1,490
    T i m b e r S e c t i o n T e r rac e
        (right-hand section)                        1,048
        (left-h and section)                          589
    C o n c r e t e Sect io n T e r rac e           2,832

S p i o n K op

    General Area                                    18,250
    Disabled Section                                   120

Chil dr ens      Section                                220



                                                   44,009




10/DM B23 2/ MS
                                                                                                                 1




                                                     D R A F T

                                                 SCHE DU LE      Lj-                 C o n d i t i o n No. ?/



                                      I N SP ECT IO NS A N D T ESTS R E Q U IR ED



G E N ER AL                                     IN CIDENCE              WRITTEN          W R I T T E N REPORT
REQUIREMENT                                                             R E CORD         R E Q U I R E D TO BE
                                                                        REQU IR ED       SUPP LI ED TO
                                                                                         COUNCIL




A co mpetent p e r s o n shall                 At least                 No.              Yes.
inspect the struct ure s w h i c h             once e very
m a k e up the Stadium.                        12 months.



A competent p e r s o n shall                 B ef or e and             Yes.
carry out a g e n era l v isu al              after each
i n s p e c t i o n of the S t a di um        sp eci fi ed
to ensu re co mp li a n c e wit h             activity,
the Safety C e rt if ic ate
Conditions.



A c ompetent p e r s o n shall                At least                                   Yes.
e x a mi ne the e l e c t r i c a l           once ev ery
i n s t a l l a t i o n of the Stadium.       12 months.



A competent p e r s o n shall                  At least                                 Yes.
test and inspect all fire                      once every
ap pl ian ce s (including                      12 months.
ex ti nguishers, hydrants
a nd water supplies)



T h e e me rgency lighting and                 At least                                 Yes.
fire warn in g (including                      once e very
the P u b l i c Addr es s) systems             12 months.
shall be t e s t e d / i n s p e c t e d
by a competent person.



The emergency lighting                         Not more                 Yes.
system shall be tested by a                    than three
competent person.                              hours prior
                                               to a
                                               sp ec ifi ed
                                               activity
                                               taking place.
                                                   -2-



GENERAL                                   IN CI DEN CE         WRITTEN         WR I T T E N R E P O R T
RE Q U I R E M E N T                                           RECORD          RE Q UI RE D TO BE
                                                               R E Q UI RE D   SUP PLI ED TO
                                                                               COUNCI L




A l l the fire w a rn in g                Not mo re            Yes.
d e t e c t i o n publi c address         than three
and other c o m m u n i c a t i o n       hours prior
systems shall be tested                   to a
by a com petent person.                   specified
                                          activity
                                          taking place.



A ll lighting systems                     Not m o r e          Yes.
(excludi ng the e me rgency               than three
lighting) shall be tested                 ho ur s prior
be a co mpetent person.                   to a
                                          spec if ied
                                          activity
                                          taking place.



All doors, gates and                      Not mor e            Yes.
tu rn st i l e s throug ho ut the         than three
St a d i u m shall be tested              ho ur s pri or
by a competent person.                    to a
                                          sp ec ified
                                          activity
                                          taking place.




A r e p r e s e n t a t i v e sample,     O n e 20% sample                     Yes.
c o m p r i s i n g 20% of the crush      in each period
b a r ri er s and h a n d r a i l s in    of 12 months.
the S t a d i u m shall be tested         Once a sample
by a co mp ete nt p e r s o n in          is tested that
a c c o r d a n c e wit h the Guide.      sample shall not
The Council shall be                      be tested a g a i n
n o t i f i e d in a d v a n c e of the   (unless spec ifi c­
dates of testing.                         a l l y req uir ed by
                                          the Council) w i t h i n
                                          four and a half years
                                          afte r first testing,
                                          but shall be tested
                                          a g a i n w i t h i n five
                                          and a h a l f years of
                                          that date.




DMB111/5/JJJ
                            GUID AN CE F O R S AFETY C E R T I F I C A T E H O LD ER S



I N T RO DU CTI ON

This note has b een prep ar ed by the S heffield City Council in order to inform
Ce rt i f i c a t e Holde rs as to the general ba ckg ro und of the Safety C e r t i f i c a t e
Conditions.          The Council in dealing w i t h Safety Cer ti f i c a t e s takes advice from
the Chief Fir e Officer, the Chief Constable, the Dir ec tor of H e a lth and Con su mer
S ervices and the Council's B uilding Surveyor.            T he se Off ic ers and the Council
itself is con cer ne d to see as far as po ssible that the spectators at a ny
sp ec ified activit ies are r e as ona bl y safe.

GU IDANCE

W h e r e advice is given to the holder by any of the four O f f i cer s m e n t ion ed           it
should be a cted upon in ac cj rd a n c e w i t h the time const rai nt s g iven in the
advice.      The h ol de r is reminded that failure to take steps to ensure the
reas on abl e safety of spectators could give rise to a prosecution.

The Chief C o n s t a b l e and his Off ic ers have a p a r t i c u l a r l y important role in
re l at io n to "public order" situations the correct handling of w h i c h should
r e du ce any risk to sp ec tator safety.

T h e Chief C o n s t a b l e must t he refore be provided w i t h a p p r o p r i a t e facilities at
the sta di um for control, crowd surveillance, d e t e n t i o n and a d m i n i s t r a t i v e
purposes.     T h es e facilities are e sse nt ial if public order is to be m a i n t a i n e d
and the risk to spectators minimised.

T h e Chief C o n s ta ble must also be informed at the earliest p ossible moment                 of the
p r o po sed date and content of all specified a c ti vit ie s so that a p p r o p r i a t e
p l a nn ing   can take place.

In a ddi t i o n there must be c on su l t a t i o n and agr eement b e tw ee n the h o l d e r and the
Chief C o n s ta ble w e l l in advan ce of specified ac tiv it ies about the p r o p o s e d
me t h o d s of a d m i ss io n and the segre gat io n of spectators. C o n s u l t a t i o n must also
take p la ce if advan ce i nf orm a t i o n is such that public order d i ff ic ult ie s m a y
arise.        As a result of this co ns ul t a t i o n it is pos si ble that the Chief Constable
m a y require, for reasons of preser vi ng public order, that the specified acti vit y
is "all t i c k e t ” or the specified acti vit y should not be played at all at the
S t a d i u m or the day and the time of the specified a c t i vi ty should be changed.

T he Chief C o n s tab le should also be able to use w hat e v e r means are a p p r o p r i a t e to
ex er c i s e control over spectators for reasons of safety and as part of this
contro l he and his O f f i c e r s should be allowed full access to all areas of the
Stadium.




GP262/DMB

1/DB101/MS
                                                                                     / * ?6          D f M f l



                       S a fet y of Sports G r o u n d s C e r t i f i c a t e C o n d i t i o n s



The H o l d e r shall a p p o i n t in w r i t i n g at least one S a fe ty O f f i c e r who has
full a u t h o r i t y to (a) take r e s p o n s i b i l i t y for safety at the g r ou nd and (b)
implement and s u p e r v i s e safety m e a s u res .         A Safet y O f f i c e r shall (a) be in
charge of the S t a d i u m and (b) be in a t t e n d a n c e at a c e n t r a l control point
du ri ng a sp ecified activity.

The H old er (and the Safety officer(s)) shall take all n e c e s s a r y
p r ecautions for the r e as ona bl e safety of spectators a d m i t t e d to the
s t adi um and shall e n s u r e that all r e sp on si ble persons (as d e f i n e d in
S e cti on 12(2) of the Act ) are c omp le t e l y familiar w i t h their d u tie s under
that Act and this c e r tificate.

The m a x i m u m n u m be r of spectators that m a y be a d m itt ed to each                           pa rt of the
stadium at any or&e time shall not exceed the numb er s p e c i f i e d                                 in s chedule

Before the s t a d i u m is used on any o c c a s i o n for a s p e c i f i e d a c t i v i t y the
Ho lder shall m a k e a rra n g e m e n t s wit h the Chief C o n s t a b l e for the attendarice
of a suffic ie nt n u m b e r of police o fficers for the p u r p o s e of m a i n t a i n i n g
lawful and orderly b e h a v i o u r among person s a t t e n di ng the stadium. The,
e x tent of the p r o v i s i o n of police services is r eserved for the
d e t e r m i n a t i o n of the C hi ef Constable.

The H ol de r shall          provide       for police use:-

(a)   a central control               room (together w i t h           appropriate         ancillary
      equipment);

(b)   a c c o m m o d a t i o n w h i c h may be u t i li se d as a d e t e n t i o n centre;

(c)   a c c o m m o d a t i o n w h i c h may be uti lis ed         for a d m i n i s t r a t i o n pur po ses .

No spectator shall be admitted                      to the     s t a d i u m in c o n n e c t i o n w i t h   a
specified activ it y unless

(a)   the m e t ho ds        of   a d m i s s i o n and

(b)   the m e t hod s        to be used for the s e g r e g a t i o n of s p e c t a t o r s            have b e e n
      approved by            the Ch ief Constable.

Wher e for reasons of safety the Council gives noti ce to the H o l d e r that
the stadium or any s e c t i o n or sections of it m u s t not be used for the
a c c o m m o d a t i o n of spe ct a t o r s the H o l d e r shall not permit any a reas so
indicated to be used.

The H o lde r shall a r r ang e for the at ten d a n c e at every spe ci f i e d a c t i v i t y of
a Chief S a fet y Steward and such number of Safety St ewa rd s as are sp ec ifi ed
in Schedule

The H ol de r shall e n su re that the Safety Stewards                           are:-
(a)   fit and capable to carry out their duties;

(b)    p r o p er ly    trained      and    instructed;

(c)    readily         i d e n t i f i a b l e by dress;

(d)    p r o vi de d with w r i t t e n ins tructions             as    to their       tasks/ d u ti es .
10.   The w r i t t e n i n s t r u c t i o n s g iven to stewards mus t   include     the    following
      tasks and duties.               Stewards must:

      (a)   Prevent o v e r c r o w d i n g by en suring   the crowd       limits    in v a r i o u s   parts            of
            the ground are compl ie d with.

      (b)   Prevent spect at ors , as far as possible, from c l i m bin g fences and
            other struc tu res e.g. floodlight pylons, and from s t a n d i n g on seats.
            W h er e by v i r t u e of the scale of the incident stewards are u n a b l e to
            prevent this, they should immediately report the m a t t e r to the
            nearest p o l ic e o f f ice r or, if no police officer is present, to the
            chief steward or the safety officer.

      (c)   Ensure    that   gang way s   and    exits   are kept    clear.

      (d)   Identify and in ve st i g a t e any incident or occurren ce a m ong                    spect ato rs ,
             reporting their findings to the police or to m a n a g e m e n t .

      (e)   K n o w the l o c a t i o n of and be able to operate e f f e c t i v e l y        the
             fire -f igh ti ng e q u i p m e n t at the ground.

      (f)   K n o w the l o c a t i o n of the   first aid room and any          first       aid   equipment
            kept elsewhere.

      (g)   Be fully c o n v e r s a n t w i t h any methods     or signals us ed         to alert         staff
            that an e m e r g e n c y has arisen.

      (h)   Be capable of r e c o g n i s i n g potential fire hazards and sus pe ct
            packages, r e p o r t i n g such findings imme di ate ly to the n e a r e s t police
            officer or, if no po lice officer is in the immediate v i c i n i t y , the
            chief steward or the safety officer.

      (i)   Comply promptly w it h any i ns tr u c t i o n given in an e m e r g e n c y by                a
            police officer, the chief steward or the safety officer.

      (j)    R em ai n at their a ll ocated posts as instru ct ed unless a u t h o r i s e d or
             ordered to do o t h e r w i s e by a police officer, the chief stewa rd or the
             safety officer.

      (k)    Report to the safety o f f ic er any damage or defect w h i c h is likely                               to
             pose a threat to spe ct ato r safety eg. a damaged crush barrier.

11.   Training exercises rel ati ng to the duties                of stewards        shall     be h e l d       at
      least once every three months.

12.   The H older shall en sure that all doors, gates and turnstiles th rou g h o u t
      the stadium are m a i n t a i n e d in good w o r k i n g order at all times.   Particular
      atte nt ion shall be paid to doors, gates and turnstiles in s p e c t a t o r
      ingress and egress routes and also to pitch pe rimeter gates.                 The H o l d e r
      shall not cause or perm it any exit doors or gates to be a l t e r e d in type,
      de sign or m et hod of o p e r a t i o n with out the prior consent of the C o u n c i l in
      writing.

13.   All exit doors and gates for use by                spectators in both o r d i n a r y e v a c u a t i o n
      and emergency e v a c u a t i o n situations       shall be m a nne d by st ewa r d s in
      accordance with s c h e du le

14.   The means      of ingress     and egress     and   the gangways       in the     stadium       shall          at
      all   times be kept      unobstr uct ed .
        15.   All floor surfaces and steps t hroughout the s t a d i u m w h i c h are a v a i l a b l e
/             for use by spectators shall ha ve even and n o n -s li p surfaces.       Adequate
              dr a in a ge shall also be pr ov i d e d where necess ary.

        16.   The number, size and s i t u at io n of en tr ances to and exits fro m the s t a d i u m
              and the means of acc ess to those en trances and exits shall be as s pe cified
              in schedule

        17.   The H older shall ens ure that all parts of the s t a d i u m to w h i c h
               spectators are a d m i tt ed shall be illum in at ed to a s u f f i c i e n t s t a n d a r d   to
               enable such pe rsons to enter or leave the s t a d i u m safely.

        18.   The H ol de r shall provide to the s a t i sf ac ti on of the C o un ci l a s ys te m of
              em ergency lighting wh ic h shall, in the event of a failure of the general
               lighting be su ff ic ie nt to en able spectators to leave the s t a d i u m safely.

        19.   The    H older shall provi de such signs or not i ce s of such type, size and
              d esign as the Council m a y from time         to time require for r e as on s of pu blic
              safety.    The H o l d e r shall e n su re that the signs or notices so r eq ui r e d are
              clearly legible so that they can easily be read at all times.

        20.   The Hold er shall pr ovide a p u bl i c address syste m wh ic h shall be a u d i bl e in
              all parts of the s t a d i u m to the sa ti sf a c t i o n of the Coun cil.    Th e H o l d e r
    ^         shall permit the Chief Co n s t a ble u n r e s t r i c t e d access to the pu blic address
               sy stem should the need arise for the p r e s e r v a t i o n of p ublic safety.

        21.   The H older shall institute and m a i n t a i n a fire w a r n i n g       system    to   the
               s at is faction of the Council.

        22.   The H ol de r shall provi de and m a i n t a i n such fire f ighting e q u i p m e n t      in such
               lo cations as the C o u n ci l may from time to time specify.

        23.   Except wi th the cons en t of the Council in w r it in g the H o l d e r shall not
               permit the storage in the s t a d i u m of any compressed gas or l iquid except
               fire ex ti ng u i s h i n g apparatus. The H older shall comply wit h any c on di ti on s
              a ttached to such a consent.

        24.   Except with the prior w r i t t e n co nsent of the Cou nc il the H o l d e r shall st
              all   times m a i n t a i n the s t a d i u m in a clean co nd i ti on and shall not pe rmit
               any  ac cumulations of rubbish or any other m a t e r i a l s w h a t s o e v e r .

        25.   The H o ld e r shall take all po ss ib le steps to ensure that no m a t e r i a l s             that
               are capable of being used as m i s si le s are accessible to s pe ct at or s.

        26.   W i t h o u t prejudice to the p ro vi si on s of Sect io n 8 of the A ct the H o l d e r
               shall not cause or pe rm it the stadi um or any of its i n s t a l l a t i o n s to be
               altered (which term shall exclu de m i n o r remedial works w h i c h do not in any
               way affect the safety of the stadium) in any m a n n e r w h a t s o e v e r w i t h o u t the
               prior w r i t t e n consent of the Council.      The H o l d e r shall s up pl y the Cou nc il
               wi th copies of such plans and s p e c if ic a ti on s as the Counc il m ay r e as on ab l y
               require to enable any a p p l i c a t i o n for such consent to be c o n s i d e r e d and
               shall comply with any co nd it i o n s at tached to that consent.

        27.   The Council may at any time by notice in writing, for rea so ns of p u bl ic
               safety, require the H o l d e r to carry out such works and/or i n s p e c t i o n s as
               may be specified in the notice.       The H o l d e r shall comply w i t h any
               conditions specified in that notice.

        28.   The H o l de r shall pro v id e and m a i n t a i n at the stad iu m to the s a t i s f a c t i o n
               of the Council a suitably e q u ip pe d first aid room and shall a r ra n ge for
               attendance of such numbe rs of qu al i f i e d first aid a t t e n d a n t s as the
 Council may require.     The first aid room shall be capable of b e i n g lit by
 bo th the general l i ghting and the emergency lighting and shall be easi ly
 identified by means of signs.     The H o ld er shall also ensur e that at all
 times a do ctor employed or reta ined by the H o l d e r is i m m e d i a t e l y a v a i l a b l e
 to attend at the first aid room w h e n required.

  T el ev is io n cameras, cables and other p ortable e q uipment shall not be
  ins talled in the s t a d i u m e xcept wi th the prior w r i t t e n c o n s e n t of the
  Council.

 The electrical installation for the premises shall be constructed and
 maintained in a safe and satisfactory condition in accordance with the
 Regulations for Electrical Installations published by the Institution of
 Electrical Engineers.  No alteration to the installation shall take place
 without the prior written consent of the Council.

 The Hold e r shall take all n e c e s s a r y steps to secure the s t r u c t u r a l safety
 of the stad iu m and shall arran ge for a c om petent structural e n g i n e e r to
 inspect the s t a di um in its e n t i re ty at least once every 12 m o nt hs .        The
 H o ld e r shall supply a copy of the en gi neers report to the C o u n c i l and
 shall notify the Coun ci l in adva nc e of the date of the i n sp ec ti on .

 In the event of a s p e c t at or b e i n g injured in the stadium, the H o l d e r shall
 (within 72 hours of the injury occuring) submit to the C o u n c i l a full
 w r i t t e n report on the c i r c u m s t a n c e s of the injury.  The H o l d e r shall
 also supply such a dd it i o n a l i n f o r m a t i o n as the Counc il m ay req uire.

 W i th ou t p re judice to S e c t i o n 6 of the Act or any r eg ul a t i o n s ma de
 thereunder the H o ld er shall m a i n t a i n w r i t t e n records s h o w i ng :-

  (a)   the n u mb er of s pe ct a to rs    a d m it te d   to each part of the          s t a d i u m for
        each specified activity;

  (b)   the names     and ad dr es se s    of    the stewards empl oyed by            the holder;



  (c)   the names of the stewards               on duty at each        specified      activity      and
        details of their duties;

  (d)   details of the tr ai ni n g ex ercises org an is ed by the H o l d e r for
        stewards in a cc or d a n c e wit h C o n d i t i o n 11 - the record shall show
        which stewards a t t e n d e d each exe rc is e and the content of those
        exercises.

  (e)   details of the crush barr i er s            and h a n d r a i l s   tested   in a c c o r d a n c e wi th
        conditions 34(b) and 34(c).

. W h e r e any con di ti on in this c e rt if ic at e req uires w r i t t e n reco rd s to be
  kept such records shall be pr od uc e d on dem and to any a u t h o r i s e d pe rson.

  The Holder shall arrange for the fo llowing                     tests and i n s p e c t i o n s to be
  carried out and wh ere reports are re quired                    to be sent to the C o u n ci l they
  shall be forward ed as soon as possib le :-

  (a)    general v i su a l i n s pe ct io ns    of the entire stadium bo th b e fo re               and
         after a sp ecified a c t iv it y        to ensure compl iance w i t h this
         certificate.

  (b)   all the crush b a r r i e r s and h a n d ra il s w i t h i n the s t a d i u m shall be
        tested in ac co rd an ce w i t h the guide by a qualified e n g i n e e r as and
        w he n required by the Council.
(c)   w i t h o u t pr ej ud ic e to c o n d i t i o n 34(b) w i t h i n each peri od of 12 m o n t h s
       a r e pr es en ta ti ve sample of 20% of the crush ba rriers and h a n d r a i l s in
       all parts of the s t a d i u m shall be tested in a cc or d a n c e w i t h c o n d i t i o n
       34(b);        the Counci l shall be n o t if ie d in advance of the days and
       dates of testing and shall be inf or me d in w r i t in g of the test
       results.         Compo ne nt s tested in a c c o r d a n c e with this c o n d i t i o n shall
       not be tested again (unless s p e c i f i c a l l y re quired by the Counc il)
       w i th i n 4i years after testing but shall be tested ag ai n w i t h i n 5 i
       years.

(d)   at least once every 12 m o n t h s the el e ct r i c a l i n s t a l l a t i o n of the
       stadium shall be exa mi ne d by a c h a r t e r e d electrical e n g i n e e r and a
       copy of his report shall be f o r w ar de d to the Council.                  The report
       shall:- brie fl y d e s c ri be the i n s ta ll at i on ; identify a reas in w h i c h
       the i n s t a l l a t i o n does not comply w i t h the current I.E.E.
       Reg ul ations; identify wo rk s req ui re d to ensure compliance.

(e)   at least once every 12 m o n t h s all fire appliances ( i n c l u d i n g
      extinguishers, h y d r a n t s and w a t e r supplies) shall be tested by a
      c o m p et en t p erson or persons.    A copy of the test reports shall be
      forwarded to the Council.

(f)   twenty four hours b e f o r e a s pe cified activity            takes   p lace   the
       following in st al la ti o ns shall be tested:-

      (i)     the public address system(s);
      (ii)      all other c o m m u n i c a t i o n systems;
      (iii)       all fire w a r n i n g and d e t e c t i o n systems;
      (iv)      all lighting systems ( i n c l u d i n g the emergency lighting);
      (v)     all doors, gates and turnstiles throughout the stadium.
      A w r i t t e n record of the tests shall be kept by the H o l d e r .

If a significant de fect is d i s c o v e r e d p u r s u a n t to any i n s p e c t i o n or test
carried out under the terms o f . this... c e r t i f i c a t e the H o l d e r shall
imm ediately n o t if y the Counc i l and take steps to correct the defect.




       RP2JS
       29.6.87
S A F E T Y OF SPORTS    GROUNDS ACT 1975
C O N S UL TA TI VE M E E T I N G - T H U R S D A Y 13TH MARCH,   1986



1.     Attendanc e

       A dm in i s t r a t i o n and Leg al - Mrs. E. Bashforth, Solicitor,
                                              Mr. D. M. Bownes, Chief L i c e n s i n g Officer,
                                              Mr.                  As sistant L i c e n s i n g O f f ic er

       Department       of Land and            Mr. K. Blount,
       P lanning                               M r . Butler.
                                               Mr.

                                                                             M
       South Y or kshire Police             - Superintendent         T.    Stewart.

       South Yo rkshire Fire                   Mr. A.    Seiman,
       Service                                 Mr. I

       He alth and Safety                   -Mr.
       Exe cutive



2.     Current Situation

       DMB summarised what he thought to be the current                          situation,   i.e.

             Fire Service     Committee has ma in power.

             Delegated power to Working Party - w h i c h                 comprises

                 South Yorkshire         County Council R e pr esentative             (Mr.           ).

                 Fire Service Re presentatives -

                 Police R epresentatives -

                 B uilding Surveyors         Representatives.

             W o r k in g Party has Delegated Power to make decisions                   (W or k in g Party
             enforce the provisions of the Green Guide).

       Mr.    Seiman,    Fire Service,       presented his v i e w of the system.

             Fire Service      Committee,      Main P ow er

             W o rk in g Party consider all proposals relating to the Ground -
             Recommend to Fire Service Committee - he qualified this by saying                               that
             minor points were not reported to the Mai n Committee.

       Mr.               C o u n t ^ Council, acted as a Clerical Filter.  He issued Minutes
       of each W o r k i n g Party meeting.      All plans, correspondence, etc. had to be
       pro cessed through him.

       DMB raised the point about delegated powers, i.e. the G e n e r a l Pur po se s
       Panel he felt would not wis h to delegate power any further.       After some
confused discussion, it was felt this would cause no problem.

Mr. Seiman stressed the point of communication.        He felt that it was ve ry
important to main tain the current s ystem of co mm un ic at io n b e t we e n all
Authorities.  He felt the Minutes of the W o r k i n g Group M e e t i n g s were ver y
important to all Authorities.

H ea lt h and Safety Executive

DMB asked Mr. j           [Factory Inspector,       if he wanted    to be included            in
the Worki ng Group.

Mr. _________ said no.  He felt that the primary legisl at io n should be the
e nforcing le gislation and as the Safety of Sports Ground Act was the mai n
leg islation in this instance, he felt his involvement to be minimal.      The
H ealth and Safety Executive wo ul d take a back seat approach .

Mr.           felt, as a personal view, that the H ealth and S af et y Executive
should have some input, but in the event of no instructions, he did not
k n o w what.

Mr. Seiman also made the point that HSE should have an invol ve me nt - there
should be a free exchange of information.

DMB told Mr.          lihat he would contact the Home Offi ce to ask what
involvement the HSE we re to have w i t h regard to Sports Grounds in v i e w of
the Popplewell Recommendations.    DMB will inform Mr. Albc;^c-<.when he has
found anything out.

Current   Situation - Individual Grounds

SWFC                    Designated                          Holds    a C er ti fi ca te

SUFC                    Designated                          C e rt if ic at e   Pend in g

Owlerton Stadium        Not Designated    Possibly Designated        in   the near     future.



The Police have no problems      at the moment,     policing of     SUFC has      been sorted
out.

Fire Service,   currently enforced     grounds and instruct        Stewards.

DMB - Who checks      that Stewards k n o w exactly what    they do in the         case       of an
emergency?

Police have issued "Idiot Cards" to all Stewards.  Also before each match
commences, Stewards are instructed by the Police in their duties.

DMB also raised    the point   that the   current    certificate    conditions may need
reviewing.

Fire Service, Mr.     Seiman, may be appropriate at this        time to r e v i e w       •
conditions.
/
    /'



5.       Enforcement

         Fire Service - Ad Hoc basis - Fire           Service   only visit   the e v e n in g matches .

         Bui ld in g Services - Only go to the Big Match es         to vi ew the     crowd,     to assess
         potential hazards.

         Police have an emergency situati on procedure.       A Police O f f i c e r or Steward
         in the event of noticing anything reports directly to the P o li ce Com ma n de r
         w ho takes immediate action to rectify any pro bl e m and then reports to the
         W o r k i n g Party. The Police also point-Aout that Stewards should have a Chief
         Steward, someone who knows the grou nd and procedures - SWFC a l re ad y have
         such a Steward.

6.       Contacts

         Police - Superintendent Stewart, Operations Division,               Poli ce H ea dq u a r t e r s
         (Please forward two copies of all correspondence).

         Fire Service - Mr. A. Seiman, Fire           Service Headquarters      (Please     forward      two
         copies of all correspondence).

         Bui ld i ng Services - Mr.      K. Blount.

7.       Final Comments

         Building Sur ve yo r - Mr. _________ [pointed out that he n o r m a l l y sends a list
         of any works^ that involve building regulations^ being carried out at Sports
         Grounds to the County Council.       DMB agreed this procedure should continue.

         Police - No general comments were made, but Su perintendent Stewart                     offered
         the facilities of the Niagra Sports Ground for future m e e t in gs .

         HS|jr - Mr.         sees an "interface role", but no direct contact for
         enforcement.    HSC could carry out inspections in the future.           However,
         where there is prime legislation, other than H S £ own E n f o r c e m e n t Act, the
         H S ^ would take a lesser role.  M r . __________ ^nade the point that in the past
         he had not spent a lot of time on inspections at Sports Ground.

         Fire Service have a system in operation.        Mr. Seiman sees p o t e nt ia l
         difficulties on the A dm inistration Side, and a need to m a i n t a i n an eveness
         of standards between Authorities.    He w o u l d not want to see one Aut ho ri ty
         hav ing different^c^ditio^is^ to the other three.      If conditions we re to be
         altered, he feels-^a new standard set of conditions for each Authority.          He
         sees no i mm ediate change in the Fire Service Role.

         M e e t i n g closed   11.22 a.m.
                                             (Uytl) -2 3 -A /^
                                                                    L. N. BUSH, F.R.I.C.S., C.Eng.,
                                                                    M.I.Struct.E., F.I.A.S.
                                                                    City Building Surveyor,
LIVERPOOL                                                           Kingsway House,
                                                                    Hatton Garden,
                                                                    Liverpool L3 2AJ
                                                                    Telephone:    0 5 1 -2 3 6 9231       Ext:   110

Our ref    ESCAPE/CBS— 77/LNB/LS
Your ref                                                            Date   18th April, 1986




      David Bownes, Esq.,
      Administration & Legal Department,
      Sheffield City Council,
      Town Hall,
      Sheffield 1.



      Dear Mr. Bownes,


      Further to our conversation of yesterday, I am enclosing herewith copies
      of the Liverpool and Everton Football Grounds' General Safety certificates,
      as promised.  I trust you will respect the confidentiality of the contents,
      although I know that both clubs are most happy to assist the authorities
      in any way in their efforts to secure proper safety at other grounds in
      the country, as well as their own.

      When discussing the frequency of visit and inspection of the clubs yesterday,
      I forgot to mention that in addition to the routine visits described, we
      do carry out spot checks, arriving unannounced during matches, in order to
      assess the compliance with the conditions of the certificate in relation
      to the attendance and functions of stewards.  Adequate and efficient
      stewards is a most important factor in the safety formula, and cannot be
      overstressed.  Too many football clubs have in the past employed, on a very
      casual basis, elderly club supporters, to undertake these important duties.
      Such a basis of employment of stewards leads the people concerned to regard
      their duties as secondary to their attendance and "free" viewing of the match.
      We have killed this attitude over the years at the Liverpool and Everton
      clubs, to great benefit, and all other clubs ought to be encouraged to do
      the same.

      Yours sincerely,




      City Building Surveyor.




                                                                                 NUCLEAR FREE
                                                                                 LOCAL A U T H O R IT Y




                When callina or tsleohoning olease ask for Mr.   L. N. Bush
                                                                           UA*f\




                   GP/262/DMB


                    29th May 1986




The Chief E xe cutive
M a n c h e s t e r C i t y Council,
T o w u Hall,
MANCHESTER
M 6 0 2JT

D e a r Sir,

Safety of Spor ts G r ou nd s Act 1975
Saf ety C e r t i f i c a t e C on di ti on s

I a m c ur re nt ly re vi e wi ng the Safe ty Ce rt i f i c a t e C o n d i t i o n s w h i c h the Ci ty
Counc i l i nh erited f r o m the S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e C o un ty Council o n 1st April, 1986.

As part of this r e v ie w it w ou ld be useful to see the types o f C on di ti on s imposed
by other A u t h o r i t i e s and 1 a m w r i t i n g to ask if y o u w o u l d s u p p l y a copy of the
C on di t i o n s cur re nt ly in force in respect of sports grounds in yo ur A u t h o r i t y ' s
area.

I am, of course, raost w i l l i n g to s u p pl y you w i t h a copy of the current
C o nd i ti on s in force in She ffield but as I a m r e v i e w i n g t h e m it w o u l d p e r ha ps be
mor e a p p r o p r i a t e to let you have a copy of the re vised e d i t i o n as and w h e n they
a re prepa red.

I l o o k forward to hea ri ng fr om y ou shortly and if you ha ve a ny qtiestions to ask
in the m e a n t i m e ple ase do not h e s i t a t e to coutact m y Chief L i c e n s i n g Officer,
Mr. Bownes, on the n u mb er gi ve n below.

Y ours faith fu ll y,




Head of D ep ar t m e n t




CS                                                                     734690 - Mr. Bownes
                                                          a i..t       K*.




                      GP/262/DMP.


                      5th June,      1986



The Chief C onstable,
South Y o r k s h i r e Police,
Polic- Hea dq ua rt er s,
Snij; IIill,
SHEFFIELD,
S 3 f ‘I Y


Dea r Sir,

Safety of       Snorts G r ou nd Act        1975

I e n c l o s e for yo u r infor m at io n a copy o f ray Report to the G e n er al P urposes Panel
oil 6th May, 1986, t o g e t h e r w i t h a co p y of the Panel's R e so lu ti on in r e l at io n to
that Report.

I wo ul d    like   to ma ke the fo ll ow in g corawouts iti rel at io n             to the d e c i s i o n t -

(a)     A l t h o u g h it has been decided to carry on w i t h the old a d m i n i s t r a t i v e s y s t e m
        o r g a n i s e d by the C ou n ty   Council I w i s h to make it clear that the s y s t e m is
        u n d e r r e v i e w and m a y be ad ju st ed in the future;

(b)      1 w i l l s h o rt ly w r i t e to      the other Distr ict C ouncils in S outh Y o r k s h i r e w i t h
         a v i e w to e s t a b l i s h i n g a basis for c o n s u l t a t i o n as d e s c r i b e d in the
         Re solution;

(c)      the r e - d r a f t i n g of the C e r t i f i c a t e condi ti on s wi ll s h or tl y be c o m p l e t e d and
         I w i l l the n be a s k i n g for yo ur comments on them.

If you have any q u e s ti on s          to a sk on this matter,           pl ease do not h e s i t a t e    to
c ontact Mr. Bownes o n the              n u mb er given below.

Yours faithfully,




Hea d of De pa rt m e n t

Encs.




BH

                                                                               734690 - Mr. Bownes
                                                      cMo
                                                                        H r   C S        /




                     DHB




                     7th July, 19S7




Lv; Chic-4. Constable,
youth Yorkshire Police,
Poii ct Hea dq ua rt er s,
Sni^, Hill,
SHEFFIELD.
S3 cLLY

For t h e at tent ion of S u p e r i n t e n d e nt St ua rt

D ea r Sir,

Safety of S p o rt s G r o u n d s Act 1975 -
Draft revised oa faty C e r t if i c a te C on di t i o n s

1 enc lo s e for your a t t e n t i o n a copy of the nev? draft C e r ti fi ca te co nd it io ns
w h i c h 1 have prepa red.              Ple ase bea r in mind that these c on di t i o n s arc a first
draft only and are in a basic fora (i.e. they have not as yet been t ailored to
the needs of in di vi du al stadia).                   1 al so enclo se a first d ra f t of the
i n t e r p r e t a t i o n s e ct i on of the C e r t i f i c a t e w hich will help w h e n reading the new
ccndi t i o n s .

1 would welc om e your c o m m en ts on th® con ditions, p re fe ra bl y in writ ing. If you
feel that it would be helpful to d i sc us s the c on di ti on s at a meet in g then please
contact Mr. Bownes on the tel ep ho ne n um b er g iv en be lo w wh o will make the
a p p r o p r i a t e arrange m en ts .

Yours faithfully




Head of D e p a r t m e n t

Encs.




PB                                                                       7346 90 - Mr. Bownes
South Yorkshire Police
                                                                                                P O L IC E H E A D Q U A R T E R S
                                                                                                S N IG H I L L
                                                                                                S H E F F I E L D S3 8 L Y
                                                                                                T E L E P H O N E (0 7 4 2 ) 7 8 5 2 2
                                                                                                T E L E X 547996




   A L L C O M M U N I C A T I O N S S H O U L D BE A D D R E S S E D T O
   "T H E CHIEF CO N STA B LE"
                                                                           ~1
   Mr                        FCIS MBIM                                                          YO U R REFERENCE                    DMB
   Solicitor                                                                                    OUR R E FE R EN C E                 OPS TWS/SM
   Administration and Legal Department
   Town Hall                                                                                    DATE                                4 August 1987
   SHEFFIELD
   SI 2HH
                                                                          J




   Dear Sir

   SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 -
   DRAFT REVISED SAFETY CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

  I refer to your letter of 7 July 1987 and the new draft certificate and
  would comment as follows

   1       I assume that no schedules are included as they are not as yet
           'ground specific'.

   2       In Section 1 a form of words should be found which puts the role
           of the senior police officer in charge in the stadium and the role
           of the safety officer in context. The safety officer would be in
           charge of the holder's eirployees but not police deployment although
           his views would be sought.

   3       I suggest that consideration should be given to including in the
           safety certificate at paragraph 4:

           'The holder shall notify the Chief Constable of specified
           activity at least 28 days before such an activity takes place
           (or such shorter time as the Chief Constable may require).'

   4       You may also wish to consider including the following in the
           safety certificate:

           'In the event of a fixture being arranged as a result of a draw in
           a football/rugby league or FA Cup competition, which would indicate
           the attendance of a club from a higher division, who by the nature
           of the club or by local interest would attract a crowd well in excess
           of the current ground capacity, or the forward information is such
           that a public order situation may arise, then in consultation with


                                                                                          Supt Stuart                        3200
       T H E O F F I C E R D E A L I N G W I T H T H I S C O R R E S P O N D E N C E IS                   E X T E NS IO N

ADM /1
Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 -
Draft Revised Safety Certificate Conditions             4 August 1987


the opposing club and the local police commander, one of the following
alternatives must be agreed or otherwise must be implemented if the
local police commander so directs:

a)   insisting the match is 'all ticket';

b)   requiring the game to be played at an alternative venue;

c)   controlling the day and time of kick off.'

No vehicle other than emergency (ie police, fire, ambulance)
shall be parked in any part of the stadium except as shown on any
plan or as agreed with the Chief Constable or senior police officer.

Under Section 10 (emergency procedures) of the Safety at Sports
Grounds Act 1975, a local authority is eirpowered, if it considers
that due to any deficiency in safety procedures at a designated
sports ground, to take certain steps to minimise the risk to
spectators. The local authority may apply to the courts for an
order prohibiting or restricting admission to the whole or any part
of the ground until such steps have been taken to reduce the risk
to spectators.

If the court is satisfied, on the application of the local authority,
that the risk to spectators at a sports ground is so great that, until
steps have been taken to reduce it to a reasonable level, their admission
ought to be prohibited, or restricted, the court may order, prohibit
or restrict, to the extent they consider appropriate in the circumstances
of the case, the admission of spectators to the whole or any part of
the ground, until such steps have been taken as, in the opinion of the
court, are necessary to reduce the risk to a reasonable level.

If spectators are admitted to a sports ground in contravention of
an order made under Section 10 of the Sports Grounds Act 1975, any
responsible person, and if the safety certificate is in operation, the holder
of the certificate shall be guilty of an offence.

The Fire, Safety and Places of Sports Bill received Royal assent on
15 May 1987 and this amends the procedure under Section 10 of the 1975
Safety of Sports Grounds Act by allowing the local authority to place
an order of prohibition on sports ground management if in their opinion
the criteria at paragraph 6 above is satisfied, thus disposing of the
need to apply to a court for an appropriate order. The club management
or holder of the safety certificate may appeal to the magistrates for
cancellation or modification of the order.

Section 11 should state who is responsible for organising the training,
notwithstanding the entry at 33(d).

As a minor point I would draw attention to paragraph 33 (e) where I feel
it should read:

'In accordance with conditions 35 (b) and 35 (c)' and not as indicated.
- 3 -

Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 -
Draft Revised Safety Certificate Conditions               4 August 1987


I hope that these corrments will be of some assistance.

Yours faithfully
SOUTH YORKSHIRE FIRE AND CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY                                                           /-•■-<                        /;<


South Yorkshire County Fire Service
H. E. Wright, M.l. Fire E., F.B.I.M.                                                                   Furnival House
       Chief Fire Officer                                                                              42 - 46 Furnival Gate
                                                                                                        Sheffield
                                                                                                        South Yorkshire S1 4QP
                                                                                                        Telephone Sheffield
                                                                                                        STD (0742) 2 7 2 0 2

Our Ref: FP19/2/4 : RG/EB                          Your Ref:                                            Date:    1 3 th August,           1987

This matter is being dealt with by . . D i v i s i .o n a l ,o f f i c e r . h . G.r i m s h a w . .    Ext. No.. . . 47.....................



     City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council,
     Administration and Legal Department,
     Town Hall,
     SHEFFIELD.  SI 2HH



      For the attention of Mr. D. M. Bownes



     Dear Sirs,

     SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 -
     DRAFT REVISED SAFETY CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

     In reply to your letter dated 7th July                                re    the    above,         please     find below
     the observations of this Department :-

      Section 9(a)           An additional item agreed with Barnsley and Doncaster Councils
                             in respect of their standard conditions is that the age
                             range of stewards should be 18 - 6 5 .

      Section 10(a) Whilst specified in the green guide, it is difficult to
                    imagine how this task can be controlled by stewards. This
                    matter should be considered further.

      Section 10(i) Reference                 should be made to the opening and securing open
                    of exits                  on the intiation of any emergency procedure or
                    at the end                 of a game and to assisting and directing spectators
                    out of the                 exits.

      Section 18             Add . . . "The emergency power supply should operate independ­
                             ently of    the main power    supply and come into automatic
                             operation     on the failure of the  latter and be capable of
                             maintaining the necessary power output for a minimum period
                             of three h o u r s .

      Section       23      Reference    to "compressed gas or liquid" should be amended
                             to . . . "flammable liquid or compressed gas (except fire
                             extinguishing apparatus)".

      Section 24             Add after "whatsoever"                  "whether combustible or not".

      Section 28             The old SYCC certificate required that the Police had knowledge
                             of the whereabouts of the doctor.

      Section       29      Again the old SYCC certificate       required                                that members             of     ^
                             the press, T.V. and radio were identifiable.

                                  All communications to be addressed to the Chief Fire Officer.
Section 35(d) This requires that the electrical installation be examined
              and a report submitted to the Council every 12 months.
              The same requirement should also apply to emergency lighting,
              and fire warning (including P . A . ) systems.

Section 35(f) Sub paragraph (iii) requires emergency lighting to be tested
              at least 24 hours prior to an activity. It would be preferable
              that the original requirement of testing 3 hours before
              an activity be maintained.

Two additional items for consideration are:-

 (i)   That a competent electrician employed or retained             by   the   Holder
       shall be present during a specified activity.

(ii)   The Holder shall provide and maintain within the stadium to the
       satisfaction of the Council the access routes for emergency vehicles
       shown on the p l a n s .

SCHEDULE - Interpretation

Whereas the old SYCC Certificate required certain matters (e.g. fire alarms,
extinguishers etc.) and the maintenance of these to be to the satisfaction
of the Chief Fire Officer, the proposed Certificate now requires these
to be to satisfaction of the City Council.

This Department does not foresee this causing           any problems subject        to
copies of the required annual certificates of           test being forwarded        to
us  for examination...

If there are any queries    on   the   above matters,   please   contact Divisional
Officer Grimshaw.

Also enclosed for your information is a list of sports grounds and indoor
sports premises within Sheffield and known to this Department.

Yours faithfully,




Chief Fire Officer Q f i
                                    CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM

    From      Director of Health                      To    Head of Administration & Legal Dept
              & Consumer Services
§                                                           | or‘ the.’attention' of'Mi| D Bownes
                                                                                       i
    Date      19th August 1987
    Ref       EPU/DRM/HJM
    Tel Ext   4621 - Mr D R Moore                     Ref   f          • r ’;
                                                            J1 •j : Q' :        -■ ---—




                                                                                           W£~'

                                                                                     0P-
              SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975
              DRAFT REVISED SAFETY CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

              I write with reference to the above and following receipt of your
              memorandum dated the 7th July 1987.

              As requested I have assessed the proposed conditions and would propose the
              following amendments to the document.   I trust you will find these of use
              and look forward to hearing from you in due course.

              1.   The holders shall appoint in writing at least one safety officer, of
                    appropriate status and authority, whose functions shall include
                    a)  to take responsibility for all aspects of safety at the ground and
                    b)  to implement and supervise all necessary safety measures
                    A safety officer shall be in control of safety within the stadia
                    except for such aspects as are most appropriately dealth with by the
                    chief constable's attending officers.  The safety officer shall be in
                    attendance or within direct personal communication of the central
                    control point at all times during a specified activity.

              2.   The certificate holder, having confirmed in writing that he accepts
                   responsibility for the safety of spectators admitted to the stadium
                   shall take all necessary precautions to ensure their reasonable safety
                   at all times.  In particular he shall ensure that all responsible
                   persons, as defined in Section 12 (2) of the Act, are adequately
                   trained, instructed and completely familiar with their duties under
                   the Act and this certificate.

                   9a)   Provided with written details as to every aspect of their
                         function, duties and tasks as regards spectator safety and
                         reasonably forseeable events that may effect such persons safety.

                   11    Training exercises relating to the duties of stewards shall be
                         undertaken at least every 3 months and a written record of their
                         satisfactory completion produced and kept available for
                         inspection.

                   23    Except with the consent of the Council in writing, the holders
                         shall not permit the storage within the stadium of such
                         flammable, toxic or corrosive compressed or liquid substances,
                         except fire extinguishing apparatus and cylinders of C0£ gas used
                         for the pressurisation of drinks dispensing equipment, above a
                         volume that may be specified in each case.  The holder shall
                         comply with any conditions attached to such a c onsent .

                   25    The holder shall take all possible steps to ensure that no
                         materials that are capable of being used as missiles or weapons
                         are accessible to spectators.  The fabric of all elements of the
                         structure of the stadia shall be so maintained that it cannot
                         easily be broken up for the purposes described above.
      28   The holder shall provide and maintain at the stadium a suitably
           constructed and equipped conveniently accessible first-aid room
           to an appropriate standard and as may be specified by the
           Council.  The holder shall ensure the attendance of such numbers
           of appropriately qualified first-aid attendants who are
           specifically available for the sole purpose of rendering
           first-aid to an injured party during a specified activity as the
           Council may require.

           The first-aid room shall be capable of being lit by both general
           lighting and emergency lighting and shall be readily identified
           and located by an adequate number of signs which comply with the
           relevant regulations.

           The holder shall also ensure that at all times a doctor employed
           or retained by the holder is immediately available to attend at
           the first-aid room when required.

      32   This requirement is in addition to any notifications requested
           under the reporting of injuries, diseases and dangerous
           occurences regulations 1985 which must be notified to the
           relevant enforcing authority under the Health and Safety at Work
           etc Act 1974.

     35a) The holder shall ensure that a written record of such routine
          safety inspections is produced by the person to whom such
          functions have been delegated.




D. R. MOORE
Environmental Health Officer
             GP/262/DMB
             MS/JDB/JW

             16th December, 1987


The Chief Constable,
South Yorkshire Police,
Police Headquarters,
Snig Hill,
SHEFFIELD.
SI 80Y


Dear Sir,

Fire Safety and Safety of Place of Sport Act 1987
Safety Certification____________________________

I refer to your letter of 3rd December, and feel that I ought to confirm
that only one Safety Certificate is currently in force in Sheffield, namely
that relating to Hillsborough.

As far as I can see the existing Hillsborough Certificate does not contradict
the amended Section 2 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975. As you are
aware, the draft revised Certificate conditions (which were circulated to you
and upon which you commented some time ago) take full account of that
amendment of the 1975 Act.

Yours faithfully,




Head of Department




JJJ                                           734690 - Mr. Bownes
                     of'                ni s t r J t 1 on                                                        ;or oi    Lano un J V l - i u n i ny*
 d .'IU    U V-,              p a i .    iu                                                                      . t e n ; 101 oi              Ler,
                                                                                            iu ! I l l i i l '
 20tn         . ‘r e ' ,      1 1 V
 g p /2 u 2/;)*;:>..
 4 6 ;'U - d r .           Loimes




                                                                                                'erti f 5cr-tf O o m H c fons

 I encift.sf? f o r y o u r d b t e n t . i on                   copy     >ji' t h e . f i n a l .-irat-t o i        t n e new tsai e t y
 C e r t i f i c a l e C on di
                              f
 It       you ..k-vc any c o ' i ' j t n t a           cc> r-auf; tin i . ; > x t . u ! = ; e   let       "it: , :n j '.




P./I




The Head of Administration and Legal
                                                                                           The Director of Health & Consumer
Department                                                                                 Servf ces

29th March, 1989
GP/262/ DilB
4690 — Mr. Bownes



Safety of Sports Grounds - Draft Revised Safety Certificate Conditions

I refer to previous correspondence and in particular to your memorandum of 19th
AUgUSwj            1 7 0 /•


I attach for your attention a copy of the final draft of the new Certificate
Conditions which 1 think Includes all the points raised in your memorandum.   You
will appreciate that the wording has in some cases been altered somewhat but I
believe uhe objectives of your coraraents have been received. I look forward to
hearing your comments in due course.

Enc.




BU19/DB293
Too Cruel ConstuDJe,
South Yorl:s i;i re- i-oi'ce,
Fuiice ■:c .-k =.quarters,
Cn J . i ' l l ,
,SCL t’i'IELu .
S3 CLY

For tiie a t t e n t io n of         Super Jntendent Stuart
1I &a Ci-i u*1r t e r s   Oth; rat. i o o s

bear s i r .

Safety of' Ur-ort $- C r o unds - Dr.; ft Cev.’scd        C a fe f” C e r t ! { !cate Co nd iti ons

1 rtier to ynu r letter of 4c» Au ':;u«it 1*-#-J7 i n c on nec tio n th drift Safety
Cert 5 f lc«Jte Conditions.  I now en cl os e for you r atten tio n    copy o f tne final
draft of tne feu C e rt ifi ca te Con di t io ns ;;nic‘> take Into account tne observations
u u i e in your letter.


Yo u     * 1 howe ver notice tr>at there a r e no references as sucf to tne Police
wl t:;f n tne Cert ir i cot e.        I n o v r- ca r ef u l ly considered th Is setter and have co'.ae
to the c o n c l u s i o n tint Co ndi ti on s ;;!’icO ourport to -?do          r - tee Cou acl i's
fun ctions to outside bogles are jn en for c e ao le a1? tney ire r-ovnnri tne power s of
the Council.         T h e r ef o re several C o nd i t i o n s vhfc:~ were included in the first
draft (re la tin g to for ex an ple c ?sc ussiuns between Ce r t i f i c a t e holders and the
Police) have been deleted or noai £ lea.

I dr.:, of course, conscious of tne very im portant Police role in
connection with the safety of spectators at sports grounds and I have therefore
taken two steps to ensure that this role is properly recognised in tiie
certification systen.    Firstly the definition of "authorised orficers" in the
Conditions includes Police Officers.    Secondly there is also a new Condition
which relates to guidance given by the Council on safety natters.    A draft of
the proposed guidance is enclosed with the new Conditions and you will see that
it refers largely to Police/Certificate holder relations.

VJould you please let me have your comments on the draft Conditions in due
course.

Yours faithfully,




Head of Department

Enc.

PB/19                                                            734690 - Hr        Bow nes
Tht Caloi ’ire ;iificer,
Sou t n Vc>r vs hi re County Fire Service,
wei i inyuon      reel,
S jiJi‘;■I
SI JttC



Dear s i r ,

Saietv of          .-.'n o r t^   rounds - .urnf t ^ v i s e a            , •<1 -.-t    u»rt ?1 Icate Condition-;

I r e f e r to your l e t t e r             o f 1 lit.-i A u g u s t 1 9^ 7 ( y o u r    rcforence   r ? i c* / 2 1 4 : r’.C.'/E” ) i n
c o n n e c t i o n wi t - 1! S a f e t y   C e r t i f i c a t e Co no! t f on>,.

I nov enclose tar y xs r at tent fon .) cony ol t -ie f I noi rev' seJ ~>;\i e ty Certi t 5cnte
Condi tlons unicli as far as nossiole i neoroor a t >_■ tat- corru^nt       'ace in your
letter.        iou wi 11 ri^r^ci ett that tno voroin; o t certain of your consents has
had to be          t vi w n y 1 ‘ tl y but I hope tnrt tne ornt-ct.’ve has none t ’u: less been
a chi eve. d .

There      are     four      points vnica           require so re farther co n s ir u r at i o n: -

         (a)       Yoa say ip your letter that an a; t ran-'c shoui^ at- ssK-eifieo in
                   conne.ct!on witn s t « a r d 5 . 1 think however that the wordi nr: of
                   Conti Ition 1 ] saoulc; be sat i s fa ct o ry ^'1 thout sti p u la t i n' an arte range,
                   .o final de ci si on has yet heon taken on this i s s u e and you nay like to
                   co ns i d e r ft i artHer;

         (b)      poli ce k m w l e d u e of the whereabouts of                          a doctor   - I believe         tnis      Is
                  a de q ua t e ly covered In C o n d i t i o n 7;

          (c)      i d e n t i £ia b l 1 1 ty of press T.V. and radio personnel - I an not sure                                      ot
                   the j u s t i f i c a t i o n for such a Co nd i ti o n and w o n de r if you h.jve any
                   f u r t h e r coranents on it;

         (d)      the a t t e n d a n c e of competent e le c tr i c i a n - a g a i n              I wonder what            the
                   j u s t i f i c a t i o n for this Co n di ti on would be.

Would you please let me have your comments on the new Conditions                                               in due        course.

Yours fait hf ul l y,




Head of Department



PB/19                                                                                   734690 - Mr. Bownes
  S o u th Y o rk s h ire P o lic e
                                                                      POLICE HEADQUARTERS
                                                                      SNIG HILL
                                                                      SHEFFIELD    S 3 8LY
                                                                      TELEPHONE (0742) 768 5 2 2
                                                                      TELEX 547996




 City of Sheffield Metropolitan District                              Your Ref:         GP/262/DMB
 Administration and Legal Department
 Town Hall                                                            Our Ref:          MS/DD/CEC
 SHEFFIELD         S1 2HH
                                                                      Date:             5 April 1989




 Dear Sirs

 SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

 Thank you for your letter dated 30 March 1989 and enclosures detailing your
 proposed revision of Safety Certificate Conditions. I will consider the proposals and
 reply in more detail in due course.

 Meanwhile, I am concerned to note that the conditions do not appear to require the
 attendance of police officers at football matches, as provided by Section 2 of the
 Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (as amended by Section 21 of the Fire Safety and
 Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987). I am forwarding a copy of your correspondence
 to the Police Authority Legal Department for advice on the matter and will contact you
 when that advice is available.

 Yours faithfully___________




- Chief Constable

                                                                   A D ^ l S T R A T t O N & LES/>.L
                                                                                .. SHEFFIELD.        j
                                                                           p "S "T a s » sta n t1 .   ~§|


                                                                            7 APR 1989            pa /4
                                                                           ^T T T T b   l E L N s"p sq ]




  The officer dealing with this correspondence is C/Supt. Denton        Ext. 3435
             GP262/DMB

             MS/DD/CEC

             4th May 1989



The Chief Constable,
South Yorkshire Police,
Police Headquarters,
Snig Hill,
SHEFFIELD.
S3 SLY



Dear Sir,

Safety of Sports Grounds - Certificate Conditions

Thank you for your letter of 5th April, in reply to mine of 30th March; I also
refer to Chief Superintendent Dentons' subsequent telephone conversation with my
Chief Licensing Officer, Mr. Bownes.

I gather that you would find it helpful for a condition to be included in the
Certificate which provided for the attendance of police officers at football
matches.  I have no objection to such a condition being inserted and I would
like to submit the following draft for your consideration:-

   "Before the stadium is used on any occasion for a specified activity, the
   Holder shall make arrangements with the Chief Constable of the South
   Yorkshire Police for the attendance of a sufficient number of police officers
   for the purpose of maintaining lawful and orderly behaviour amongst
   spectators.  The extent of the provision of police services is reserved for
   the determination of the Chief Constable".

I would appreciate your comments on the Certificate conditions and the remainder
of the Certificate Conditions which were enclosed with my letter of 30th March.

I wish to proceed with the issue of the Sheffield United Certificates within the
fairly near future, and I would therefore like to hear your comments, if
possible, by 15th May.

Yours faithfully,




Acting Head of Department



19/DB35/MS                                           734690 - Mr. Bownes
The Acting Head of Administration             The Director of Health and
and Legal Department                          Consumer Services
                                              The Director of Land and Planning
4th May 1989                                  F.A.O. MR. A. BUTLER - BUILDING
GP2b2/DMB                                     SURVEYORS
4690 - Mr. Bownes




Safety of Sports Grounds - Draft Revised Safety Certificate Conditions

I refer to my memorandum of 29th March, in relation to the final draft of the
Certificate Conditions which were attached to that memorandum.

I wonder if you would let me have your views on the draft conditions by 15th May
       You will, of course, appreciate that I wish to proceed with the issue of
the Certxficate to Sheffield United in the fairly near future.




19/DB35/MS
             GP262/DMB



             4th May 1989



The Chief Fire Officer,
South Yorkshire County Fire Service,
Wellington Street,
SHEFFIELD.
SI 3SG



Dear Sir,

Safety of Sports Grounds - Certificate Conditions

I refer to ray letter of 30th March,   in relation to the final draft of the New
Safety Certificate Conditions.

As I now wish to move ahead with the issue of the Sheffield United Certificate,
I would appreciate your comments on the new Conditions on the four points which
you originally raised (as detailed in my letter) if possible by 15th May.

I look forward to hearing from you shortly.

Yours faithfully,




Acting Head of Department




19/DB35/MS                                             734690 - Mr. Bownes
                                CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM

 From      DIRECTOR OF HEALTH AND CONSUMER          1 To    ACTING HEAD OF ADMIN & LEGAL DEPARTMENT*
                                  SERVICES          1       Attn. Mr. Bownes,
                                                    1             Chief Licensing Officer
Aate       12th Ma y 1989                           1
 ^Ref      EPU/JCH/BE                               1
 Tel Ext   4609 ~ Mr.                               1 Ref   GP262/DMB
                                                    1




           SAFETY IN SPORTS GROUNDS
           DRAFT REVISED SAFETY CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

           In response to your memorandum of the 4th May 1989 referring to the list of
           draft revised safety certificate conditions circulated on the 29th March 1989,
           I would wish to make the following comments.

           Condition 8

           I would suggest the insertion of the word ’similar’ between other and portable
           on the first line of this condition would make its meaning somewhat clearer.

           Condition 9

           I would suggest that this condition requires a rider indicating that this
           requirement to notify accidents to spectators is over and above any similar
           requirement imposed by the Reporting of Injuries, Diseases and Dangerous
           Occurrence Regulations 1985 made under the Health and Safety at Work Act
           1974.

           Condition 13

           I would suggest that this condition needs reworking to ensure that the exact
           meaning of training exercises is conveyed.  As it stands the condition does
           not make it clear that what is required is the undertaking of practical
           exercises designed to test the effectiveness and efficiency of emergency
           procedures and contingency plans.


           I would   suggest that the heading   'Spectator Areas'   is   superfluous.

           I would  suggest that the heading 'Fire Safety' should follow Condition 19
           relating to the public address system.

           I would   suggest that the following two    conditions are included in the General
           Safety section;

           1)   A comprehensive safety management plan      shall be drawn up and maintained
                 to the satisfaction of the Council.

           2)   The holder shall at all times maintain all structural and operational
                 parts of the stadium in sound order to the satisfaction of the Council.

           On a general point, is it advisable for the requirements relating to provision
           of facilities for the Chief Constable to be outside the formal certificate
           conditions as this may lead to difficulty in enforcing the provisions of the
           certificate.
I trust that yo u find m y comments of assistance, if you should wish to discuss
them at all do not hesitate to contact me on the telephone number shown.
                                       C IT Y OF S H E FFIE LD — M E M O R A N D U M

    From        The Building Surveyor,                          To     Acting Head of Administration and


•
                Department of Land and Planning                        Legal Department

    Date        16th May, 1989                                         For the attention of Mr. D. M. Bownes
    Ref.        BSD/ABu/KTH
    Tel. Ext.   4162 - Mr. Butler                               Ref.                                9 /1 6 1 R 3 7 1 9 K




                Safety of Sports Grounds -
                Draft Revised Safety Certificate Conditions

                I refer to your draft dated 29th March,          1989 and comment as follows

                1.    Interpretation

                1.1   In the definition of Authorised Officer, there is a need to define
                      the purpose to which an officer of Sheffield City Council would be
                      authorised.

                1.2   In the definition of Specified Activity, it is considered that the
                      reference to 'public entertainment for which a licence is issued by
                      the Council' should be deleted, since the conditions of the general
                      safety certificate may be inappropriate to such a public
                      entertainment.  Licence conditions could incorporate many of these
                      standard conditions, but it is undesirable for conflicting conditions
                      to be in force for the same event.

                1.3   A commencement date of possibly 2 months after any succeeding code or
                      guidance is published should be included in the definition of 'The
                      G u i d e 1.

                2.    General Safety

                2.1   Condition 1 should refer to the stadium since the "ground" is not
                      defined.

                2.2    Condition 1 - The Safety Officer may be in direct personal
                      communication with a central control point even if he is not   at the
                      stadium.   I suggest that a more suitable wording should be "A Safety
                      Officer shall (a) be in charge of the Stadium and the Holder's
                      Employees and (b) be in attendance at the Stadium and be at (or in
                      direct personal communication with) a central control point during a
                      specified activity.

                2.3   It is noted that the words "The Holder shall take all necessary steps
                      to secure the structural safety of the Stadium", included in
                      condition 31 of your first draft are now excluded from this document.
                      It is considered that condition 2 could be extended to:-

                      "The Holder (and the Safety Officer(s)) shall take all necessary
                      steps to (a) secure the structural safety of the Stadium and (b)
                      provide for the reasonable safety of spectators admitted to the
                      stadium and (c) ensure that all responsible persons (as defined in-
                      Section 12(2) of the Act) are completely familiar with their duties
                      under that Act and this certificate.
                                               -2 -



         2.4               Condition 4 - The last sentence could be altered to read:-
J              "The Holder shall ensure that the signs or notices so required are
'              clearly legible and maintained so that they can easily be read at all
                times".

         2.5   Condition 6 - "The Holder shall supply the Council with copies of
               such plans, specifications and calculations as the Council may
               reasonably require to .... "

         2.6   Condition 9 - "In the event of a spectator being injured in the
               Stadium, the Holder shall, as soon as is practical, inform the
               Council of the circumstances and (within 72 hours of the injury
               occurring) submit to the Council a full written report on the
               circumstances of the injury.  The Holder shall also supply such
               additional information as the Council may require."

         2.7   Condition  10 - "The Holder shall arrange for the attendance at every
               specified activity of a Chief Safety Steward and a minimum of such
               number of Safety Stewards as are specified in Schedule 1.

         2.8   Condition 11 - An age limit (possibly between 18 and 65) should be
               imposed for persons to be stewards.

         2.9   Conditions 11 and 12 - Note that in condition 10 it is a requirement
               to have a Chief Safety Steward, but may not be a requirement to have
               additional Safety Stewards unless specified in Schedule 1. The
               preambles to conditions 11 and 12 should therefore read "... the
               Chief Safety Steward and any Safety Stewards ..."   "Safety Stewards
               must:-"

        2.10   Condition 12(a) - "Under the direction of the Safety Officer or the
               Chief Safety Steward or an Authorised Officer, prevent overcrowding
               and ensure the crowd limits in various parts of the ground are
               complied with".

        2.11   Condition 12(b) - Substitute Safety Steward for Steward and
                                 Substitute Chief Safety Steward for Chief Steward.

        2.12   Condition 12(d) - Substitute Chief Safety Steward for Chief Steward.

        2.13   Condition 12(e) - Substitute Stadium for Ground.

        2.14   Condition 12(h) - Substitute Chief Safety Steward for Chief S t eward .

        2.15   Condition 12(i) - Substitute Chief Safety Steward for Chief Steward.

        2.16   Condition 12(j) - Some Safety Stewards are not allocated specific
               posts.  This should read "if allocated a specific post, remain at
               that post as instructed unless authorised or instructed to do
               otherwise by an authorised officer, the Chief Safety Steward or the
               Safety Officer".

        2.17   Condition 12(1) - 1.   Amend spelling of procedure.
                                 2.   Substitute Chief Safety Steward for Chief



    •
                                      Steward.
                                        - 3 -



2.18   Condition 13 - "Training exercises organised by the Safety Officer
        relating to the duties of the Chief Safety Steward and any Safety
        Stewards shall be held ...."

2.19   Condition 14 - It must not be mandatory for only the minimum number
        of Safety Stewards to be on duty.  The text should be amended to read
        "All exit doors and gates .... shall be manned by Safety Stewards at
       least in accordance with Schedule 2.   The other duties detailed in
       Schedule 2 shall be carried out by Safety Stewards".

 3.0   Spectator Areas

3.1    Condition 15 - Not all grounds may have pitch perimeter gates.      The
       text should therefore refer to "any pitch perimeter gates".

3.2    Condition 17 - The wording of the draft is too restrictive.  It may
       be amended to "All floor surfaces, other standing surfaces, steps and
       gangways throughout the stadium which are available for use ...."

4.0    Fire Safety

4.1    Condition 19 - The Holder must both provide and maintain a public
       address system.

4.2    Condition 21 - "The Holder shall provide and maintain at least such
       fire fighting equipment in such locations as the Council may from
       time to time specify".

4.3    Condition 22 - It is thought that the wording here should have been
       "Except with the consent of the Council, in writing, the Holder shall
       not permit the storage in the stadium of any low flash point, toxic,
       corrosive or compressed liquid or substance (except fire
       extinguishing and drinks dispensing apparatus).  The Holder shall
       comply with any conditions attached to such a consent.

5.0    Lighting and Electrical Installations

5.1    Condition 26 - By requiring an independent source for emergency
       lighting in condition 25, electrical installations must be in the
       plural.  The word "constructed" could be substituted by "fabricated".

6.0    Inspections, Tests and Records

6.1    Condition 29 - Such a notice would make requirements, not conditions.

6.2    Condition 30 - "If a significant defect is suspected or discovered
       persuant to any inspection or test carried out under the terms of
       this certificate, the Holder shall immediately notify the Council and
       take steps to correct any defect".

6.3    Condition 32 - in (b), (c) and (d) all references to   "stewards"
       should be substituted by "Safety Stewards".

7.0    Schedule 2

7.1    Individual numbers of stewards should be shown on a plan of the
       respective stadium, and be discussed at a meeting of the advisory
       gr o u p .
                                            - 4 -



     7.2   Sheffield United F.C.
/
           a) Spelling of disabled to be corrected.

           b) It is thought the sub-heading should read "Patrolling the Stadium
              and Dealing with Emergencies".

     7.3   Sheffield Wednesday F.C. - An allocation of safety stewards should be
           considered in the following positions

           a) The vomitories in the Spion Kop.

           b) Radial fence gates in the West Terrace.

           c) External emergency exist to West Stand.

           d) In the Spion Kop to maintain gangways.

           e) At pitch perimeter gates.

     8.0   Schedule 1

           Consequential on the deliberations of matters raised in Schedule 2,
           the numbers in Schedule 1 may require revision.

     9.0   Schedule 3

           Individual pens in terraced areas should have a separate allocation.

    10.0   Schedule 4

    10.1   The general requirements should be referenced,   i.e.   (a) to (j).

    10.2   1st entry - I suggest the wording could be amended to "A competent
           person shall inspect all the structures which form part of the
           Stadium ".

    10.3   2nd entry - This duty should be that of the Safety Officer.

    10.4   8th entry - "... shall be tested by a competent person".

    10.5   10th entry (relating to crush barriers)

           a) The general requirement shall be amended to read "All crush
              barriers, balustrading and handrails in the Stadium shall be
              tested by a competent person in accordance with the Guide.   The
              Council shall be notified in advance of the dates of testing.

           b) The Incidence should be amended to read1"A representative sample
              comprising 25% in each period of 12 months.  Once a sample is
              satisfactorily tested, that sample shall not be tested again
              (unless specifically required by the Council) within three and a
              half years after first testing, but shall be tested again within,
              four and a half years of that date."

           c)   The report submitted to the Council should include test details
                and results.
10.6   An 11th entry should be included:-

       a) General requirement:- "Any crush barrier, balustrade or handrail
          which has been newly installed, or received maintenance or repair
          for any reason (other than repainting) to be retested".

       b) Incidence:- "Within 28 days of the installation, maintenance or
          repair".

       c) Reports to be supplied to the Council.




 K27ACC
r - ^ ^ S O U T H YORKSHIRE FIRE AND CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY


      South Yorkshire County Fire Service
      H. E. Wright, Q.F.S.M., M.I.Fire.E., EB.I.M.                                                    Command H.Q.,
                   Chief Fire Officer                                                                 Wellington Street,
                                                                                                      Sheffield,
                                                                                                      South Yorkshire S1 3FG
                                                                                                      Telephone: Sheffield
                                                                                                      STD (0742) 727202

     Our Ref:     FP19/2/4 : RG/MS                   Your Ref:   GP/262/DMB                           Date: 25.05.1989

     This matter is being dealt with by ..PiyA.sipnal.Officer R . ,Grimshaw                           Ext. No. ...
                                                                                                                 27.1....

       City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council,
       Administration and Legal Department,                                      ADfcC ••RATION & LEGAL
       Town Hall,                                                                          ^SHEFFIELD.
       SHEFFIELD                                                                    tftA U Or ^SSiSTAMT
                                                                                       0!?PT.         HEAD     LS
       SI 2HH
                                                                                B      3 1 MAY 1989            PAAl

       Dear Sirs,                                                                   O .S .M .j ~LIB   j ELNS   PSO
                                                                               GS                              cc
       SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975 -
       DRAFT REVISED SAFETY CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

       In reply to your letter dated 30th March in connection with the above,                                         please
       find below the observations of this Department.

       The final revised Safety Certificate Conditions have been examined and the
       four points referred to in your letter have been reconsidered.

      With regard to the four points referred to

       (a)      It is agreed that the wording of Condition  11 should be satisfactory
                without stipulating an age range but the experience in Barnsley, where
                they have some difficulty recruiting suitable stewards was that fifteen
                year old boys were being appointed and it was felt that at that age they
                may not be able to cope with an emergency situation.

       (b)      On the Police knowledge of the whereabouts of a                         doctor,         there        are   no
                further observations.

       (c)      Should any match be such that large numbers of the press, TV or radio be
                attracted, it would help the Police and club officials if all personnel
                belonging to these organisations were identifiable, particularly where
                they have access to areas beneath stands whilst a match is in progress.

       (d)      The attendance of a competent electrician is required within the period
                prior to 3 hours before the commencement of any game in order to test
                the general and emergency lighting and fire warning systems, should an
                slectrical fault occur whilst a match is in progress, it is felt that
                this should be investigated and rectified immediately in order that the
                match can continue with complete crowd safety. This was a condition of
                the County Council Certificate.




                                  All com munications to be addressed to the Chief Fire Officer.
Other matters noted are

(a)   In the "Interpretation of the General Safety Certificate" the Definition
      of the Certificate has been modified. In the previous draft reference
      was made to what the Certificate was comprised of, this has now been
      omitted.   Should the fact that the Certificate comprises the general
      conditions, schedules, plans and 'Guidance for Safety Certificate
      Holders', be recorded at this stage?

(b)   In Schedule 4, the requirement       to test emergency lighting and fire
      warning/public address systems "not more" than three hours prior to a
      specified   activity   taking   place    should   read "not less" than
      three hours prior to a specified     activity taking place as in the
      original South Yorkshire County Council conditions.   The reason for this
      is to allow the batteries for such systems to become recharged prior to
      the event commencing.     You have extended this requirement to all
      lighting systems (excluding the emergency lighting) and all doors, gates
      and turnstiles etc., specifying      the three hourtime limit in each
      instance. The three hour time limit is only critical in respect of
      emergency lighting and fire warning public address systems for the
      reason specified above, therefore, as regards normal lighting and doors
      etc., subject to them being tested on the day of the event, no specific
      time limit is considered to be necessary.        It could certainly be
      considered to be onerous to require all such tests within three hours of
      an event commencing.

(c)   Following my previous comments, Condition 12(a) has been modified to the
      effect that stewards must prevent overcrowding under the direction of
      the Safety Officer or the Chief Steward or an Authorised Officer.
      Whilst this may be satisfactory when considering migration from one
      section to another once spectators are within the ground, it is felt
      that this matter can be more reliably controlled by strictly limiting
      the numbers admitted to each section at the turnstiles. As each section
      is filled, the turnstiles, which are capable of recording this fact
      should be locked. This may not be considered to be a relevant condition
      for   inclusion    in  the    Certificate but certainly needs further
      consideration before any Certificate is issued or amended.

(d)   There is no Schedule 3 setting out the capacities of each section of the
      ground attached to the draft conditions. It is recognised, however,
      that these need further consideration by the Officer Working Party
      before finalisation since figures will be needed for each part of a
      ground from the Police, Building Control and Fire Service to determine
      the actual limits.

(e)   Schedules 1 and 2 detailing numbers of stewards to be on duty at a
      specified activity and the duties to be carried out will need detailed
      consideration and again it is felt that these are matters for discussion
      with the Officer Working Party for final resolution by yourselves.

It is now hoped that you will be able to finalise the adoption of the General
Safety Certificate conditions as quickly as possible in order that the
outstanding amendment to the Certificate issued to Sheffield Wednesday FC and
the issue of the Certificate to Sheffield United FC can then be progressed.

This will entail a full evaluation of all aspects by the Officer Working
Party, i.e. ground capacities, stewarding arrangements, firefighting anrt
emergency evacuation procedures etc. This will require the provision of up to
date plans of all buildings, stands, terraces, etc.
The County Fire Service are willing to give every assistance to   achieve   this
aim.

If you have any further queries on these matters, please do not hesitate to
contact the Officer concerned.

Yours faithfully,




Chief Fire Officer,
                                                                                     C * % y rr\II

TELEPHONE:                                                                   Cc   C lJ E Q
SHEFFIELD (0742) 76 85 22


                                                                         SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE


                                                             I ADMWISranwMSDit0 S3 8LY
                                                                    urn
T. WATSON, BA
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE
                                                               A i . / ■ ,LS.
                                                               s 12 m                PAA
                                                             r C fo.S.W.J Lid j ELNS pso |
                                                                                      CC 1
The Administration & Legal Department                            Your Ref:    GP262/DMB
Town Hall
SHEFFIELD                                                        Our Ref:     MS/DD/JW
S2 2HH
                                                                 Date:        7 June 1989
For the attention of Mr M Webster



Dear Sir

SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS -
DRAFT REVISED SAFETY CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

I write with reference to your letter of 4 May last.

I am pleased to note that you are now agreeable to the inclusion in the certificate of a
condition requiring the provision of special police services on the occasion of a specified
activity. With regard to the wording of the condition, may I suggest the following for your
consideration:-

       “The holder shall make arrangements with the Chief Constable of the South
       Yorkshire Police for the provision of special police services on the occasion
       of a specified event at the stadium for the purposes of maintaining lawful and
       orderly behaviour amongst spectators, and the extent of the provision of those
       services shall be determined by the Chief Constable and he and his officers
       shall be allowed full access to all parts of the stadium”.

As to the other matters contained in the final draft of the new certificate, I would refer you
to my letter dated 4 August 1987. In that letter I raised eleven points with regard to your
original proposals and I am pleased to note that you have incorporated points one, two,
ten and eleven in the draft. With regard to the other points I still consider that the
requirement for twenty eight days notice of a specified activity (point three); the power to
require activities to be “all ticket” etc (point four) and the restriction on the parking of
vehicles (point five) should be made conditions of the certificate and I ask that you give
further consideration to this.

On a minor point I would draw your attention to the omission of the word “not” in the
second paragraph on schedule three of the draft.

On the matter generally, you may feel it prudent to delay the issue of the certificates until
after the recommendations of the current public inquiry are made known. You may feel
that a meeting to discuss these matters would be beneficial and I shall be happy to make
my officers available should you so wish.

Yours faithfully



Assistant Chief Constable
Management Services
                                   BARRIER 144

                 Failure to consider the effect of removal
                   and the effect of barrier on capacity
                         (Question Crowd Movement)



Fact 1

Police note of a meeting between themselves and the Club on 18th June,
1986 indicating that they would request Barrier 144 to be removed.

Fact 2

Note by John Strange (3.41 of the bundle) of inspection on 7th August,
1986 and request for removal.

Fact 3

Referred to by Dr. Eastwood in letter of 1st October, 1986.

Fact 4

My statement, page 54, para. 174.

QUESTION                               ANSWER

Wasn't this alteration likely to       It is accepted that the alteration
affect safety (Section 8), wasn't      was likely to affect safety and that
therefore, written notice needed       therefore, written notice was
(Condition 5.2 and 29), why was        required.  I did not request written
it not asked for?                      notice as the matter was discussed
                                       by all the interested parties on site
                                       and agreed, this included the Club's
                                       representative, etc.

Why was there no record of the         See paragraph 174 and 175 of the
meeting?                               statement.  I can recall making a
                                       written note at the time, but
                                       unfortunately I cannot now find it.

Does the removal of 144 affect         None of the advisers suggested to me
capacity? How?   To what extent?       that the removal did affect capacity.
Was any effect considered? Why         It did not occur to me that it might.
not?                                   No-one told me that they were in fact
                                       considering capacity.  I did not
                                       consider that the removal did affect
                                       capacity until it was mentioned to me
                                       that the Inquiry was considering it.

What was considered?                    On the day, I recall that Inspector
                                        Calvert of the Police indicated that
                                        there was a problem concerning people
                                        coming through the tunnel 1 onto the
                                        terrace and being obstructed by the
                                        presence of the barrier.   I cannot
                                        remember details of the later
                                        discussion, but it was agreed and
                                        Mr. Strange made a note of it and the
                                        Building Surveyor recalls the
                                        discussion.
What effect on crowd movement did     No adverse subsequent effect of
the removal of barrier 144 have?      removal of the barrier was ever
In general?  On the day?  If it had   reported; I do not know the effect
been left would there have been a     of removal of the barrier had on
crush in the tunnel? If it had been   crowd movement on the day - this is
left there is still a channel from    a matter for evidence; speculation as
the tunnel entrance to the front      to the effect of leaving barrier 144
of the terrace.                       in place is a matter for the Police
                                      and the Club.




D.M. Bownes
21.6.89




HB4AAN/JJJ
The Pens - Effect on Capacity



Questions                       Answers


Should the effect on crowd      There is no reference on file to
capacity have been noted in     the South Yorkshire County Council
1981? If not, Why not? -        considering capacity in the pens.
See Green Guide, Chapter 16     Since 1st April, 1986, the
Capacity for Terrace and        Sheffield City Council has not
Paragraph 101.                  considered capacity either.
                                Capacity is an issue frcm which the
                                County Council or the City Council
                                would meet to receive advice frcm
                                their advisers. It is not something
                                which would automatically occur to
                                the system administrator and it
                                certainly did not occur to me until
                                it was mentioned by the Inquiry.
                                The Green Guide, although it
                                mentions terraces does not make any
                                specific reference to pens. It
                                occurs to me that pens may well be
                                a regular feature of lots of
                                football grounds and that had there
                                been any particular danger inherent
                                in the establishment of pens, the
                                Home Office would have taken this on
                                board and commented to the
                                Authorities.

                                It should be noted that there was
                                internal Police concern about the
                                safety factor in the past before the
                                Leppings Lane Terrace in 1987
                                (Document 136 of the
                                bundle), but no reference was made
                                to the Council by the Police on this
                                question.

                                The Club Secretary was also
                                suspicious of the crowd capacity in
                                November, 1981 (162), but again this
                                was not mentioned to the Council.
                                Plan No. 1610/64 showing capacity in
                                the pens on Leppings Lane was passed
                                to the Council with the 1983 test
                                results on the crush barriers on
                                Leppings Lane. The 1987 plan
                                showing the ground layout was only
                                submitted to the Council in 1989.
                                It also shows capacity on the
                                Leppings Lane End.
Questions                          Answers


                                   In addition to comments frcm the
                                   Building Surveyor and the Fire
                                   Service in relation to capacity, I
                                   would have expected the Police in
                                   1985 to indicate that capacities
                                   would need to be fixed as this
                                   is the whole basis of segregating
                                   supporters. I can say that as far
                                   as I am aware the capacities were
                                   not considered after 1st April,
                                   1986, but before that I dealt with
                                   no consideration or it was thought
                                   that there was no effect on capacity
                                   because of the Stewarding/Police
                                   controls of the pens.

Why was there no alterations       As far as Sheffield City Council is
to Safety Certificates either by   concerned, the pens were installed
South Yorkshire County Council     before it took charge of the system.
or Sheffield City Council?         There is no record on file as to the
                                   South Yorkshire County Council
                                   amending the Certificate in relation
                                   to the pens.




HB4AA0
Number of Turnstiles at Leppings Lane -
Alleged failure to consider the number of turnstiles to
cope with any reasonable flow of spectators that might
be expected.  - See Green Guide Paras. 44-46.___________

COMMENTS   :

Both the County Council and the City Council would need to receive advice
on the numbers of turnstiles required anywhere in the ground.  The
question of the provision of turnstiles hinges on crowd flows, behaviour,
plans of arrival etc.  These factors can only be possessed on match days.
The advisers with the primary role on match days are the Police and I
believe that advice would come from them in relation to these matters.

I would not raise questions about the turnstiles independently.    Any such
consideration would need to be started by someone normally the Police or
even the Club.  According to the               bundle of documents it is
clear that the Club wished to expand the number of turnstiles in 1985 but
refrained from doing so because of cost reasons.    The Police have not
indicated at any stage that the turnstiles are inadequate or that maybe
crowd problems occur at the Club.  I wrote to the Police on 13th
November, 1986 asking for their comments as far as safety of sports
grounds were concerned on Sheffield Wednesday and Sheffield United and
they replied on 3rd January, 1987 and said there were no current problems.

The Police, have in the past commented upon problems at Penistone Road and
the Club hve engaged in some works there in relation to turnstiles at the
time of the kop development and also in relation to access to the ground
in the Gate (0) development proposals.




HB4AAP/PGT
Mr R M Whalley                                      SSB/RG/4/11B

Secretary to the Inquiry

Home Office

Queen Anne's Gate

London   SVJ1A OAT                                  20 June 1989




Dear




HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY




In response to your letter dated 23 May, inviting the Association to

submit evidence to Lord Justice Taylor' Inquiry into the Hillsborough

disaster, I attach a Memorandum of Evidence on the Association's

behalf with an appendix,      "Football Violence:   The Metropolitan

Viewpoint".




I have been asked to add that the Association has been giving

consideration to the wider issues of peacetime emergency planning for

some time now;       and to let the Inquiry have a copy of AMA document

"Local Authorities and peacetime Emergency Planning:        A Review of

Current Arrangements and Proposals for Improvement".        This document
      d,
was adapted by the Association following wide consultation within the

AMA and with concerned outside bodies.       It sets out the results of a

review which detected serious gaps in the present arrangements, and

contains proposals which are designed to place peacetime emergency

planning by local authorities on an aceptable footing. Unfortunately,

its relevance has been highlighted by a number of peacetime disasters,

and most recently by Hillsborough.
. The Association would also like to submit a paper prepared by the Emergency

 Planning Unit of Merseyside Fire and Civil Defence Authority which builds

 on the document referred to above.   The Paper emphasises the need for

 legislation tc establish a statutory general peacetime plan which would

 require local authorities to draw up comprehensive emergency response

 procedures. Inese would involve co-ordination of local authority service -

 including liaison with police and fire services - adequate 24 hour call-out

 and stand-by systems for minor emergencies, and hazard appraisals which

 would list all major risks in the area.   The AMA believes that

 metropolitan districts and London boroughs - normally in the frontline when

 it comes to coping with emergencies - should each have at least one

 full-time peacetime emergency planning officer to complement those at

 county level.   Their work would be backed up by the creation of an

 Emergency Planning Inspectorate and an Advisory Committee on Emergency

 Planning, whose role would be to investigate disasters,   publish their

 findings and provide training packages and models.




 The Association is very willing to provide Lord Justice Taylor with

 any further information that might be required during the course of

  the Inquiry.
         IUN 15 '89 11:50 FRESHFIELDS U.K. 01 489 8565                                           p.2




                                           gfBFPISJB m OM SiKf P.C.         WAM


                Ground Plan
                 i)    Attached is a driving M9 8945A ahowing current ground layout aa
                       requested.
                 li)   sncloeed ia a nap whidi elaarly shows the location of the ground in
                       relation to tba aurrounding area.
                 til) Since responsibility for licencing under tba itans of tha Safety of
                      fporti Grounds Act aovad to tha City of a»effield, mi arc a till awaiting
                      a revised Stfety certificate. A copy trill be fonardad in dus oouraa.
                 staditai OBaration
                 i)    Close consultation takee plaoe with the felioa regarding forthcoming
%j   •                 natchaa. Oia laval of Banning however retains tha perogativ* of south
                       Yorkshire Police.                                                          .
                ii)    Biara ara W turnatilaa at Billaboreugh a ll of whieh ara conputer linked
                       to VDC'a in tha Control Roan and tha Secretary's office, in addition
                       television cn»ras monitor each bank of turnatilaa and record onto
                       reoordara in order to analyse possible problem and daisy* at points of
                       antry.
                Policing
                i)     south Yorkshire Police ara vary experienced and very thorough in their
                       policing of football matches. As an example enclosed ara copies of
                       their Operation Orders for tha reoent r.A. cup Swi-Final held hare at
                       Hillsborough and in contrast the fixture with Q.P.R. staged on 2nd Kay
                       1987. .
                Stewardlnq ;          ‘x
                 i>    9Mffield Wednesday vqploy a retired police Superintendent sr. D, Lock
                       aa their Safety and Security Consultant.
     0          ii)    13i« ground is sub-divided into its oonponsnt stands and terraces and a
Q                      steward is appointed to ha in charge of each area. _^ ^
                 iii) ceoounication between ataff on aatchdayt is by using t wo-W radioa.
                     • The police ara able to link Into this aystan.
                 Segregation                                          ^ r
                 i)    Strict aegragation is enforosd. ihe West stand, holding 4,465, and tha
                       Mppinp Lane terreoas, holding 10>100, are the areas designated for
                       visiting supportare.

                                  •   ■      -•               ^              ^■ - ,   :X   .
                 1)    Our family araa is contained within tha South stand uncovered; I t has a
                       aaxiflum capacity of 3,310.                             .     V- ■ ■v .
                        ■■■ ■ ;        :                -).            V             A /
                                                   ,,   * •       continued ...
  Intelligence G a tin g
  i)    1hl« is dealt with by close liaison with th« Police and the visiting
        club,
 Security of Players and Match Officials
  i)    loth Mtdb officials and players park within a secure and ic iw rM ear
        part.
  ii)   there is always a police preseroe by the players tunml whan tha tauns
        and natch officials enter and leave th* pitch.
' Sgound Bequlations
  1)    Tha standard Ground Regulations as provided by tha Football League ara
        displayed.
 Alcohol
 i)     There is no alcohol on general sala within tha ground.
 ii)    A Restaurant Licence in the name of catering Manager, Mr. Peter Rayner,
        is held in repeect of the Riverside and Tavern Restaurants. '
 iii) A Lioanot in the name of Secretary, Mr. Graham Mackrail, is held in
      respect of the Directors Guest Lounge.
 Aanission Prices
 i)     A oopy of aAnisaion prioea for season 1987/88 is enclosed.
  ii)   ttere la no policy of charging visiting supporters a higherprice than
         hcne supporters.
  Fixtures
  i)    ttieffield Wednesday pair with a>effield Ohited at the request of the
         South Yorkshire Police.
                                           *
  CUP Matches/All ficfcet Matches
  1)    Clooe consultation with the Folios always takes place prior to
        determining arrangmanta for high profile aatdhes.
        8 L B W

  i)    Tickets nay be purchased by persons! application, pdst or by telephone
        via credit cards.
  ii)   Normally tickets will go on sale 14 days prior to the date of the match
  iii) Visiting supporters are encouraged to buy their tickets from their own
       club*
                                                       continued . . .
   Transport Xrranowwnta
r r i)   Supporters Arriving by car, park in side t t m u or on th* nearby
         industrial estat*.
                    _       .. . .                ■ -.1., ■ . •
   ii)   Supporters arriving by train using waislsy tridge tution arc escorted
         fay the Polio* the half Ml* to th* ground.
   iii) Visiting supporters travailing by ooaoh ar* dropped off in Upping*
        Lane. tte ooaehea ar* then parked in lerrlea Road South.
   Public Halations and caBunieationa
c i)     Sheffield Wednesday has a vary activ* Young Owl* and Traval Club.
   ii)   ht every match local schools, parti*« ate. ar* *nt*rtainad by th* club
   iii) Sheffield Wednesday have joined the Football and Cornunity programs*.




                                         #
SOUTH       Y O R K S H IR E C O U N T Y C O U N C IL

                              c( M
        W i t h th e C o m p lim e n ts      cf
                        fVLe.4                           '
  T H E CH IEF E X E C U T IV E
   To    r\ -t- Vu                                        Q.--’—
                    C        Cv-.’l-d.


                           F O R IN F O R M A T IO N                 C P- (• C'
                                         - 7 / >•.
                                     i  v D u t h y o r :<s h ;r £
                                     I COUNTY FIRE SERVICE,
                            FOR A C T IO.N-. -
                                     • ,a'w'.r”'          ■    ' -••          -X .
                                                        rk
                                                         »*y       W 1   * rf • •   -i
                                                          £
                                      TT-Tl              f)
                            FO R C O jV JM E S lX'
                                      1“
                                      S O.C.FX'i
                                      ! C .A .O . I       A    .
                                      j-       -^ -r r tu \p ^ \i
   L
: •_ F r .c m ^ _                                   _              ~3. V-Ct ‘ ^

    D e p a r t m e n t of A d m in is tr a tio n
    C o u n ty H a ll
    B a r n s le y           T e l . Barnsley 8 6 I 4 I Ext
\j                     c—                             {
                                                      si           CI



       ■         .                 V -v * .        v _ - t .- v .- T    i' tr- - ^ r -" -'^ ls-
V-'-         v            *               ..                                _
•_Y>       ~0    li*                                    a              .Mr- U.^

 £>C:--.oC           u~ —


TT v.-.      C t-~ ^                ---------         -C          U

 Vw'S-"'-'-'—        "c          *-|>                    V.w v          y- * “~ ’ v“

 C^C—r-cV .             L ‘ v_vL'. • —- - -    ,     Vj - - v_           v , v - —>

                                          -L                     - -'   v -— A
 Cw
                                                                           1    f T'               i



                     F;-M/DV/!S/5o3                                                    3rd SeptsEbar, 1980


                                                i?r. D. Vaugh an                          422



 Dear Hr. Brownlow,

 Safaty of Sports Grounds Act, 1975

I have, notad wi th concern racent nadia reports on incidents at football
catchas, particularly at the r scant cne at Hillsborough betr-een Sheffield
Uednasday and Newcastle Unitad w han a r„u=ib<3r of your officars racaivad
ir.iuries aftar tha i^atch had ended.

 I fully appreciate tha reasons why the police, both in South 7cr.fcshira and
-a tsGvnerey c - a i - . s i £ •■&r.^f.e~o>blatc-.-ccr-tain-p.".asii>1 1~ cub 1 ^3 ~ ■^-'£ang. * . ^ - ; v . .t,
 (usually vis ting supporters) .-after a catch h a s -ended with in a ground rather :•
 than risk hooliganism, violence and damage outsida the ground.                       However,
 the "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds" issued b y the Heme Office does
 reccnnsnd in paragraph 6.14.3 that all doors cn an e::it route should be
 secured in the fully oner, position before tha end of play, as it is
 generally recognised that the period of greatest risk to crowd safety at
 football grounds is at tha time of leaving.

I an anxious that both the South Yorkshire Police and Football Clubs
should not ba put at risk, either ohyscially or legally, b y the ’’locking
in" procedure.  Indeed, the Hillsborough Stadium General Safety Certificate
rsruiras (in usxagrsph 1C) that all dccrs and gates which t o n an egress
rcuta should ba opened and secured in the fully opan position at a tice
before the end of a satch agreed baf.;esn the Clue and yourself.   I vould
suggest that if the practice is to be continued, ccnsiieraticn should ba
given to the departing spectators being held back in a relatively safe
place, such as on tha terrace, rather than being allowed to proceed to
the point of exit (as suggested by the Guide).

As you are .aware, the County Council set up four Area Officer Working
Parties to exercise its functions under the Safety of Sports Grounds
Act, 1975, the South Yorkshire Police being represented at both
Headquarters and Divisional'level on such W ork in g'Parties.

 I would be the first to admit that, in the absence of designation of other
 than the Hillsborough Stadium, progress in advising the other four football
 clubs in South Yorkshire cn the whole of the requirements of the Act has
 not be en as rapid as I would have liked. This has not generally been helped


 J. E. Brownlow, Esq.,
 Chief Constable,                                                        /by the attitude...
 South Yorkshire Police,
 Police Headquarters,
 Snig Hill,
 Sheffield.
 S3 eLZ
         /■/




               J . 3. Brovnlcrur, Esq.            '         -2 —              3rd Sepceaber, 1930.




               by the attitude of tha Clubs who, whil st accepting the principle, seem
               reluctnnt to spend tconey on ground icproveinanCs which will be required
               wha n designated but do n o t ccnsfcituta an actual danger at tha present
               time  .
               On a icra specific point, I understand that extensions to tha barriers
               at the foot of the Spion Kop at the Hillsborough Stadiira designated
               ground have b e a n added at the request cf the police, the wire ~ish a
               the top extending beyond the edge of the frsr.2 .

               1 have no record of the Sheffield A r e a Officer forking Party being
               consulted prior to the Club b ei n g requested to undertake the work,
               I mention this as it could be a source of aEbarrasssant and lead to
     ^         accusations of inconsistency as the Sheffield Area Officer Working
               Party at a SLaecins cn 26th October, 1979 recctsended against mash
               protrusion in the Sheffield United Pitch Security Fence.     At that meeting
               you we re represented by Superintendents J. W. Gavins and T. Johnson.

               To avoid any misunderstanding, 1 vou ld stress that the foregoing is in
               no w a y intended to be a criticise of the traditional role or nethcd_ of
'•        '' ' policing o £ ’’f o e t S d l l ‘grounds' or''n:;^Fte:rau:~to' in'truaa'in ycur"''r V ’"" r •*
               operational r e s p o n s i b i l i t y . ’ The views expressed'are put•forward in a
               constructive spirit and in the hope that y o u '.‘ill agree to the police
               continuing to contribute to .the O ff ic er Working Parties and so achieve
               consistency cn ail aspects throughout the County.

                                                                                                  semes




               be useful" if the County Council were to be represented at^such meetings
               by the C o - o r d i n a t o r of the fou r Area Officer •.•’cr:c?.n^ Parties, Mr. D. I.
               Vaurhan cf cy staff.

                                                               Yours sincerely,




                                                               Chief Executive
                             " BR EAC H E S" O F THE G R E E N G U I DE
      IN R E S P E C T OF THE CA P A CI TY O F THE PENS, THE CR U SH BA R R IE R S,
                 THE W I D T H OF THE P E R I M E T E R GA TES AND THE TUN NE L



Fact - Generally (a) the Guide is flexible - "breach" is inappropriate
(b) the Green Guide is equivalent to "generalised guidelines",
paragraph 2.17.

(a) Pens - Capacity j^HSE page 7 Pen 3  1015, Pen 4 1036 equals 2051
maximum, but Dr. Eastwood's drawing gives different measurements, the
Green Guide recommends 1:200 plan (prior 218) HSE         1:50.  Dr.
Eastwood 14.2 x 13.8 which equals 10.58, 14.4 x 14 which equals 10.88
equals 21.46 maximum.

QUESTION                                       ANSWER

Did any o n e co n si d er c apaci ty          In 1981 and 1985 it only appears
in the pens?                                   that the Fire Ser/vice di'd so in
                                               relation to means of e s cape. There
                                               is no record of any other
                                               consideration of capacity.

Should     they ha ve done?                    Seems to require consideration of
                                               capacity of terrace (paras. 218-
Doe s the G r e e n Gu i de re quire           221) .
th i s ?

Who    should ha ve c o ns i d e r e d   it?   The Building Surveyor according to
                                               the division of responsibilities
                                               although it now seems that the
                                               Building Surveyor thinks that the
                                               Fire Service ought to have done it.

If it w a s n ev er con sidere d, why ?        It appears not to have been
                                               considered in detail because there
Why d idn' t     I con si d er it?             was some confusion over who should
                                               do it.  I didn't consider it
                                               because I was not aware of a
                                               problem in that area and the
                                               proposals had all been approved
                                               before I took over the system.

To what extent does the                        Conditions 3 and 9(2).
Certificate make any provision?

Does the new Certificate make                  See 12(a) p.484 of the Bundle, but
any different provision?                       crowd limits are in Schedule 3.

Were self-contained pens ever                  No, it appears that they were
provided?                                      always intended to have Police
                                               control and that freedom of
                                               movement was possible;
                                               overcrowding is possible, even
                                               without the pens.
Crush Barriers

Non-conformity /2!h s e and
History - see blue sheet.



To what extent does the                       Conditions 25(i) and (ii), 28(4),
Certificate make provision?                   29 and 15.

Why wasn't total renovation/                  I understand that the Building
replacement required in                       Surveyor formed a view after
1979/80?                                      consulting with the Club's
                                              representatives and the other
                                              members of the Working Party
                                              that Dr. Eastwood's plans for
                                              installing new barriers and
                                              replacing those which did not stand
                                              up to the test were adequate.

Was there ever any c o m p l a i n t /        None is recorded on the files,   but
a c c id e nt in vol ving the ba r ri ers ?   see the 1981 incident.

D id anyone ever notice n o n ­               The slight variations from the
c on f or m i t y ? If not, wh y not?         Guide on the terrace were noted in
                                              1979/80 and accepted as being
                                              reasonably safe by the Building
                                              Surveyor, etc.

Procedure on inspections?                     At least 10% of the barriers are
                                              examined in some detail by the
                                              Building Surveyor on inspections.

Ca us a ti v e?                               This is a matter for evidence and
                                              no doubt the Inquiry will form its
                                              own view.

Width    of P e r i m e t e r Gates

Wh y do the p e r i m et e r fence gates      They were in existence prior to the
not comply w i t h the 1.1 me t re            new Green Guide which imposed a
w i d t h in the G re e n Guide?              1.1 metre requirement towards the
                                              end of 1986.  They were also not
                                              considered to be part of the
                                              primary exit system (see Fire
                                              Service comments).  There also has
                                              been no complaint from the Police
                                              or the Fire Service about the
                                              width of the gate.  It is also to
                                              be remembered that the gates were
                                              put in there in the first place
                                              for access by the Police into the
                                              pens for purposes of crowd control
                                              (?).  There is no note on the file
                                              about any suggested difficulty in
                                              connection with the gates in 1981.
    The Tunnel

    The tunnel gradient does not   It is in places steeper than that
    comply with the Guide?         recommended by the Guide.   The
                                   landing immediately at the
                                   tunnel entrance I am advised
                                   compensates to some extent for the
                                   gradient.   I also understand that
                                   the reason for the profile of the
                                   tunnel is possibly due to the
                                   nature of the foundations for the
                                   West Stand.   The tunnel is a pre­
                                   existing feature (1966); there
                                   have been no accidents or
                                   complaints listed about it and it
                                   has been regularly inspected.
                                   (See Fire Service Statement).

    Causative?                     This is a matter for evidence.




HB4AAQ/JJJ
         F I R S T A ID R O O M - Ne ver seems           to have got its p r o p e r e q u i p m e n t



Facts

1.   See the Safety Certificate, paragraph 8, and the Green Guide,
     paragraph 29.

2.   Dr. Bailey required minimum basic service,                          including Minute Man
     resuscitator and telephone (89).

3.   The Officer Working Party specified those requirements                                 (90 and 96).

4.   Club reminded 9th August, 1985 by S.Y.C.C. 275.

5.   Club reminded 4.12.87 by S.C.C. 433.

6.   Environmental Health ask for equipment to be provided for St. John's.

7.   Mr. Wells T19 deals with St. John's equipment.

8.   Mr. Housley T20:69 deals with Fire Se rv ice r e s u s c i t a t i o n m a c h i n e s ?

     QUESTION                                                   ANSWER

     What do we know about Environmental                        _____________ of Environmental
     Health discussions with St. John's?                        H e a lt h a pp a re n tl y talked to
                                                                Mr. W el l s of St. J o h n a n d asked
     Did we ever check on them?                                 h i m w h a t eq u ip m e n t he nee ded
                                                                and that he w o u l d then a s k the
                                                                Cl ub to pr ovi de it.             Apparently
                                                                Mr. W el ls in d i ca te d that there
                                                                w e r e no national standards but
                                                                e v e n t u a l l y a g r e e d that ce rtain
                                                                e q u i p m e n t was req u i re d and
                                                                e v e n t u a l l y the Club ag re ed to
                                                                p u r c h a s e some for them.          This
                                                                is re f er r ed to in Mr. M a c k r e l l ' s
                                                                statement.            No c he ck was m a d e as
                                                                to w h e t h e r or not the e q u i p me n t
                                                                h a d be e n pr ovided.

     W h a t abo ut a telephone?                                                    c an no t recall s eeing
                                                                a t el ep hone in the First Aid Room
                                                                b ut I u n d e r s t a n d that the Pol ice
                                                                R oo m is next d oo r to it w i t h all
                                                                the a p p r o p r i a t e c o m m u n i c a t i o n
                                                                facilities.

     E q u i p m e n t pro vi d ed by St. Joh n's               See Wells evidence, T19:10, pure
                                                                oxygen only. The Fire Service had
                                                                positive pressure resuscitator
                                                                T20.

     W hy d idn't we k n o w that there was                     I was not aware intially that the
     no r e s u s c i t a t o r / t e l e p h o n e , or seek   County Council had receive d
     to enforc e the orig in al r e q u i r e ­                 advice about first aid and only
     m en ts ?                                                  d i s c o v e r e d Dr. Ba i le y 's note
                                                                a f t e r the Inquiry had commenced.
                                                                The Health & C on su mer Se r vi c es
                                                                D e p a r t m e n t did, howev er,
                                    investigate the question of first
                                    aid and discovered that there is
                                    no national guidance on what
                                    should be provided and appeared
                                    to have had difficulty in finding
                                    a baseline on which to start with
                                    first aid requirements.  The
                                    solution was to ask St. John and
                                    obtain from them a list and to
                                    persuade the Club to provide
                                    equipment which apparently it
                                    did.
What are reasonable first aid       There is no definition of these.
facilities?                         There is the G.L.C. "Pop Code"
                                    which says virtually nothing
                                    about first aid and leaves it
                                    very much to individual judgment
                                    on the day.  This means that in
                                    practice everyone has to rely on
                                    the experience and competence of
                                    persons providing first aid (for
                                    example, St.John, into the level
                                    of equipment that they need.

Causative?                          Again, this is a question for
                                    evi de nc e.
Was the absence of a resuscitator
and a telepfioen causative?




HB4AAR/JJJ
DISTRIBUTION OF FANS ON TERRACES AND ENSURING THE CAPACITY IS NOT EXCEEDED



See Green Guide, Paragraph 16 and the heading of Chapter 8.  The
Certificate provides that the West Terrace holds 7,200 people, should
specific provision have been made for the pens?  Should the numbers going
into the pens be mechanically noted? "Even Distribution" - should the
Certificate have made further provision for stewarding or use of Police in
this context, but see 6(2).

The capacity should have been considered both in 1981 and                          1985, but there
is no written record to show that it was.  Where there is                          freedom of
movement on the terraces, the numbers going into the pens                          and staying
there would be very difficult to assess even if they were                          mechanically
counted in to start with.

As far as e v e n d i s t r i b u t i o n is concern ed, I u n d e r s t a n d that fans o f t en
have p r e f e r r e d spots and wi ll crowd to g e th e r near those spots.             It is in
the nat ur e of a terrace that some v a n t a g e p o in t s are wa—                    to ot he rs
but also that some free d o m of m o v e m e n t is inevitable.                See F. D if f er e n c e
of Seats as fixed posit io ns.

Note also the availabilty of the crush barrier system which is a tried and
tested method of crowd control and which is designed to prevent unsafe
crushes as far as possible.

It   is highly unlikely that the Certificate can achieve more than it does
at   present in relation to conditions.  The problem of overcrowding is such
an   obvious danger that the Club and the Police must be expected to take it
on   board.  Obviously, this is a key point in football crowd control.

The Green Guide itself d o e s n' t m a k e any c le ar specific p r o v i s i o n in
relati on to pens and no r e g ul a ti o ns have be en issued by the G ov ern ment .         I
u n d e r s t a n d ho we ver, that pens are a fairly c o m m o n fe a tu r e of football
gro unds and that if d a n g e r had been per c ei v ed by any of the A u t h o r i t i e s or
the G o v e rn m en t , then a p p r o p r i a t e advice w o u l d h a v e been issue d
immediately.

N.B. Pens no doubt d i ff e r in size and layout.




HB4AAS/JJJ
^ l E E T I N G WITH MERVYN JONES, MR METCALFE AND M R FRASER TO DISCUSS THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL
    DISASTER INQUESTS HELD ON 26TH FEBRUARY 1990

  The reason why I wanted to meet today, Mr Jones and I have been discussing it, and we
  thought it would be helpful if we had an informal discussion between ourselves as the
  people with whom I have corresponded as opposed to other firms of solicitors that may
  have interests, but who at this stage, h a v e n ’t yet had occasion to write in a substantial
  way.

  You will recollect that both of you are anxious to obtain data because you need it for
  various civil matters which are of no concern of mine.

  The original intention was that once the public enquiry had been completed that I would
  resume the Inquests reasonably promptly.   It was fixed for the 15th January but in the
  invent, because a criminal investigation was initiated, I changed my mind about that
   jecause one would normally hold Inquests after the DPP has made a decision, and then
  depending on that decision.

     lad a letter from Miss Steel saying she understood the difficulty with the criminal
 ^repect of the matter but could we at least help her with regard to where the deceased
  were and the medical evidence.   I reflected on that and wrote to the DPP and thought that
  this might be a way forward so that we could have a resumed Inquest on a limited basis
  with fairly tight rules as to what kind of evidence we would hear and how we would
  present it.   Obviously it may not give you all the answers you want but it would go a
  long way down the road.   What we would be dealing wi th is who the deceased was, when he
  died and where he died and we would strictly not be dealing with the question of how or
  why.   That of course could prejudice the criminal part.        The DPP has specifically asked
  me not to.   Certainly, if you look at it from the b e r e a v e d ’s point of view it would be
  against their interests assuming there are bereaved people who wish to have the
  prosecution and certainly Mr Hytner indicated that in his           .... remarks, so it may not be
  in your interests but certainly the bereaved would not want me to muddy the water to such
  an extent that any criminal prosecution, assuming that there was one, fell to the ground.

  Oo you feel that it would be helpful if we arranged to have ......... the Inquests for
  dhe purpose of taking evidence in that limited way.  We will then have to reiterate at
  the end of that particular evidence and I will come to the question of what will happen
  on resumption because that will depend on the DPP to a certain extent.  Have I made
     slf clear?

  Mr Metcalf - Speaking from the point of view of the SY Police, I am one day away from
  being able to say whether it would be useful or not because we have a hearing tomorrow
  for Mr Justice Stain at which what is in conflict is whether the present civil
  proceedings should continue or whether they should cease to be restarted or new
  proceedings started when all matters, including the Inquests have been completed.   Now if
  the conclusion tomorrow is that the present proceedings have to go ahead, whether they be
  heard in October or later, then I can say straightaway it would be extremely helpful if
  Inquests could proceed, that must be true of all defendents.   If the proceedings are
  discontinued, then it really ceases to be significant from the point of view of SY Police
  except with any information the sooner we have it, the better.

  Mr Fraser - Certainly so far as the bereaved are concerned, one of the major questions is
  in their minds, is how did my husband or son die? WHy c a n ’t I have particular information
  about him?  I think anything that can be done to get that information to them, in almost




           INIAAF
  n-adverserial way, would be warmly welcomed by them.       The proceedings of which Hr
        speaks, d o n ’t directly involve the bereaved because they are, correct me if I ’m
 ;| ^ i t ’s the contribution proceedings between the various defendants, the insurers of
  olice have agreed that subject to proof, they will deal w i t h all the civil claims and
  e are issues arising from that.       Certainly in terms of the bereaved, those
  eedings are not a factor and I am sure they would all welcome as much information as
 >ossible to get.

letcalf - I think t h e r e ’s a further point which again I d o n ’t suppose affects us
ictly, which I perhaps ought to make on that, nobody is being kept waiting for
)ensations INAUDIBLE so t h a t ’s not a live issue, the question of the amount of
)ensation is in issue and one of the particular aspects is something known as pre
.h terror/pre impact terror which we used to describe as pain and suffering before
-h.  If it be the case that there is evidence of people havi ng survived for a long
9 or recovered consciousness sufficiently to recognise what state they were in or
:ered pain, then the bereaved relatives are likely to be entitled to higher
sensation on those grounds.       That may be a factor which is preventing cases being
^led at the moment.

7raser - Certainly t h a t ’s a major factor but I d o n ’t think t h a t ’s adverserial in the
       ; between ourselves, t h a t ’s really a matter for finding out information, t h a t ’s
 ^ R i ’ve been bombarded w i th all these letters from people.

 - Looking from the bereaved point of view, my feeling is that they would welcome a
ited Inquest, provided that the limits are explained to them an that they understand
 reason for it.

Fraser -There will be one or two people who you will be faced with if you do proceed
 find those restrictions difficult to accept and you will have to be as firm as I have
 doubt you can be with them, even though they have it explained in advance, i t ’s an
remely emotional situation particularly for those who were there with people who died,
 perhaps so much for people who are at arms length.  It may be seen as an opportunity
 those who were there, to get it off their chest and that could be a problem I think.

 - We have thought about this, it is difficult and I also recognise that it is
ossible for me to satisfy 95 families.  I have thought about h o w we should present the
dence and I feel we should not ask any SY Police Officers to give oral evidence at
s hearing.

       alfe - I c a n ’t think that any of them could give any information    about this,   they
.H r   give general information about body positions and so on.

’ - There are a lot who participated in the rescue and resuscitation and by not calling
-m, i t ’s only fair to say that we are harming those that did well and tried very hard.
: we decided it was impractical to select.       It becomes very much harder to control all
; questioning and for that matter the a n s w e r s . The principal way we want to present
j evidence is that there will be be team of Officers from W Midlands, they will prepare
summary of the evidence and will present that summary of how the deceased arrived at
a ground and the events which took place at Hillsborough, basically statements.        As
in as the summaries are available, they will be circulated to the solicitors of the
Bering Committee.    If you felt that that was acceptable      as it stands, then I would




        INIAAF
     '/
                                                       -   3   -                                               •                      j
     _                               t


   c^fse n ot to ca ll any o th er evidence.             The s u m m a r i e s w i l l be as f a c t ua l ly accurate as
  ie Of f ic er s can m a k e the m but they w o n ’t deal w i t h the how.               You w i l l k n o w w h a t the
   ateme nts c o n t a i n e d f ac tuall y a nd y ou w i l l al so k n o w the n am e s of the w i t n e s s e s but y ou            ]
  m ’t see the w i t n e s s e s in person.

 i w a n t to use an na -c a pp a s.   Thes e are in t en d e d as aide m e m o i r e s and we w i l l ha ve the
 fficer p r o d u c e this, it a c t u a l l y s um mari ses the m a j o r e v e n t s in this p a r t i c u l a r p e r s o n ’s
 istory.     On the o p e n i n g day, so meone w i l l e x p l a i n the di a grams .

 r Jones - R u n n i n g p a r al l el to this is the v i s u a l e v i d e n c e w h i c h is a c t u a l l y m uc h more
 recise in t i m i n g terms.        It a c t u a l l y says a lot w h e n y o u h a v e v i s u a l e v i de n ce and you            J
 ompare it w i t h p e o p l e ’s ac c o un t s of w h a t they r e m e m b e r e d and d i d n ’t and indeed the
 imes .

 !MC - W e   int en d to ha ve     this   for ever y d e c e a s e d pl u s    the   summary.

 !r F ra s er - Plus    any v i d e o or still p h o t o g r a p h s   th at   ar e a v a i l a b l e as w e l l ?

          We d o n ’t w a n t to use the v ideos at this s ta ge b e c a u s e it is v e r y distressi ng.              Mo s t
  M r n e m h a v e a l r e a d y seen the v i de os and stills b e c a u s e the O f f i c e r s w h o are go ing to be
 ■resenting the su mm ar ies w i l l be able to say that the i d e n t i f i c a t i o n s ha v e been co n fi rme d
 .n n e a r l y every case.         There are a few that w e h a v e n ot b e e n able to e s t a b l is h the
thereabouts and the re are a few w h e r e the families, ju s t d i d n ’t w a n t to look.                    Wh a t I ha v e
in m i n d is a p l a n w i t h d i f f e r en t dots w h e r e v a r i o u s p e o p l e w e r e seen alive. We wi ll
produce those p l a n s and if so m eb o dy feel that the y w a n t to see the pho tograp h, we wi l l
nave b l o w ups of the v i d e o still.            A n y th ou g ht s on that?

Mr F r a s e r - The onl y co mme nt I ha v e abou t the s u m m a r i e s is that, p e r ha p s i t ’s bec a u se I
nave a L i v e r p o o l backgr ound, but any su mm ary is s o m e b o d y ’s a p p r o a c h to the problem.            I
w on de r w h e t h e r in a d d i t io n b e i n g given the summary, it is p o s s i b l e or ev en p r ac t i c a b l e to
be give n the e v i d e n c e from w h i c h the sum mary has b e e n e x t r a c t e d so that w h e n the
sol ici tor has re a d the summary, if there is a n y t h i n g in it w h i c h causes h i m or his client
J-oncern, the b o d y of the ev i de n ce can then be gone to.                  I w o u l d n ’t expect the body of the
eviden ce to be gone th ro ug h pi ece                 by piece b e f o r e you, but any summar y is bo un d to be
subjective.

HMC - W e ’ve t h ou gh t about this at c o n s i d e r a b l e l e n g t h an d it c a n ’t ea si ly be done,
       icu l ar l y w i t h r e ga rd to the e v i de nc e of the P o l i c e O f f i c e r s b e c a u s e it m a y c o n t a in     ^
      ir sta temen ts, there rea ll y is a ta ct ical p r o b l e m w i t h some of the state ments.                         Qu ite
apart fr o m that, s tat emen ts m a y c o n t a i n DP P s e n s i t i v e in forma tion .           We ha v e thought about
going t h r o u g h the statements, w h i c h w o u l d be a m a m m o t h task, and s c o r i ng out all the bits
but on balan ce, w e thou ght that w o u l d be even w o r s e t h a n d o i n g w h a t w e are doing.                      That
d o e s n ’t of c o u r s e pr e c lu d e at the Inquest f r om saying, w e ’ve h e a r d w h a t y o u ’ve said but
if the In que st w e r e to be resumed, it m a y be that w e w o u l d w a n t to h e a r it in mor e
detail.       I c o u l d m a k e a not e of that and su b j ec t to r es um ption , I w o u l d c o n s i de r it as a
possiblility.

It m a y be w h e n I read th r o ug h the files, th ere m a y be some w i t n e s s e s I feel I could call
or it m a y be that I can read as d o c u m e n t a r y e v id en c e, ev e n e v i de n ce fr o m Police O fficer s
b e c au s e I onl y n e e d to re ad w h a t is re l e va n t u n d e r the rules, and I w o u l d say that.




             INIAAF
 Mr Fraser - There will be some families who want their, someone said, their 15 minutes of
 fame.      I suppose to some extent they are going to have to be given that opportunity
 a r e n ’t they.  I think the vast majority will go through very smoothly but I think that
 there are going to be one or two who are going problems.

 HMC - We recognise that,     but we want the Inquests to be meaningful.

 Mr Fraser - Yes, i t ’s serving the two points particularly,     getting information and also
 dealing with our problems on the civil front.

 Mr Jones - The summary is not only one of my Police O f f i c e r s ’s summary but   that is
 reviewed by me and my people, i t ’s actually going to go to Dr Popper so he         gets actually
 the full file with all the statements and including matters which could be           considered
^Prejudicial.  He can actually read those matters which relate to the death           and look at
 that in terms of how it compares with the summary.    The summaries come out         from the
 Coroner as opposed to come out from me.

    Fraser - No disrespect to W M i d l a n d s ’ Officers, I think that if that point is made,
     clearly made, I think some of the "oh i t ’s another policeman and another p o l i cem an ’s
 statement" sort of comment, then if a statement comes from your office, i t ’s going to be
 much easier to swallow.

 HMC - Would you want to see the summaries Mr Kennedy?        I would prefer not to send the
 summaries to dozens of parties.

 Mr Fraser - One of the points at issue is that at the moment a broad swipe has been taken
 at this pre-death payment and suffering, those summaries are almost bound to contain
 information which    will benefit us and I certainly would have no objection to the oterh
 side seeing them,    I d o n ’t know whether they would want to.

 Mr Metcalf - I think the distinction that can be drawn between us and the other
 defendents is that we are doing the paying out, so we have a legitimate interest.
7
 HMC - I ’m quite happy is you say it would be helpful to see them before we begin.

 Mr Jones - T h e r e ’s no problem.   The first thing was to clear with Mr Fraser in terms of
   i t side of things.

 Mr Fraser - We have to work together, if the document became available and the plaintiff
 relied upon it, I would have to disclose it any way, so you might as well see it at the
 beginning rather than.  It will be a matter of public record after the hearing because ti
 will be part of the deposition.

 Mr Metcalf - Returning to the beginning of this, there is I think a line to be drawn in
 making clear what these preliminary hearings are intended to deal with between saying,
 well look w e ’re doing this to prevent any possible risk of prosecution, but not actually
 giving the idea that a prosecution is certainly going to follow.

 Mr Fraser - That has occurred to me and will occur to others.

 HMC - We thought about doing this a while ago but I turned it down because I thought that




          INIAAF
 if I held a limited Inquest as this stage, everybody would assume that I knew what the
 DPP was going to do.     The reason why I feel we can do it now is because of Miss S t e e l ’s
 letter.     She requested the information, what we are doing is trying to comply with her
 wish.     It would be made clear, if necessary 95 times, that under no circumstances can it
 be construed as a preliminary.     Do we say that because somebody w o n ’t believe it, we
 d o n ’t do anything at all?

 Mr Fraser  - t h a t ’s right, there will be one or two hotheads who will look for the
 ulterior motive behind this.      The vast majority will accept it in the spirit which i t ’s
 done.  The press will do the same.

   HMC - I am quite satisfied in my own mind that we are not doing it for that reason.
   There are three scenarios which are worth mentioning.            One, that the DPP decies to
^P r o s e c u t e somebody or several people for manslaughter.      If that were to happen, then
   Section 16 of the Co r o n e r ’s Act would apply and I wo uld adjourn the Inquests on
   provisions of that Section.            Whether I resume or not, I wi ll decide at the end of the
   prosecutioh, but it is my normal practice not to resume when prosecutions for murder,
 j ^ n s l a u g h t e r or ........... take place.  Secondly, that he decides not to prosecute for
 ^ P a s l a u g h t e r or a charge that falls within that Section.    In that case, I will have to
   decide on a resumption then I will make up my mind ho w mu ch further evidence I will need
   to call.          Thirdly, he decides not to prosecute but that somebody brings a private
   prosecution.           Again, I ’m not saying it will happen but it is a possibility, Mr Hytner I
   think hinted at that possibility.

 Mr Metcalf -    I wo u l d take his remarks very carefully, he at no stage gave the idea that
 he or his colleague, King, thought that there was anything in which they were putting
 forward.  What they were saying was, "some of my clients believe".       He was very careful
 in his wording.

 HMC - I w a s n ’t suggesting that he thought that one should be brought, I was just saying
 that he recognised that there were some people who might wi sh to do so.      Assuming that
 ..someone brought a private prosection, then y o u ’re back in the Section 16 situation.

   Those are the three scenarios.        If the DPP were to prosecute, then if I h a d n ’t done the
   resumptions at this stage, I would have had to resume on a limited basis to at least take
   the medical evidence.        Bearing mind even if the DPP does prosecute, he may not actually
A ' o s e c u t e 95, he may select.   It might be that it woul d be unfair not to at least take
^ ^ a e sort of evidence we have been talking about for the other x number who a r e n ’t
   mentioned on the charge sheet, but it          would be covered under Section 16.      So   I might be
   faced with having to do all this anyway after the DPP has decided.          Assuming        that we do
   it now, that        work will have been done if the DPP decides to prosecute, I will resume the
   Inquests for        the purposes of adjourning under Section 16 and then I will make up my mind
   when it is over.

 Mr Fraser - I t ’s going     to take a lot     of heat      out of the situation.  There is a need to
 know, I think so far as      i t ’s possible   to give      that information, I think i t ’s   an exce
 idea.

 Mr Jones - Humanely, if you look at it in terms of not doing anything at this stage, it
 could be quite a while, and the psychologists tell us that the grieving process needs
 this in order to work through.  The vast majority of families want to settle down and




           INIAAF
                                          - 6 -

start rebuilding their lives but they c a n ’t do it.

HMC - I d o n ’t know what the DPP   is going to do any more than you do.    When I mention     it,
tha t’s got to be put as part of     the scenario.

Mr Jones - To help you on that, if this goes ahead at the time we are talking about,            the
final submission to the DPP w o n ’t have been made whilst this is going on.

Mr Fraser - What sort of dates are we talking about?

 HMC - What we want to do as soon as you are happy, we want to have the pre-inquests with
 you next week because we want to give everybody a chance to hear and know w h a t ’s going
 on, and resume the Inquests on the 18th April, and start actually taking evidence on
i n d i v i d u a l cases on the 19th.    When we first set it, it was said, how can you do it
 around the anniversary.          I t ’s certainly a point.  The people will obviously very
 emotionally involved on the 15th anyway, and it may possibly be better to take them while
 they are already upset, quite naturally, instead of letting them go down and then lift



Mr Fraser - How long do you anticipate this is going to       take?

HMC - I ’d be interested to hear what you think?

Mr Metcalf - A week or two weeks came into mind straightaway.

HMC - I think the minimum is two weeks.  What we want to do is eight a day if we can and
that would take us 12 days.  The first day we d o n ’t want to take eight.

Mr Fraser - Timetabling is a problem.  Eight a day is eight families in and out,           it can
be done if the Social Services support and everybody gets their act together.

Mr Jones - What I intended to do with Summary Officers,       that each one would only have one
J e r day, so h e ’d actually chaperone them in and out, so   they w o u l d n ’t have this idea of a
sausage machine.

M r Fraser - I know that the Social Services in Sheffield are keen to help if t h a t ’s a
   ssibility.

HMC - The Zeebrugge Disaster managed 18 a day but I think their problem was different.
Although they dealt with where the people were found, it was bearing in mind that the
ship w a s n ’t lifted until six weeks or whatever after the incident.     Nobody knew where the
people had been because the water had gone into the bow.         We have the problem of trying
to find 95 people in thousands, out of thousands of photographs. So it will probably take
a bit longer to present the evidence.      I d o n ’t want this rushed, I want each family to
feel that they have been treated with courtesy, i t ’s been dignified.

Mr Metcalf - I c a n ’t see us and the others really having any questions to raise,        I c a n ’t
see us being more than present hearing the evidence.

Mr Fraser - Would you attach to the summary the PM report or would you include it in it?




         INIAAF
                                            - 7 -

 HMC - The PM report would be separate.       I might call the Pathologist to every Inquest and
 I ’d value your comments.

 Mr Jones  - I t ’s a question what the family want to some extent.   I know there are one or
 two PM reports which talk of fractures and what the family want to kn ow is whether that
 fracture caused any distress.     In the majority of cases, they are very sympathetic
 reports.  I c a n ’t see very many families wanting to put questions to the Pathologist.
 One or two certainly.

   HMC - There are one or two where there were queries.            I want the families to be able to
  hear what was what, i t ’s better if i t ’s dealt with in Court.          What I had in mind, and I
  h a v e n ’t yet spoken to Prof Usher, is on the opening day, to take evidence from Dr Forrest
  who did the alcohols, otherwise h e ’s got to sit here for 12 days, about half d i d n ’t have
J p n y alcohol at all, another large batch only had relatively low levels, there may be a
   few where the alcohol level is a bit high.          I thought that we could call Prof Usher or
   some other suitable Pathologist, so that he could give us a general dissertation on
   traumatic asphyxia death.      The families w o u l d n ’t have hea rd it but the solicitors would.
       may be that if we do that, we could then take as documentary at least a proportion of
   tne P M s . But if you say this family w o n ’t be happy unless they hear from the
   Pathologist, then I will consider that.

 The Jury, initially I was going to do without but I have changed my mind.       There will be
 a Jury even at this preliminary stage, though the Jury will have nothing to do because
 there will be no verdict as such at this stage.      Bearing in mind that one of the
 scenarios is that a prosecution may take place and that I may adjourn under Section 16,
 and at the end of the day, may not resume, if we do this without a Jury then none of its
 been heard w i t h a Jury and I think technically i t ’s better if the Inquests were heard
 with a Jury.

 Mr Metcalf - I c a n ’t fault your logic but it would be nice      for them if there was a way
 round it but I c a n ’t think of any.

'^lMC - Initially I was going to do without, but assuming I did resume in six months time,
  w e ’d have to repeat a fair bit of it anyway, even if I can get the same Jury ro w e ’d have
  to start w i t h a new one, and do the whole job again. I felt it would be unwise to
^Dr ocee d without them from a legal point of view.

 Mr Metcalf - I t ’s case where you wo uld automatically have had a Jury had their been no
 possible element of prosecution.

 HMC - T h a t ’s the problem.  The Act says that if, a Coroner shall proceed .......... I
 think its wiser.      The Jury is going to cause a bit of a problem because I know from some
 of the, at least one, a bereaved representative that they are worried about how you can
 get an impartial Jury.      Bearing in mind that this is an Inquest not a trial, I ’m not
 really worried about selecting.

 Mr Jones - For this purpose,     as they are not going to come to a verdict,       it d o e s n ’t
 really matter.

  HMC - We wi ll probably exclude anybody who is related to any of the deceased, I think
  that is something which we should discuss and decide w heth er we want to have any criteria




           INIAAF
  for exclusions on the Jury.  We d o n ’t want to pick and choose but we d o n ’t want to have
  people who by definition are involved in some way.     I have to think about this.

  We are inclined to ho ld it here and I will show you around the building later.      As we are
  going to be dealing wi th 95 Inquests and provided we can get the summonsing right, we
  shouldn’t have too many people in the building at any one time.     Except on Day One when
  the press will be here, then I think they will go away.   We want   to try and arrange for
  coffee and the WRVS, and we want to inform the Hillsborough Support Group.      I d o n ’t want
  to get involved in the running of that side because i t ’s more for H r Fraser.   What Ihave
  in mind, is when we warn the family of attendance, we wo uld at the same time warn the
  Support Group.  We wi ll then expect you to co-ordinate them, the   Social Services etc.

  ^4r Hetcalf - Are they all     represented, all 95?

  Hr Fraser - T h e r e ’s about two or three that a r e n ’t, this   is something   that your Officers
  and I can check.       Representation has changed.

^^'MC - Can you let me have you updated list?

   Hr Fraser - Yes, I can let you have that by the end of the week.         Our difficulty is one
    that I have no wish to embarrass my friend about, but we as a Steering Committee, may not
   be here because we have a problem with the Insurers about being here.           Our original, if
    I ’m treading on difficult territory, please say so. Our original approach         to your
    Inquest was this; we have already sent out a questionnaire to all solicitors who
    represent the bereaved and with very few exceptions, they have all returned them saying
    they want block representation.        This means you would have one individual or a team of
    two or three working on a rota basis appearing before you.        It had originally been our
    intention to match representation with our protagonists, but in v i e w of what you have
    said today, my view, subject to the view of my Committee, would be, that it would be at
    solicitor level only and probably me because I have 22 personal bereaved families and as
    I lead the team for the Inquests, I would probably be before you.        That was on the basis
   •that the Insurers would fund that en bloc.        They have declined our invitation to pay for
    vepresentation for the bereaved at the Inquests at all.        Not either en bloc or as
    solicitors or for each individual family.        So the present position is that we either have
    to persuade them to see the error of their ways and there is a m e eting on Wednesday of
    this week at which an attempt will be made, or, we have to tell the families they cannot
JMj e represented unless they pay for individual solicitors themselves and the prospect
^ c h e r e f o r e is that you have a different solicitor for each bereaved, or in some cases, no
    solicitor at all.        The third possibility is that there is funding available from another
    source.        I can tell you that as I speak there is no other source available.    It has been
    suggested that we approach the Legal Aid Board, it is not possible.        I t ’s been suggested
    that we approach the Disaster Fund, and they have declined, so there are only two
    possibilities, either we can persuade the Insurers.        In fairness to the Insurers, their
    stance was taken before this information came available to us, but either we can persuade
    them to change their minds and agree to fund block representation or fund individual
    solicitors representing their clients and those solicitors instructing us as agents.          Or,
    secondly, you have a team of different solicitors, you have a different solicitor for
    each bereaved in front of you with my exception.        Some have blocks of three, four and
    five solicitors, but there are quite a lot with one.        The present situation is that you
    could end up with up to 40 solicitors in front of you and that is a problem for which I
    TAPE ENDS




           INIAAF
 T h a t ’s the situation as we talk at 3.30 today.

  Mr Metcalf - I think the particular problem is that for two reasons my clients, and it
   i s n ’t just the MMI in this instance, d o n ’t wish to go beyond that which they are legally
   liable for and the two reasons are, firstly, we are pursuing the others, the Club,
   Eastwoods,    the City Council, and if we pay out for something for which we are not liable
   legally, then we w o n ’t get any     of it back.  Secondly, without giving any details of cover
   involved, it has      been a matter of comment and it is partly correct, that if the amount to
  be paid out goes       over a certain limit, it will be the ratepayers of S Yorkshire, whatever
   Treasury support      they may get, who will be paying out compensation. In those
   circumstances, nobody wants to take a decision which could lead them to being surcharged
   at a later date for having willfully given away what turns out later to be public money.
   They present quite serious obstacles, whether there is anything that can be done I ’m not
Jjjj^ure. There is a meeting on Wednesday where this will be discussed again.         Mr Fraser is
  quite correct in saying i t ’s not me that takes decisions.

^^*MC - From my point of view it would be better if we d i d n ’t have, we do have many cases
^P.iere people are not represented and there is no objection, but given the emotivenes of
  this case and the limitations, legal representation might be helpful and desirable for me
  and the.  In a sense I ’m in your hands, assuming for a moment that I were making a claim,
  then I would include in my claim, the expenses and that wo uld include legal, then I would
  have to argue whether it was legitimate expense.

 Mr Metcalf - The difficulty is that it comes back to the question of civil action, the
 moving on at speed. In general terms, an Inquest takes place before a civil action and
 i t ’s always legitimate expense to go and be represented at the Inquest because something
 might come out that will be relevant to the civil action.

 HMC - In a sense we are doing that, we       have brought the Inquest forward.

 Mr Metcalf - Except that we are talking about representation here, the trouble is the
 agreement has been made to pay out so there’s nothing for them to gain in that sense.

 Mr Fraser - Our argument is one of the issues that you are going to clarify is the extent
 of suffering before death and therefore we are here to get that information, and


•
 "herefore we think that we should be paid.    If we get the papers in advance, we d o n ’t
  .ave to come. It is my wish that the Steering Committee is here and will represent as
 many as possible, I will be here in any event and it is my view that as many as possible
 should be done, because although like you I have no wish to do it any more quickly that
 is necessary, if we have done the first d a y ’s worth at eight, then we should       be able to,
 if we can establish a pattern, without it being too obvious, then it will be          easier for
 everybody.

 Mr ..... - Can I just clarify here INAUDIBLE If a decision was that it w a s n ’t going to
 be forthcoming, the costs, where would  that leave us in terms of communication, talking
 to whom, the families directly and for  them to decide as to whether they employ at their
 own cost?

 Mr Fraser - No what the Insurers say is that they will pay the generic costs of our
 preparation for the Inquests e.g. I ’m here today as one of the Committee as part of the
 generic costs of that Committee.  But the moment the Inquests start, then no we would not




          INIAAF
  be here.  Up to the 18th     Ap ril   we would    be in, but once you switch       on the microphone
  the 18th, then w e ’re not   here.

   HMC - You would accept communications   and presumably notifying your clients?

  Mr Fraser - Yes t h a t ’s right.

  Mr .... - But it does change ho w we got here, the question of Social Services support is
  that it i s n ’t something that we could actually lay off to you.

   Mr Fraser - No, I w o u l d n ’t have raised the question of money had that not been an obvious
   link.    Our present view is that if funding is granted, we will be here in terms of an
   jadvocate and at least one legal runner who knows his way around the papers and can assist
^ | o u r Officers.

   Mr Metcalf -I would have thought we would have been looking at one representative here,
^ ^ o l i c i t o r or a clerk after things got going.

  HMC - L e t ’s assume the financial side got sorted out and that you will be here.  If we
  are going to do eight a day, I reckon we will have to move at a fairly brisk pace and
  what I have in mind is to wa rn the family to come at x time, deal wi th the case, take
  them out of Court, bring the next family in.     That will mean that if you want to see the
  family who we have just dealt with, then you have got to have somebody here to see them
  because we will be starting the next Inquest.

  Mr Fraser - or they may want to see me, but I would have somebody from my office here or
  from the Committee to deal with any problems then, similar to the Public Inquiry.  Who do
  you anticipate will be before you?

  HMC - I have drafted a letter to all solicitors I am aware of, not just the Committee.
  There are quite a lot of firms who were represented at the Inquiry who have not
c o n t a c t e d me at all but I intend to tell them about the pre-inquest review so that they
   jan attend if they wish.       I suspect that not everybody will come and that at the Inquest,
   it will be yourself and possibly you.

^^(r Metcalf - I would have thought the Club and Council would have someone at the
^ ^ ;iq u e s ts .

   Mr Fraser - I think to some extent that the publicity that comes from your office about
   what the Inquest is for may reduce the numbers.  If it is known that it is non liability,
   non adverserial.

   HMC - I think they will be here the first two or three days,     then they may decide t h e r e ’s
   not much.

   Mr Jones - Can I just add that there will be transcripts as well.

   HMC - We are wired for sound and we usually transcribe from tapes, but at the moment that
   even if we have it here, I will get preferably the same firm that did the Inquiry to do
   shorthand transcripts and we will probably record as well.   We will let anyone who wants
   copies of the transcripts, have them at the usual rate.   I will try and get individual




                 INIAAF
                                           - 11 -

  Inquests done separately so that we w o n ’t get a whole d a y ’s proceedings.    You can ask for
  individual copies rather than all those for that day.

 Mr Metcalf - It will reduce the need to go through the evidence at the end.  I c a n ’t
 think at the moment of circumstances where we would have questions to ask, if we d o n ’t
 the likelihood is that we would want a low level representation and a transcript.

 Mr Fraser - I think from a political point of view,      the Ch Constable might want somebodv
 in.

 Mr Metcalf - Yes and no.     If it i s n ’t necessary, but I would have thought,     I ’ll have to
 think about it.

0 ^ M C - I want to call the cases in Pathologist order because if I do need to call a
  Pathologist, I want to call him for half a dozen.        But of course where there are two
  people in. the same family have been killed, then t h a t ’s an over-riding consideration.
  Those Inquests should be done on the same day.        There are other factors which come into
   t as well.   They will appear random.     The disadvantage is that they w o n ’t be in
  solicitor order.   If the Committee d o e s n ’t represent, i t ’s not a problem.

 Mr Fraser - How much notice wo uld you give the families or would you tell the
 solicitors ?

  HMC - What I have in mind, is that we would notify the solicitors of the time and also
  the family directly.  An Officer wo uld tell them, and of course any witnesses we may wan*-
  to call, the Officers would notify.   And of course the Hillsborough Support Group so it
  may well be that in certain circumstances, w e ’d turn up at the door as well. W e ’d have
  to say that the Inquest is going to be held on x day but be prepared for change. Mr
  Fraser, you could explain those aspects.

   Mr Fraser - It would help me if you could also tell me wi th my Committee hat on,          the
^ o r o p o s e d dates as well.

  HMC - Yes.  If I know that the Committee will be representing en bloc,         I w o u l d n ’t notify
  the individual solicitors, I would just notify you of the dates.

   r Fraser - I think it would be better if you told the solicitors as well.    To a large
  extent, we are anonymous in the sense that we have deliberately not identified ourselver*
  as individuals and if I have the information, then by the time I get to his solicitor aiul
  he gets it out, or he gets the information get back to me, I think if i t ’s possible, te li­
  the family, tell the solicitor and also tell me.

  Mr Metcalf - It only matters in terms of preparation,      reading up etc.

  HMC - That   is all I really need to say today.

  Mr .... -    This question, your objectives as it were, in    asense   you are   united in termt*
  of finding   out the information in order to settle on

  Mr Metcalf   - We each have the idea that this thing is better settled       quicker.




          INIAAF
                                           - 12 -

 Mr ..... - In particular, the pain and suffering levels, immediately before and after
 death, there may well also be needs amongst the families to actually question, which they
 would normally do in an Inquest, question the people who were actually there, to say what
 did you do to help my client.        One thing that you will have to be sure of is that this
 ’d e v i c e ’ will actually bring out that to your satisfaction.  A lot of it will centre of
 what the summaries say, but the ability to cross examine will not be there at that point,
 either for you or for the families.        If we called the police after we had just completed,
 and in many instances they would be in a position to give that evidence under cross
 examination, there could also be considerable problems there where it could become
 adverserial in terms        of complaints against police.

   Mr Fraser - The majority of the families w o n ’t be looking for that problem, there will be
   some.   I think the advance publicity can make it as clear as possible,     on both sides of
^ ) h e Pennines, that this is an exercise to give information and not one to

 HMC - This   is the draft letter.

^ ^ r Fraser - Would it be your intention to talk to the press before next w e e k ’s meeting?

 HMC - I ’m inclined to say I should tell the press about the meeting and I have drafted
 another p r e s s .

 Mr Fraser - Somebody must copy it to the press agency.

 Mr Metcalf - The only thing I would mention from your point of view is that some people
 might phone that number on the second page and be surprised when someone says "W Midlands
 P o li ce".

 HMC - It is going to solicitors apart from those few who are not represented.          I am going
 to do a covering letter to those.

jjir Fraser - So this is to all those solicitors who have notified you they        represent the
  deceased to all organisations who were represented

 Mr Metcalf - Other    bodies who were given representation at the Inquiry.

 HMC - Do you think    you could send me the addresses?

 Mr Fraser - When would you    expect to release this?

 HMC - Tonight if we finish early, we need the addresses so tomorrow.     I d o n ’t intend to
 send one to each deceased, just one to each firm.     I do intend at some point to have a
 meeting wi th the press and re-explain a) what we are doing, b) try and point out that I
 d o n ’t want any more bad press in my Court. I also want to talk with the Social Services.

 Mr Metcalf - I suspect you will get quite a big turn out next week from people,         I d o n ’t
 know if t h e r e ’s scope for extra benches.

 HMC - We w o n ’t have all the families, it will all be solicitors.  I d o n ’t think w e ’ll
 have enough     space  next week but I agree with you, Isuspect there will be quite       a few
 r epre sentatives.




          INIAAF
  Mr ..... Can I just confidentially brief you both in terms of the progress of the
  investigation.  That is continuing, I saw Mr M e t c a l f ’s eyes raise when I said the final
  submission to the DPP w o n ’t have gone by the time this starts on the 18th.      It w o n ’t be
  long after, I intend to finish it in the Spring and await the D P P ’s response.      But in
  fairness, it will not be completed, every t crossed and every i dotted until the end of
  this particular process.     Not that this process is anything to do with it, i t ’s just
  simply that other things are going on and that includes interviews which I will be
  talking to you about.   I have had your letter, we d i d n ’t deliberately respond other than
  to acknowledge because we wanted to talk about this, bearing in mind your letter came
  about the same time as Miss St e e l ’s asking very similar questions.

  HMC - Are you content that we should proceed in the w ay that I have outlined?

^^r    Metcalf - I see no reason why not.

  Mr Fraser - I agree entirely.     There will be one or two problems with this but on balance
    think i t ’s an excellent idea, primarily from the point of view of the relatives to get
  the information that they have wanted for nearly a year, and also from the lawyers point
  of view, there is    an added bonus that    information wi ll come out, and those few problems
  will be the price    we will have to pay    for a much larger benefit.

  Mr .....   - Without naming any individuals, do you think there would be scope and would
  it be appropriate   to take those cases  which perhaps could cause greater difficulty
  towards the middle or towards the end, rather than on the first day when all the press
  will be queued up?

  Mr Fraser - It depends on the nature of the problem really.

  Mr Metcalf - I think it would be usual in most Courts to take shorter cases before longer
  ones and if the anticipation is that in some cases there will be a lot of questions, the
  usual thing wo uld be to list them at the end.

  -\r ......    What you might get is a lot of the other families hyped up.

 — Mr Jones - I think it should be started as a low key thing and hopefully it        will run that
^P,/ay.  Whereas if you have the w o r l d ’s press here on the first few days, the   disadvantage
   is that if they get hold of the timetable, I think t h e y ’ll do that anyway.     But I agree,
   the stuff which can be got out of the way without any difficulty should be,        so as not to
   upset them as individuals.

  Mr   ....    - Minimise the trauma really.

  Mr Metcalf - Again, if any cases which are going to cause any particular problems are
  last on the list on any given day, then no other family is going to be kept waiting.

  HMC - Structure them within the days as well.

  Mr Fraser - I wo uld say that there is one particular case I can think of that should be
  heard in the morning.

  HMC - If you have any views Mr Fraser you must tell me.




              INIAAF
                                               - 14 -

    Hr Fraser - I have to be very careful.

    HHC - I ’m not asking you to tell me now.

    Hr Fraser - There is one family who would   swell the coffers of the local hostelry before
    they arrived, so if they were a 9.00am start.   One other thing, what time will you start
    in terms of travelling?

    HHC - Any thoughts?

    Mr   .....    - 9.30am at the latest I would have thought.

jHHC     - Can you do it?

    H r Hetcalf - There ’s no problem from our point of view,       I am just thinking about.

^^■'r Fraser - An hour and three quarters to         drive but I d o n ’t want to do that   15 days.

    HMC - No but from the families,      if it takes two   hours for the journery from      Liverpool

    Mr Fraser -       A third of them are not from Liverpool.

    Hr ..... - INAUDIBLE         see in fact in the order of the day whether we can     actually get
    the geography.

    Hr Hetcalf - I would have been inclined to suggest a start at 10.00am and be prepared to
    sit later rather than starting at 9.30am.

    HHC - Iagree.   Without a Jury you can sit as long as you      like but with       a Jury   you have
    to stop   for refreshments, etc.  W e ’ll have to do the best we can.

^ T h e witnesses will be paid in the usual way.        There w o n ’t be many witnesses but none
   Witnesses, that includes family, will not be.

    Hr .... - Do you want to mention the possibility not the probability,           the possibility of
^    *nother we ek being set aside for.
•'
    HHC - W e ’ve chosen the dates because they suited us from a practical point of view but we
    recognise is that there may be INAUDIBLE we want to finish it if at all possible before
    the 4th Hay.    We have tentatively reserved another week, beginning 21st Hay I think to
    ...... the stragglers or those on holiday.




                 INIAAF
                            HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL DISASTER - 15TH APRIL 1989


Informal Meeting of HM Coroner, Legal Representatives and the Bereaved, Held on Tuesday,

6th March 1990__________________________________________________________________________________


Legal Repr esentatives:-



Mr Fraser - member of the Steering Committee which was         formed by the firms of solicitors

    in Liverpool who were instructed by families shortly after the disaster.          My

    Committee represents approximately 150 practises within that Group,         about 50

    practises have received instructions from bereaved families.          Those 50 practises,   I
    understand,    represent 92 of the deceased,   there being three bereaved families who

have either not contacted us as a group or contacted solicitors themselves.          We have had

    general contact and it would be our intentions       subject to your approval,   to be

    present to assist the bereaved and the Court throughout any hearing you may

    rec onven e.



Mr Gregory - represents Sheffield City Council.


Mr Peter Doyle - Davies Arnold.Cooper Solicitors,       for Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.



Mr Andrew Callaghan - Dibb Lupton Broomhead,       represents Trent Regional Health Authority

    and Sheffield Metropolitan Ambulance Service.



Ms Katherine Thorpe - Reynolds Porter Chamberlain,       represent Eastwood & Partners.



Ms Norcliffe -     Hammond Suddards,   represents SY Police.


I want to introduce Mr Mervyn Jones, Assistant Chief Constable, West Midlands Police and

he is acting as my C o r oner’s Officer for the purposes of this meeting and also for the

purposes of the Inquests.
 The purpose   of this meeting is to try and tell you some of the         thinking which I have been

 engaged in,   the proposals which I have with regard to resuming         the Inquests and to obtain

 from the legal representatives,    confirmation that what I am proposing would appear to be

 an acceptable way forward.    I ought to make it clear,         that I have had a preliminary

 discussion with Mr Fraser and Mr Kennedy last week,           with a view to exploring the very

 subject which we are discussing today.        These are the 2 solicitors I have had most

 correspondence with.
                                        r        /4
                                            f-CA'ty-


^.The second thing I want to say,   the fact that we are meeting today and I am thinking of

 resuming the Inquests rather sooner that I had originally intended,           does not mean that

 the Director of Public Prosecutions has either informed me of any decisions or taken any

 decisions with regard to this matter.



 My C o r o n e r ’s Officer who is also heading up the Team which is preparing the paper work
 for the DPP informs me that the Director at the moment is not able to take a decision

 because all the paper work has not been delivered to him.



 As you will note from the letter I sent to you,          it is my intention subject to this

 meeting to try   and resume shortly after Easter.         The timing for that has got nothing

 whatever to   do with any action or inaction by the DPP.



^The present time schedule for submission of papers to the DPP is such that if we do
 resume these Inquests shortly after Easter,           the papers will not yet have been submitted

 to the DPP in full.    The position will be exactly as it is today.         It may be that whilst

 we are proceeding with the Inquests,       the papers will go to the DPP and indeed the

 submission may well be completed.     We had considered something of this sort some time

 ago and we rejected it because we were concerned that people might feel that there is

 something going on which I ’m not letting on about.           That is not the case.



 The reason why I revised my opinion as to the possibility of resuming these Inquests, was
 because we received a letter from Miss Steel, who is a member of the Hillsborough
 Steering Committee,    in which she had enclosed a letter which she actually wrote to the

 DPP,   and by chance we also had   a letter from Hammond Suddards, who d i d n ’t actually make

 the same point but it was also raising points relating to timing and disclosure.           I
 realised that what Miss Steel was saying was similar to my original thoughts and felt it

 was appropriate to reconsider my earlier decision which was to do nothing until after the
 DPP has answered.
                                            -   3   -




I want to indicate three possible scenarios before the Inquests.                Please listen to these

bearing in mind what I have said as to my knowledge as to what the DPP is going to do.

The first one is, having considered all the paper work and the evidence, he decides to
bring a prosecution against somebody or bodies, corporate or otherwise,               but he decides to

bring a prosecution for a major offence which falls within Section 16, and the only one
which is likely to apply is manslaughter.               If he were to bring such a charge,   then the
procedure under Section 16 of the Co r o n e r ’s Act is that I woul d adjourn the Inquest.             At

the end of the Town Hall proceedings,       it would be my option wh ether I resumed the

Inquests or not.       I t ’s only fair to say that I ’ve been Coroner now for about 4% years and

I ’ve never yet resumed an Inquest which was adjourned under Section 16.


Scenario     two is the DPP says no prosecution but that one or more or some other person
decides that they wish to bring a private prosecution against somebody corporate or
otherwise.     If that were to occur and if a charge were laid,           then Section 16 would apply

again with exactly the same consequences.



The third scenario is that the DPP says no prosecution,              and nobody else wants to proceed.

In those cases, we would in a normal run of events,              resume the Inquests and complete it

within the    ......   that I consider appropriate to the circumstances.


I d o n ’t know which of these scenarios will apply but if we were to resume before the DPP

makes a decision,      and if a Section 16 situation were then to arise,          I would immediately

after resume the Inquests purely and simply for the purposes of                adjourning under   the

provisions of Section 16 in order to comply with the Act.               That   would be a formality but

w o u l d n ’t take very long but in a sense,   getting the information now, would have the

advantage that we would be able to deal with it fairly quickly.                One of the reasons you

adjourn under Section 16 is that families can get their death certificates                which   they

c a n ’t normally do until the Inquest is complete.
                                              -   4    -




Following receipt of Miss S t e e l ’s letter and my reconsideration,         I got in touch with the

DPP or one of his representatives,         to see whether he would agree that I should resume the

Inquests on a limited basis.        What I proposed to him was that we would resume for the

purposes of taking the medical evidence,              and we would deal with the alcohol levels of the
individuals at that time.       We would endeavour to put before my Court of where the

deceased were within the Stadium and if possible,              evidence of where they were seen either
alive or dead at various points within the Stadium and probably,              some evidence as to how

they got to the Stadium.       We would not deal with how or why they died or who is to blame.

The reason for this is:



a) the DPP would not agree to me resuming the Inquests if we were to deal with

controversial matters.       He would not agree if we dealt with matters which would impair
his investigations or the scope for action which he might wish to take.               It is in the

interests of justice that nothing I do should muddy the waters and perhaps hinder other

proceedings which make take place in a different Court.



If I resume these Inquests,       they will be of a limited nature.         They will be designed to

be non adverserial,     to present the factual evidence.          The way I want the evidence

presented to meet the legitimate requirements of everyone involved is as follows.


We will deal with post m o r t e m s .   Some Inquests will require the Pathologist to be present
others will only require documentary evidence.              We will discuss this with the

Hillsborough Steering Committee and other relevant parties to determine whether the

Pathologist is required.



We will deal with the alcohol levels of the deceased.               They were all done apart from one,

and we will tell you at the Inquests what the individual levels were. Dr Forrest will

attend some of the Inquests to formally prove his evidence and if there is any individual
case where the alcohol level might be controversial, we will ask Dr Forrest to attend.

My intention is to hold a short Inquest for each individual deceased and complete the

evidence as far as we are going.
                                         - 5 -



W Midlands Police are preparing the remainder of the evidence following Lord Justice

Tay lor’s report and the publication of the interim report and submission to the DPP.        The
Inquest cannot be held until the DPP has completed his work,      so I said get the paper work
done for the DPP, my documents can come later.      A file of each individual deceased will
be presented to me containing copy statements together wi th a summary by one of the W

Midla nds’ Police Officers which will summarise,    factually and non adverserially, the

evidence of the witnesses.    We intend to present that summary to Court.



In order to help the legal representatives and the bereaved families, we intend to

circulate the summaries before the particular Inquest to enable comments regarding
inaccuracies or unclear statements,    to be made to me via legal representatives.       If it
is possible, we will either get the Summary Officer, who will be here and will be giving
evidence,   to elaborate on the particular point,   or I might decide it is possible to get a

witness to deal with that point, or we will read a w i t n e s s ’ statement by way of

documentary evidence on that point.     Under no circumstances are we going to call any S

Yorkshire Police Officer to the hearing.
                                             - 6 -


    The Officers will either themselves or possibly other W M i d l a n d s ’ Officers, will explain

    to me the identification procedures and I am expecting to make use of plans where they

    will indicate on the plan where a deceased was seen.       I do not intend to use the video in

    the Court and I am going to be very reluctant to look at either video stills or

    photographs.   Partly because it is logistically very difficult and partly because I d o n ’t

    think it is particularly helpful and because in many cases the photographs or video

    stills have already been seen by members of the family because they helped in locating

    and identifying some of the deceased.


#
    In summary, we want to have a limited Inquest, we want to present the evidence in a

    particular form and we d o n ’t want to do anything which could possibly be construed as

    impeding the DPP or could constitute an attack or criticism of any person or persons or

    corporate/incorporate body.


    Are there any questions?


    Mr Fraser - the only question which you may come t o ........... is the question of timing

    of the issuing of the summaries.     The logistics from our end would be,    as I anticipate

    it, the solicitors will want to go through those summaries in some detail with families,

    for those families who want to see them, and they will then have to report to yourself

    and to us and explain w hether or not they want to be here, what questions if any they
    have to put. Those questions will have to be notified to Mr J o n e s ’ Officers and answers

    found if they are available.     So the logistics of that may occupy some time.      Is it
    possible when the summaries are complete to give an indication of when they might be

    issued?



    I am well aware that the more time I give you,     the easier it is.    All I can say is that I

    have got to read them first,   but we will try and let you have them as soon as possible.

    Please bear in mind the limitations,    the summaries will be designed to give the factual
    evidence,   so you will know the names of the witnesses and you will know what they are

    saying with regard to that particular factual bit of evidence.
Mr Fraser - how far in terms of time do you anticipate the summaries will go,             to the

point of identification or beyond,    or not as far as that?



I would expect that they would go at least up to the temporary mortuary and possibly up

to the point of identification.     The identification in a sense will be dealt with at the
opening so we may well stop at that point.      The objective is to trace each individual
from the moment he left home to the point in time when he was in the temporary mortuary.

We may not succeed but that is the intention.      We feel that is what you want to know.



We will probably have available but I d o n ’t think we will circulate,        documents called

anna-cappas,   these are rather   nice summary charts which have clocks on them and         it is

easier from that to see where     certain events occurred.   There will be a      copy in Court on

the relevant day.


It would be unreasonable for people like Dr Forrest who did the blood alcohols,             to sit

here for every Inquest,   so what I intend to do is to ask Dr Forrest to come along on Day

1 and to prove formally to the Court, his evidence and to explain as far as is necessary,

the method used for the test.     We also want to have Inspector Leighton and may be one or

two others, who will explain the anna-cappas,     the codings,   etc.    I am also considering

asking probably Professor Usher to give an overview of the pathology of the type of

injury which occurred.


We are aiming to hold eight Inquests per day.      We want to have      enough time so that each

individual family can feel that their particular loved one has          been given full

consideration.    This means the duration is likely to be 2% to 3 weeks of sittings.

Clearly for each Inquest,   i t ’s a relatively short period of time but for me and the legal

representatives and for the Jury,    i t ’s weeks of stress and i t ’s not fair to them to make

this longer than it has to be.     But I d o n ’t intend to rush it,    they have to be as
thorough and sympathetic within the limits I have indicated to          you.   I want people to be

able to leave at the end of the day and be able to say, well we know we           h a v e n ’t heard all
the answers,   but we know more   than we did when we started.
                                          - 8 -

The Inquests will not be held in numerical or alphabetical order.           The listing of the

cases is a very difficult problem and      I d o n ’t think we have solved it.I had made up           my

mind that we were going to do them in      Pathologist order,    in a sense that is still the
order.    But in a few cases, more than    one person died in a family, and because of the way
their identifications were done and the way the post mortem was done,          it w a s n ’t always

the same Pathologist who dealt with family units.        For that reason alone, we will have to

break the general order because I d o n ’t want to deal with the same family on different

days.    There are other factors that come into play.



I appreciate that it may   be important to you, but the decision as to which order we are

going to take the cases is going to be mine and my Officers.          We will certainly not want
to inconvenience anybody deliberately,     I think it will be an     impossible task to try     and
take individual preferences   into account,   or if we do take them into account,        they would
come at the bottom of the list.      We are conscious of where people live and that        they have

to come a long way in many cases.



My initial intention was   to hold the limited Inquests,      assuming that we proceed, without

a Jury being present.    I have reflected on this and despite the fact that the Jury at

this stage will not have very much to do other than to listen,          I feel that we will have
to have a Jury present for each Inquest.      I think you should assume that we will be

dealing with a Jury.    Even if this were an Inquest     from start to finish,     an Inquest   is
not an adverserial procedure.     The job of the Jury    is   to reach a verdict   on theevidence

which they hear in the Court.



I intend,   assuming that we proceed,   holding the Inquests here at the Medico-Legal Centre.

I intend to arrange for the proceedings to be transcribed so that transcripts will be
available in a reasonable time.      I d o n ’t think there is any need for them to be available
on a next-day basis.    Of course,   they will have to   be paid for.



Do any of the lawyers think this is a non-starter?



Mr Fraser - in view of your opening remarks, we have had an opportunity to discuss these

proposals at some length and there is a general       ...... towards the idea and you are to

be commended for putting forward the suggestions you have.
                                              -<* -



    Are there any other legal representatives who have any other comments as to whether we

    should proceed on this basis?


    I am well aware that there is a Hillsborough Support Group and I want you to feel that I

    w o u l d n ’t do anything to harm or hinder your endeavours.   On the other hand,   I think we

    have got to have correct lines of communication.       Probably the right way of looking at

    this is to say the support groups are really family orientated.          I know that you have

    thought of other groups,    for example the Jury, who may need some support at some point in

    !;he future, but I am talking about the families now.       What I intend to do is, we will be
    listing hopefully when we anticipate the Inquests will be held and what we will probably
    do is give you a provisional date and try and confirm as soon as possible.           If somebody

    could be nominated from the Hillsborough Support Group,         I or my Officers would endeavour

    to inform you of the dates when a particular family will be involved.          Once we have done

    that, we would expect the solicitors to liaise with the Support Group.          The lines of

    communication should be through the solicitor rather than through the Coroner to relieve

    me of a certain amount of work.     It may well be if time allows that we will arrange for

    an informal meeting with the Hillsborough Support Group and          myself and maybe the
    Officers.   If a family is informed of the Inquest and they do not arrive, we will proceed

    with the Inquest.


    We will try to have refreshments available in the building.



    The press will be entitled to be present at these Inquests.           It is public    Court and they

    are entitled.




\

\
                                 •                                                                                                     •                                                                                                    •                                                                                                •




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        £J-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Mf j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -C l




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             OP'S?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             U-> <P u



  Government’s duty to put safety before identity
  FO O TB A LL l i often i i k t to tack firm           raise such a sum now seem s Irrelevant.                                                                                                                 tem pted to b e ra te o u r football authorl*     th a t fences killed Innocent people at
  lea d e rsh ip , but th is m k ' i em a n a tio n s   Surely every penny available to the game           P A T R I C K B A R C L A Y o n th e le a d in g q u e s tio n s after H illsborough                 ties for allowing decay to set In. I              H illsborough, m any feel the Poppksreli
  from ik w n li» | Street. » b r i t th e cotin*       should be Invested In safety, w hether In                                                                                                                  Anyway, when It comes to paying for            report, after th e B radford a n d Brussels
  t ry ’* m o il forceful leader since Chur*            th e form of seat*, or e x tra tu rn stile s, or   were enacted w ithout fu rth e r help from        of 2 ((i per cent would alm ost treble th at.      Lord Justice Taylor‘s Interim recommen*           d isasters, produced fragm ented legisla*
  chill a p p e a rs to have m ade the Fn<rtbaU         g rea te r n u m b ers of police to com pensate    th e G overnm ent, It would m ean post*               It Is not going to h a p p e n , say White*    datlon* in th e sum m er, the word is th a t      tinn, confusing local a u tho rities. Some
   S p e ctators Bill a higher p riority th a n         for th e rem oval of perim eter fences, or         p o nlng lots of little Jobs designed to p re ­   h a ll sources, because th e G ov ern m en t Is    the Crime M inister would prefer to re ­          Insisted on fences, others not. Well, hoo­
  Use reb u ild in g of grounds, suggest th a t         anyth in g else. The Football T rent, which        vent hooliganism a n d to foster lin ks be-       re lu c ta n t to relieve a tax on gam bling.      spond with a one-off g ran t to the T ru st of    liganism may be • m atter of choice; Mfety
  fnctU atlon Is not ilw s> s a h a d thing.            believes th e replacem ent of standing a r ­       tween clubs a n d th eir com m unities.           (The tax on h o rse-race betting, which            about ClOm. She would then be seen lo             h as to be put above th a t now.
      Setting aside the argum ents about the            eas with seals Is th e answ er, talks of a            If. on the o th er h and, this supposedly      seem s to me a f a r m ore seriou s, a n d oc­     care for spectators, albeit in the shorl             Only when T aylor h as *ald w hat la
  m erits of the Bill — and this is not a time          g rad u a l prog ram m e over two or three         tax-cutting ad m in istratio n were to re*        casionally h a rm fu l, form of gam bling          term . Coincidentally, the gam e’s a u th o ri­   needed, a n d th e m easure* have w histled
   for dogma; even those of u* who have op>             years. Hut do we really have to wait that          lieve the burd en of duty on pools com pa­        t h a n th e treble chance. Is m uch         se­   ties might feet obliged to co-operate more        th ro u g h , sh o u ld we a d d re ss th e second*
   posed it from the start should be th in k ­          long? And how Is th e o rd e r o f work a t        nies, the whole range of civilising things        vere, b u t th en h orse racin g Is th e estab*    fully with Ijidy Bountiful as she presses         a ry q u estio n o f identity c a rd s. T h e re Is,
   ing afresh after Hillsborough - It will              clubs to he decided? Alphabetically?               to which everyone is verbally comm itted          H shm ent “ s p o rt" in th is country a n d       ahead with h e r identity-card scheme.            a fte r all. a w idespread view t h a t they
   cos! a great deal of money to implem ent                1T»e T ru s t's e stim ate Is b a sed on fi­    (the easy bit) could be pul Into practice.        football less favoured th a n in Italy, tay,          To take the two together may neveiihe*         could be d a n g e ro u s In c ertain ! s itu a ­
, th e scheme? « p !« C4ftm over R*e years.             n an ce cu rre n tly available from th e           The 4«tv stand* at 43 »/* per rent. The           o r Spain: a point some |H*litiri»ns may           less hr hazardous. I hough safety and             tions. And th is tim e It would b e hjrtter t f .
       Dw question of wbHher fexHlwfi ran               pouts cwfcfm oks. If the p ro g ram m e             11 ost's budget is about Cl Ora A reduction      cure to p om ler th e nesl tiror they a re         hooliganism a re inextricably linked in           we h a d o u r h in d sig h t in advan<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1           r


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         X
    European code for safer football urged
       By Sarah Helm
  Home Affairs Correspondent
   A ^ K A L pro g ram m e of ticket
   s a l^ ^ f f tr o ls , club improvements
   and anti-ho o ligan m easures has
   t K j A p p o s e d for consideration
  h r ^ p t r o p f a n football clubs in
  a rep o rt com m issioned by Euro*
  pe*n sp o rts m inisters.
      The rep o rt, not yet published,
  includes p lan s fo r all-seat s ta d i­
  ums a n d education program m es
  for police, fans a n d authorities* It
  suggests th a t fans who cannot get
 tickets fo r an away gam e should
 be able to watch It live on large
 television screens a t th eir hom e
 stadium . It proposes family en*
 closures a n d m etal detectors and
 breathalysers a t turnstiles.
      The rep o rt h as been p rep ared
 by a com m ittee of governm ent of­
 ficials fro m 15 countries, set u p to
 m onitor the Euro p ean Conven­
 tion on Spectato r Violence and
 M isbehaviour a t Sports Events,
 drawn u p In th e wake of the
 Heysel d isa ster. The proposals
were settled two days before
 Hillsborough. They will go to
 Coiin M oynlhan. th e M inister for
 Sport, a n d his continental coun­
terp a rts In a few weeks.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             f!
     The re p o rt d irects many o f its
proposals to clubs, orging them
to take a fa r g rea te r role in safety
and to e n c o u ra g e fan s to feel im-
p o r l ^ f c o th e ciub. It tries to bal-
a n c ^ ^ p i c safety with the need
to su p p re ss hooliganism .
     E j f j ^ l u b should set u p a sera*
r i f t ^ ^ B n i t t e e a n d acknowledge
t h e ^ ^ ^ l t y of safety over profit,
the rep o rt says. It urges d u b s to
do m ore to encourage responsible
supporters*               clubs,   including
proper tra in in g of stew ards to li­
aise wtth local police.
     Some o f the recom m endations
ar * alread y in force in many clubs
and ibe rep o rt m akes clear th a t
no* all th e proposals would be
necessary in all clubs.
     (>n ticket sales th e report sug­
gests devising a system for check­                       Nearly a week after the disaster, the mourning continues al Anfleld. Liverpool supporters standing in front of the sea of fl<mer* and ciub colours tlmi now rovers t*
ing and tra c in g purch a se s o f tick­                third of the pitch a t the Kop end. Yesterday there was still a half-mile queue o f people stretching round the ground, bringing more flowers, scarves and messages.
ets. The n u m b er of tickets one
person c a n buy should he limited,
no tickets should sold on the day
a n d all-ticket m atches should he
sold well below capacity.
      O r safety the rep o rt says th at
                                                         Liverpool buries 18 Hillsborough
                                                                 disaster victims
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e rs o n c a rd s with black borders.
  there sh o u ld he ad eq u a te b a rr i­                      By Christian Wolmar                                                                                                                                                M any a r c personal, as the barriers
  er*, grilles, fencing and tu n n els to                                                                                                                                                                                           o f t h e K<»p h a v e b e e n t u r n e d i n t o
  se«regate s u p p o rte rs and p ro ie d               L .! V f ; R P O ( )t wa s bury in g its                                                                                                                                   little s h r i n e s l o r i n d i v id u a l s u p ­
  players a n d officials. But it adds                   d e a d v e s t c rd a v f f ghte cn fu n e ra l s       to g o t o last S a t u r d a y ' s m a t c h . b ut    t o p . t o l d t h e c o n g r e g a t i o n o f WX)     p o r t e r s w h o lost t h e i r lives.
  that a sufficient space between                        t o o k pl a c e a r o u n d Mcr *cv sfd c               w i t h face s well m k e e p i n g wi th t h r         h o w M r M c A ll i s t e r h a d d i e d t r y ­             H o w e v e r , a g r o w in g n u m b e r
 pit ch a n d sta n d s is desirable, for                and          the        Roman           C at h o l i c   s o l e m n i t y a n d dig ni ty o t t h e oce a-      ing t o r e s c u e a f r i e n d w h o was               a r e an gr y, ra i li n g at t h e po l i c e anti
 safety reaso n s.                                       A r c h b i s h o p o f I iv c r p o o l. th e           sion. As wi th m a n y ol t h e i r t e n               t r a p p e d m t h e cr ow d.                            the m edia. O n e . p o ste d p ro m i­
     Ml e x i t s s h o u l d h e c a p a b l e o f      M o s t R e v D e r e k W o r l o c k . ts iluc          r r a t i o n ac ro ss i h e citv. ti ns w e ek               A m o n g t h e o t h e r f u n e r a l s held      n e n t l y next t o w h e r e a p o l i c e ­
bein g o p e n e d in a n e m e r g e n r y              t o a t t e n d a s c o r e m o r e in t h e next        ha s a g e d t h e m                                    veste ula v w ere those o f th e se c ­                   w o m a n w a s s t a n d i n g , a p p e a r e d to
fro m t h e in s i d e . T h e r e p o r t c r i t i ­   t h r e e days.                                               T h e family a n d fr ie n d s h a d               o n d y o u n g e s t p e r s o n t o d i e at            b e a m e s s a g e f r o m R v c r t o n fan s
c i s e s ^ ^ k i n g of e x i t s — even wh«-n                A m o n g t h o s r b u r i e d y e s t e rd a y   s h o w n i h e it lo%"i Itv t o t h e g;'.mc           I ii il s h o ro t t e h . I ‘l-vc a r- o l d Ph ili p    a d d ressed to th e C h ie f C onsta ble
a                 w i t h a key is p re s e n t .        w e r e tw o b ro t h e r s . C h r t s i o p h r r      s n d t o t he el nh r*v havi ng m a m of               l l . i m i n o n d . a n d t h e ol d e s t .            of S outh Y orkshire, w h o se laches
     l * ^ ^ ^ m em bership s c h e m a                  a n d M a r ti n T r a v n o r o f H i rk r n            t h e w r e a t h s ov ule in s h a p e s ^ n h         v r a i ol d ( i e r a l d H a ro n                       at H i l l s b o r o u g h h a v e b e e n v>
should be considered.                                    h e a d ( h n s i o p h c ' , . > . » a s y mur          fo ot ba ll t h e m e s t h e r e w v r loot                  W h i l e t h e b u ri a ls w e r e ta k i n g      h a r s h ly q u e s t i o n e d It r e a d " Y o u
    I j j ^ ^ s h n u f r i h e co n t r o l* o n th e   t i r o m a n w«(h two c hil dre n. :t                   '•alls a n d shici.N, a n d tlu* r o o t ol             p m ce , t h e s h r i n e at A n f ie h l co n           a r e d i e red s, w r a r e t h e bh i c s . w '
s i / ^ ^ ^ B u s e of m u s i c a l i n s t m *         l o u i e r hy tr»«ic M a n m . i '\ sliil               ‘•nr h ea rs e w-ts e o t i r ^ r . d e c k e d         t i n n e d ' o grow ’r e s t r r d a v a lt er           aH know rh c t r u t h . Hut P e t e r
                    sl o g an * nn b a n n e r s .       l i ve d wi th his pa r ei vs . R o t h n ro t h         * ’th t e d Howe^s, (ho c o l o u r s of                n o o n ti tcr e wa> stt!l                 ha lf -n nic   W r i g h t , d o vo n'7"
     Fo r       in tern a tio n a l         matches      c r s h a d b e e n too tb aU -in a d.                   she b r o t h e r s ' t e a m                           q u e u e of p e o p l e s t r e t c h i n g r o u n d         T o d a y tn L i v e r p o o l at exactlv
tra ining sh o u ld be                                         M o re than                   peopio         -          l .a t c t . *1' liH-tTicti f o r m e d a          th e g r o u n d , bri n g i n g He                       six m i n u t e s p a s t t h r e e t h e e n t i r e
pobrc to discu ss h o * to -                             a m o n g ( h e m t h e L iv er pool p»av                g u a r d of h o n o u r t o n h r m n c r .it o f      s e a t v e s t o a d d to t h e                          city will c o m e t o a ha lt , t r a f h e i n ­
a n d h e l p v i s i ti n g shj                         c r s Ian R u s h a n d Ian Mo lh v                      E r a n n s M cA li 's t cr .        n l.ondon          m a s s t h a t n o w t a k e s u p a t h i r d nr        c l u d e d . f o r o n e r a r e m o m e n t o f si
    H u b s should const                                 p a r k e d t h e s m alt re d bric k St .hi                                                                     th*- pit ch.                                              leticc a m i d t h e a n g e r.
o n t h e p o r t r a y a l of                           s c p h s ( h u rc h ar v 1 cl o g g r tt *bc            pool and ro in c d e n ta ily had                              ■V well as t h e flo we rs, th e                    A m a te u r film of d is a s te r , page
Thn, sh o u ld also tal                                                                         M an y of         t ot lo ur v e a rs m S h r f f ie i d                                   di e t e d d \ b e a r s , t h e po                       t r a i l i n g a r t i c l e , p a g e IS
line a g a i n s t c h e a t i n g an '                                                                               I t P .tt rtr k O 'S u l li v a n . t h e r a r -              a n d the m e m e n t o * . t h e r e a r r                   P r i s o n e r s o f w a r , p a g e .'1
on t h r fie ld , e n s u r i n g tl                                                              tVJV"    of     ish prie st -if V M a t a a r f ! M a r v ’s                     is a m b of m essages, some                                      P a t r i c k B a r c l a y , p a g e 59
official* a r e o p to t h e ts                                                                                   H o m a n * athpSn ( hwr rh in Hu y                              t e n o n c a r d b o a r d l»oxcs. o t h ­                         l !KFA g e s t u r e , p a g e #*0
                                                                                        ■   .



                            p ic
                            ^           e£>


                                                                                HPd
        Should our                                                                C K




       safety always
        come first? 9f4's,
         J a n e t Radcliffe R ic h a rd s a r g u e s
        t h a t too m a n y r e s tr a in ts a r e n o t
        n e c e ssa rily in th e public in te r e s t
             HEN the Hillsborough        to imagine what the safest pos­
  W          disaster struck last
             week, we all felt we
   should move heaven and earth
   to make sure such 3 thing never
                                         sible life wouid be like, but it is
                                         equally hard to imagine that it
                                        could be worth living.
                                          . Obviously, then, communities
   happened again. If the public         must make decisions of a simi­
   inquiry makes safety reconv           lar sort. I remember being told
   meadations of sweeping and           20 years ago that some Govern­
   extensive kinds we shaii proba­      ment department ^probably
   bly respond as we did to the cail     Transport valued a human life
   for smoke aoods in aircraft and       at £80.000. This meant that a
   metal escalators on the under­       p e d estrian bridge co stin g
   ground. and say that we must         £30.000 could be built if it would
   make these changes oo matter          be likely to save a life a year, but
   how much they cost. Siace life is    if it wouid cost more, it had to
   priceless, we cannot rok it just     save more.
   to save money.                           We must decide how much we
     Now of course, if the 95           want to pay for making our­
  people who died last Saturday         selves safe, in terms both of
   had been trapped in a mice with      money we might spend on other
  rising water, every imaginable        things and of personal freedom.
  effort would have been put into       We could make ourselves much
  saving them. No-one would             safer if we spent nothing on the
  have thought ot me cost. But          Arts or national parks, or
  even so that does not suggest         imposed an eight o'clock curfew
  that it would have been right to      and made it illegal for anyone
  put iimitless money and effort        under 40 to nde a motorbike,
  into removing ia advance any          but most people would say such
  risk of their being killed.           costs were far too high for the
     The point is illustrated more      gain in safety.
  clearly in an individual case, if         When we bear the results of
  your daughter had been kid­           inquiries into disasters we may
  napped. and you reaily believed       feel that the only way to express
  she would be                                              our sympathies
  k ille d unless                                           adequately is to
  you paid a mas*                                           talk ot unlim­
  sive ransom,                                              ited efforts to
  you wouid prob-         We mustdecide                     prevent such
  ably give ail you                                         things in future;
  had to save her
  life, and do
                          how much we                       but really we
                                                           should u nder­
  n othing eise            wanttopay                        stand that since
  until you had                                             we cannot save
  re s cu e d her.         formaking                       the people who
  But you would           ourselvessafe                    have died, the
  not go to any­                                           question now is
  thing like the                                           one of risk. We
  same effort to                                           need to ask not
  save her from                                            just how foot-
  every possible                                           ball stadiums
  :ho n ce of death, because if you     can be made safer, but also how
  spent all your money on safety        much safer each measure would
  harnesses, fire alarms and            make them, and wnat the cost —
  escape ladders she would have         not only m money, but in chang­
  no toys or books or holidays.         ing to other things that are val­
     .M some point you would            ued-* would be
  decide that enough had been               Some changes may be cheap
  spent on safety, and that other       and uncomplicated (it is a great
  things mattered more than             relief to see those dreadful
  increasing it still further. You      cages going) but others may not.
  would refrain from making her         Those will need much thought,
  safer, in other words, to save        whether the eventual cost is to
  money — because the money             be borne by all of us, or just by
  could provide her with other          the soccer establishment
  things.                                   Whoever bears »t, and what­
     There are also other costs, not    ever principles we decide to use
  connected with money, that par­       to determine the value and
  ents will not meet (or safety.        safety, it will be wrong to pay
  Good parents take great care of       massive amounts for marginal
  their children, but do not gener­     increases in safety at the cost of
  ally stop them from chmbinjf          what those principles say ts
  trees or riding bikes or. eventu­     more important.
  ally, going out alone. Those              The fans may have to decide
  activities can be dangerous, but      whether they would rather run
  the cost of forbidding them is        greater nsks than lose their ter­
! too great.                            races or pay higher entrance
     Much the same happens with         fees.
: individuals' decisions about              If that is what they prefer <and
  their own lives. We take reason­      if we have no otner reason to
  able care over our own safety,        object to terraces), then per­
  but no-one feels that every           haps they should be allowed to
  penny and every ounce of effort       take the nsks. as with any other
  should go mto making life as          dangerous sport After all. the
  sate as possible. Some of us may      saisst thing would be to abolish
  stop short -)f hang-gliding or         fxcer altogether
  caving, but w? still drr.e to visit       Life is not wortn protecting at
  friends in spite of a real danger     the cost of -shat manes it most
  of death on me roads. It is hard      worth living.
                                                   KEEBLE HAWSON
                                                                    S O L IC I T O R S
                                                   In c o rp o r a tin g B ra n s o n B r a m le y & Co.

  A. H. GREGORY            N.
                           G.
                                T . HAWSON
                                CONNELL
                                                                                                           OLD CATHEDRAL VICARAGE,
  C. J. PRYCE
  P. A . SEALEY            A.   J. COOMBE
  K. L. WEBSTER            C.   M . M . A YRE                                                                       ST.JAMES' ROW,
  M . A. PLATT

                                                                                                                             SHEFFIELD,
  Consultant:
  A . H. CONNELL
                                                                                                                                      S1 1XA.
                   The Clerk to :                                                                          TELEPHONE 0742-722061
                   Mr. M.J.A. Murphy,
                   Barrister at Law                                                                        MDX NO. 10537

                   Counsel's Chambers                                                                      FAX NO. 0742 - 700813

                   12 Paradise Square                                                                      FAX NO. 0742 - 750243
                   SHEFFIELD 1.
                                                                                                           9th May,           1989

  OUR REF:                                      YOUR REF:                                                  W H EN YOU TELEPHONE OR CALL PLEASE ASK FOR:

AHG/AG/HILLSBOROUGH                                                                                            Mr. Gregory




                   Dear Sir,

                   Hillsborough Inquiry - Sheffield City Council

                   We enclose copy letter received from the Treasury Solicitor
                   for Mr. Murphy's attention.

                   Yours faithfully,




                   KEEBLE EKkWSON


                                                                                              nn PfrM.n'
                                                                           pj-
                                                                                                                   ;i
                                                                                                                  i\\


                                                                           09* '




                         THE FIRM IS REGULATED BY THE LAW SOCIETY IN THE CONDUCT OF INVESTMENT BUSINESS
                     THE TREASURY SOLICITOR
                    Q u e e n A n n e ’s C h a m b e r s
                    28 B roadw ay L o n d o n SW 1H 9JS
                    Telephones Direct Line 01*210 2 1 0 9
                                 Switchboard 01-210 3000
                     Telex 917564       GTN 210
                     Fax No. 01-222 6006 - 210-3488
                     DX No. 2318 Victoria
M essrs K e e b le H aw so n s                                                                  P l m e quote
7 St Jam es Row                                                                                 L 8 9 /2 1 1 7
S h e ffield                                                                                    Your reference
SI 1XA
                                                                                                 Date
F o r t h e a t t e n t i o n o f M iss G r e g o r y / M i s s A y r e                         9 M ay 1989




                                                       BY FAX AND LETTER




H IL L S B O R O U G H IN Q U IR Y - S H E F F IE L D C IT Y C O U N C IL


Y o u w il l r e c a l l t h a t a t t h e p r e - i n q u i r y m e e t i n g o n 2 8 t h A p r i l L o r d J u s t i c e T a y l o r
in d ic a te d t h a t a n y bo d y a g a in s t w hom a n y a lle g a tio n s w as t o b e m a d e w o u ld b e
in fo rm e d of it an d t h e s u b s ta n c e of th e e v id e n c e s u p p o rtin g it

Y o u w i l l a p p r e c i a t e t h a t t h e t a s k o f a s s e m b l i n g t h e e v i d e n c e f o r t h e I n q u i r y is a
fo rm id a b le one a n d s ta t e m e n ts a r e still b e in g ta k e n . H o w e v e r, it s e e m e d rig h t to le t
you h a v e w h a t m u s t b e a p re lim in a ry in d ic a tio n o f c r itic is m s w h ich m a y b e le v e lle d a t
th e C ity C o u n c il, as th e lo c a l a u th o r ity re s p o n s ib le fo r t h e s a f e ty c e r t i f i c a t e s u n d e r
th e S a f e ty o f S p o rts G ro u n d s A c t, 1975, a s so o n a s p o ssib le b e f o r e t h e c o m m e n c e m e n t
o f t h e In q u iry .

T h e fo llo w in g a r e t h e m a in c r itic is m s w h ic h so f a r a p p e a r f ro m t h e e v id e n c e a v a ila b ie :-

1.         T h e p e n s on th e t e r r a c e s a t th e L ep p in g s L a n e e n d o f th e g ro u n d c o n s t i t u t e d a
           p o te n tia l d a n g e r if cio w tlcU .    T h e m ed iis o f e g re s s o n to tn e p itc h w e re
           in a d e q u a te a n d you sh o u ld h a v e in s is te d t h a t t h e r e w e r e m o r e g a te s , t h a t th e y
           w e r e p ro p e rly sig n e d , t h a t th e r e w e re m e a n s o f a c c e s s l a t e r a l l y b e tw e e n th e
           pens, ag a in p ro p e rly m a rk e d , and th a t a ll g a n g w a y s w e re p ro p e rly m a rk e d .

2.         T h e d i r e c t i o n a l sig n s w e r e i n a d e q u a t e , so t h a t t h o s e e n t e r i n g w e r e n e c e s s a r i l y
           c h a n n e lle d to th e tu n n e l le a d in g to th e c e n tr a l tw o p en s.

3.         T he c ru sh b a r r ie r s w ith in th e pen s w e re n o t p ro p e rly p o sitio n e d an d o n e a t le a s t
           w as o f in su ffic ie n t s tre n g th .

4.         T h e tu n n e l g iv in g a c c e s s to th e t e r r a c e w as n o t o f a c o n s t a n t g r a d ie n t b u t
           slo p ed s te e p ly a t t h e t e r r a c e e n d : th is w a s p o t e n t i a l l y h a z a r d o u s if a la r g e
           crow d c a m e dow n th e tu n n e l.
4




        5.        T h e w a ll a t th e tu r n s tile s w a s n o t a d e q u a t e to p r e v e n t p e rs o n s c lim b in g in to t h e
                  g round.

        6.        A c c e s s b y a m b u la n c e s o r f ir e e n g in e s to th e p la y in g a r e a an d th e su rro u n d w a s
                  n o t a d e q u a te ly p ro v id e d fo r. F u r th e r m o r e , th e p ro v isio n o f f ir s t- a id e q u ip m e n t
                  w as in su ffic ie n t.

        S h o u ld a n y f u r t h e r m a t t e r s d e s e r v i n g o f c r i t i c i s m c o m e t o o u r a t t e n t i o n , w e w ill o f
    '              c              o            u              r            s                e         '




                                                                                          £r%.      juj




                                                                D A V ID B R U M M E L L
                                                         A s s is ta n t T re a s u ry S o lic ito r




                                                                              2.
               With the C o m p li m e n t s                i
                             of     l(4o'J
                     G2 DIVISION



 :f i c e                                         Si
d Emergency P l a n n i n g Dept                    ^
.nne's Gate
N SW1H 9AT

.-2 1 3
                                           Nik* -       *2
                     k^l                   jc*t
                   eJsasA*             ^                »*5
                                  Vo                    ^
SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 - INFORMATION
1      It Is Important to know all the provisions of the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975, which are relevant to stadia within its scope. These are
explained, without legal force, in the booklet 'Guide to Safety at Sports
Grounds - Football', obtainable from Her Majesty's Stationery Office. The
following points are particularly important but reference should be made to
the Act itself for authoritative information.
2     Right of Entry and Inspection
Section 11 of the Act gives to authorised officers the power to enter and
inspect a sports ground and to make any inquiries as are considered necessary
for the purposes of the Act. Authorised officers also have power to examine
records of attendance at the ground and records relating to the maintenance of
safety at the ground.
3     Alterations and Extensions
Section 8 of the Act requires notice to be given to the Council before work is
begun of any proposed alteration or extension to the stadium.
4     Offences and Penalties
For the following offences, that is to say:
(a)   Contravening any term or condition of this certificate, admitting
spectators to the Stadium at a time when a safety certificate is not in force
or in contravention of a Court Order, the penalty is, on summary conviction, a
fine not exceeding 12,000 or, on conviction on indictment, a fine or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years, or both.
(b)    Failing to give notice of an alteration or extension to the Stadium or
obstructing an authorised officer, the penalty is on summary conviction, a
fine not exceeding £ 2 ,000 .




                                         1                385/0246K/PH(8>
                                                        No. of Certificate 007
                               GREATER LONDON COUNCIL
                        SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975
                            GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE
A.   Address of the stadium for which            CHELSEA FOOTBALL CLUB
      this Certificate is issued                 STAMFORD BRIDGE GROUNDS
                                                 FULHAM ROAD, LONDON SW 6 1HS
B.   Identification of stadium:                   AS SHOWN ON CERTIFICATE PLANS
                                                 NOS 1-13 WHICH PLANS FORM PART
                                                 OF THIS CERTIFICATE
C.   Occupier of the stadium                     CHELSEA FOOTBALL AND
                                                  ATHLETIC CLUB LTD.
D.   Applicant for and person to whom the      CHELSEA FOOTBALL AND
      Certificate is issued ('the Holder')      ATHLETIC CLUB LTD.
      being a qualified person as determined
      by the Council pursuant to Section 3(1
      of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
1.   In exercise of the powers conferred by the Safety of Sports Grounds Act
      1975 and all other enabling powers, the Greater London Council hereby
      issues to the holder a replacement General Safety Certificate in respect
      of the stadium described above being a stadium designated by Order of the
      Secretary of State as a sports stadium requiring a safety certificate.
2.   The use of the stadium for the activities specified in Schedule 6 to this
      certificate is subject to the terms and conditions set out in Schedules
      1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 to this certificate which shall be complied with to the
      satisfaction of the Council.
3.   The maximum number of spectators that may be admitted at any one time to
      the stadium and to each part thereof shall be as shown in Schedule 3 to
      this certificate.
4.   The words used in the certificate and the schedules attached hereto shall
      have the meaning assigned to them under Section 17 of the Act of 1975 and
      Schedule 1 to this Certificate.
5.   The schedules and plans attached all form part of this certificate.
6.   The previous Certificate effective from 1 August 1979 is cancelled and
      replaced by this Certificate with effect from 14 March 1986.


                                          erk to the Council
                                        (The officer appointed for this purpose)

THE COUNTY HALL
LONDON
SE1 7PB

                                            2                385/0246K/PH(8)
J                                 LIST OF SCHEDULES ATTACHED TO
                                     AND FORMING PART OF THE
                                   GENERAL SAfETY CERTIFICATE
i
J    SCHEDULE 1     DEFINITIONS


J    SCHEDULE 2     GENERAL CONDITIONS OF THE CERTIFICATE

     SCHEDULE 3     DETAILS OF ACCOMMODATION LIMITS FOR PARTS OF THE
j                   STADIUM


j    SCHEDULE 4     FIRE APPLIANCES AND TRAINING

     SCHEDULE 5     TEST OR PROOF LOADS
J
     SCHEDULE   6   ACTIVITIES COVERED BY THE CERTIFICATE
]#   SCHEDULE 7     LIST OF PLANS

J
J
J
1
J.
J
J
J
J
J
                                                                  385/0246K/PH(8>
3
3                                                             SCHEDULE 1

      STANDARD TERMS USED IN THIS CERTIFICATE'
I     ’the A c t ’                      means the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975;

3     'the holder'                      means the applicant for and the person to
                                        whom the General Safety Certificate has been
                                        issued and who Is a 'qualified person' for
3     'the Council'
                                        the purposes of the Act;
                                        means the Greater London Council;

3     'specified activity'              means any of the activities mentioned in
                                        Schedule 6 ;

3     ‘the Police Superintendent'       means the Chief Superintendent of Police
                                        commanding the division in which the Stadium
                                        is located, or his designated deputy;
J     'the plans'                       means the document or documents attached to
                                        this certificate marked 'plans referred to in
                                        the General Safety Certificate' and includes
] •                                     any other document or documents which may be
                                        added to such document or documents;

3     'the stadium'                     means the whole area edged in red on the
                                        plans;
      'fire protective boarding'        means a board or composite sheet material
3                                       approved for this purpose by the Council.
                                        The following boards or composite sheet
3                                       materials are currently approved for use in
                                        the situations referred to, based on fire
                                        tests carried out so far:
                                        To ceilings and soffits
                                        14mm Alphapan
                                        14mm Alphire
                                         6mm Durasteel 3DF2
                                        12.5mm Fireline
3                                        6mm Master board
                                         6mm Supalux
                                         6mm Tacboard
                                         6mm Tacfire
3                                       20mm Vicuclad
                                        To doors
3                                       Where the board protection if permitted to be
                                        in the door panels only:
]                                        6mm
                                         6mm
                                               Supalux
                                               Tacfire
]
                                                 4                385/0246K/PH(8)
)•
    ]                          Where panelled doors are required to be
                               protected all over:

    1                           6mm Supalux
                                6mm Tacboard
                                6mm Tacfire
    1                           6mm Masterboard on both sides of the door
                               Instead of the risk side only, with Palusol
                               intumescent strips in the head of the door,
]                              and the lock and hinge stiles.
                               Where flush doors are required to be
3                              protected all over:
                                6mm Supalux
                                6mm Tacfire
]                               6mm Masterboard on both sides, with
                               intumescent strips all as described for
                               panelled doors above.
3                              To partitions
                                6mm   Masterboard
1       *                       6mm   Supalux
                                6mm   Tacboard
                                6mm   Tacfire
1           'fire-resisting'   means the construction is capable of
                               resisting the action of fire for not less
J                              than half an hour in accordance with the
                               conditions of test of BS 476 current at the
                               date of this certificate, and where the
                               construction incorporates a door:
3                              (a) the door if tested in accordance with
                               the prescribed conditions o £ the
                               above-mentioned British Standard 476 would
3                              satisfy the requirements of the test when
                               fitted in the frame as to stability for not
                               less than half-an-hour and integrity for not
1                              less than twenty minutes but with no minimum
J 9                            period as to Insulation, and the door:-

3                                (1)     is maintained effectively
                                         self-closing, unless the door is to
                                         a duct, shaft or cupboard when,
]                                        alternatively, it may be kept
                                         locked shut and provided with a
                                         notice to that effect, and the door
                                         is kept free from any means of
3                                        being held in an open position;
                               (ii)      is close fitting to both frame and
]                                        the floor and, where there are two
                                         leaves, between the leaves;

]
                                                        3 8 5 / 0246K/PH <8)
]•
       (iii)        Is hung on hinges no part of which
                    Is made either of combustible
                    material or of non-combustible
                    material having a melting point
                    less than 800°C; and
        (iv)        Is permanently marked 'FIRE DOOR
                    KEEP SHUT'.   This notice may be
                    within a diamond shaped sign.
    (b) the door frame Is of solid timber or
    metal (not aluminium or aluminium alloy)
    with rebates or door stops not less than
    25 mm deep, the door stops having a width at
    right angles to the face of the door,
    excluding any projection beyond the frame,
    of not less than 30 mm and, if planted door
    stops are used, the door stops being
    pre-drilled and fixed by 38 mm x No. 10 s.g.
    screws at approximately 230 mm centres.
NOTE: Hhere existing construction is protected
to the satisfaction of the Council in the
following r e s pects:-
 (i)      Ceilings and soffits where protected
          with either:
          (a)       plasterboard closely butted and
                    securely nailed to joists; or
          (b)       lath and plaster in sound
                    condition; or
          (c)       'fire-protective boarding' securely
                    nailed or, in the case of
                    Durasteel, screwed to joists, the
                    joints between sheets closely
                    butted and where not supported by
                    joists, securely nailed (or, in the
                    case of Duras t e e l , screwed) to
                    nogging pieces or sealed by cover
                    f i 1l e t s ;
( ii)     partitions where either covered on the
          risk side(s) with:
          (a)       plasterboard or 'fire-protective
                    boarding'with the sheets closely
                    butted together and securely nailed
                    in position and with any sunk
                    panels in such partitions first
                    made flush with timber of
                    'fire-protective boarding', or
          (b)       finished with lath and plaster in
                    sound condition

                6                  385 / 0 2 46 K/ PH< 8 )
                                   C111)    doors where protected on the side remote
                                            from the escape route:
                                            (a)       for 44 mm (IX”) panelled doors, by
                                                      covering the panels with
                                                      fire-protective boarding securely
                                                      screwed or nailed into the stiles,
                                                      rails and muntins;
                                            (b)       for panelled doors between 38 mm
                                                      (IX”) and 44 mm (IX") in thickness,
                                                      by filling the panels flush with
                                                      solid wood or layers of
                                                      fire-protective boarding and
                                                      covering the whole door with
                                                      boarding as in (a);
                                           (c)        for flush doors not less than 38 mm
                                                      (IX") in thickness, by covering the
                                                      whole door with boarding as in (a),
                                           then this construction is accepted for
                                           the purpose of the definition;
'non-combustible'              -      means material capable of being classified
                                      as non-combustible if subjected to the test
                                      for non-combustibility prescribed in British
                                      Standard 476 current at the date of this
                                      certifi cate;
'surface spread of flame              means the division into classes of building
classification'                       materials according to the rate at which
                                      flame spreads over their surfaces as
                                      determined by BS 476 current at the date of
                                      this certificate;
'elements to be load tested'          means crush barriers, guard rails, hand
                                      rails, balustrading, railings, fences,
                                      protection to open wells, walls and pitch
                                      perimeter fe n c e s ;
'maintained escape lighting'   -      means a lighting system in which all escape
                                      lighting lamps are in operation at all
                                      material times;
'non-maintained escape lighting'      -    means a lighting system in which all
                                           escape lighting lamps are in operation
                                           only when the normal lighting fails.




                                                  7                 385/0246K/PH(8)
                                                              SCHEDULE 2

GENERAL CONDITIONS

Management
1.   m      holder   shall:
     (a)      subject to Condition 2 of this schedule, retain control over the
              whole of each part of the stadium at all times when the stadium Is
              In use for a specified activity;
     (b)      take all necessary precautions for the reasonable safety of
              spectators admitted to the stadium;
     (c)      before and after each occasion when the stadium is used for a
              specified activity:
            (1)      inspect the stadium and shall pay particular attention to the
                      condition of each terrace, viewing slope and stairway and
                     means of access for emergency vehicles;
           (ii)      examine each crush barrier and balustrade for deformation or
                     any other patent weakness; and
         (iii)       remove and dispose of all rubbish and combustible waste and
                     clear each exit, staircase, exit route, boiler room,
                     electrical intake room, void, lift lobby and means of access
                     for emergency vehicles of goods, litter, combustible or
                     flammable material and other obstruction;
     (d)     ensure that all buildings, structures, components and installations
             referred to in this certificate are at all times maintained in such
             condition as to fulfil safely their required functions, and when
             required by the council a certificate to that effect shall be
             submitted by a competent person acceptable to the council; and
     <e)     see that a detailed inspection of the ground including all
             buildings, structures, components and installations, is carried out
             annually to ensure compliance with the conditions of this
             certificate.
2.   The holder shall nominate in writing a responsible person who shall be in
     charge of, and upon, the stadium during the whole time it is in use for a
     specified activity.   If the holder is a limited company any responsible
     person nominated as above shall be a duly authorised officer of the
     company.   Such written nomination shall be continuously available for
     inspection by the Council's officers.   The nominated person shall not be
     engaged on any duties which will prevent him from exercising general
     supervision of the stadium.
3.   The holder shall arrange for the carrying out of each test detailed in
     this schedule, and make the results of such tests available for
     inspection by the Council's officers at all reasonable times.




                                              8               385/0246K/PH(8)
Itcords
4.   The holder shall keep the following records which shall be made available
     for inspection by the Council's officers at all reasonable times:
            (i)    A record of the number of spectators admitted to the stadium
                   for a specified activity, and to each part of the stadium
                   referred to in Schedule 3.
          <ii)     A record of any accident or incident which causes injury,
                   other than a playing injury, which is brought to the notice
                   of the holder and which occurs whilst the Stadium is in use
                   for a specified activity.
      (iii)        A record of each maintenance inspection carried out at the
                   stadium to ensure compliance with 1(d) hereof and of each
                   inspection under 1(c) and 1(e) hereof.
          (iv)      A record of any defect relating to the safety of the stadium
                   howsoever discovered including a record of the time when such
                   defect has been remedied.
           (v)      A record of tests of the escape lighting generator and prime
                   mover (where provided) as specified in paragraph 9 of this
                   Schedule.
          (vi)     A record of tests of the batteries (where provided) as
                   specified in paragraph 10 of this Schedule.
      (vii)         A record of tests of the public address system as specified
                   in paragraph 12 of this Schedule and 2(iv) of Schedule 4.
     (viii)         A record of tests of the fire telephone system as specified
                   in paragraph 2 ( 1 v) of Schedule 4.
          (ix)      A record of tests of the sprinkler system as specified in
                   paragraph 3(n) of Schedule 4.
           (x)      A record of tests o f the manual electrical fire alarm system
                   as specified in paragraph 2(iv) of Schedule 4.
          (x i )   A record of tests of the hydraulic hose reel system within
                   the main stand as specified in paragraph 3(j) of Schedule 4.
      (xii)        A record of tests of hand fire appliances as specified in
                   paragraph 3(m) of Schedule 4.
     (xiii)        A record of the names of stewards on duty at each event and
                   the positions allocated to them within the ground as
                   specified in 25(a) of this Schedule.
      (xiv)        A record of details of each training session, drill and
                   pre-match briefing given to staff and stewards as specified
                   in paragraph 25(e) of this Schedule and paragraphs 5 and 6 of
                   Schedule 4.



                                            9                385/0246K/PH(8)
 Structural Safety
 5    (a)   Each element to be load tested, as defined in Schedule 1 shall be
            tested as required by the Council, for strength, condition and
            durability. Each element listed in Schedule 5 shall be tested to
            the loads specified therein. Each test shall be carried out by a
            suitably qualified person at five yearly intervals or at such
            intervals as the Council may require, and a satisfactory
            certificate to this effect shall be submitted not later than three
            months before the expiry date of the current certificate. The
            number and situation of each element to be load tested shown on the
            attached plan shall be retained and such elements shall be
            maintained to the strength to withstand the proof loads specified
            by the Council in Schedule 5.
      (b)   A certificate o f satisfactory strength, stability and state of
            maintenance of all buildings, structures, components and
            installations, other than elements to be load tested shall be
            submitted at intervals not exceeding three years and not later than
            three months before the expiry date of the current certificate. The
            certificate shall be signed by a competent person acceptable to the
            Council and shall list and identify specifically the items to which
            it refers and confirm that they are in such condition as to perform
            safely their required functions for three years from the date of
            the certificate.
     Electrical and Heating Installations
6.   The electrical installation for the premises shall be maintained in
      accordance with the Regulations for Electrical Installations published by
      the Institution of Electrical Engineers.
     An inspection certificate in the form prescribed in the current edition
     of the Regulations for Electrical Installations issued by the Institution
     of Electrical Engineers shall be submitted to the Council once in every
     five years not later than three months before the expiry date of the
     current certificate, or at such other time as is specified on the current
     certificate.   The certificate shall state that the installation is in a
     safe working condition and shall be signed by a competent person who
     should preferably be one of the following:-
            a professionally qualified electrical engineer,
            a member of the Electrical Contractors' Association
            a member of the Electrical Contractors' Association of Scotland,
            an approved Contractor of the National Inspection Council for
            Electrical Installation Contracting, or a qualified person acting
            on behalf of one of the above (in which event it must be stated for
            whom he is acting).
7.   In the absence of daylight, normal lighting (sometimes referred to as
      'artificial' or 'general' lighting) shall be maintained to each stairway,
     gangway and circulation area of a sufficient standard to enable persons
      to leave the stadium safely.




                                            10             385/0246K/PH(8)
    1



    1
             8.    When spectators are In the stadium the non-malntalned escape lighting
                   system shall be available to Illuminate the public areas accessible to
                   spectators in the event of a failure of the main electricity supply, or
    I              alternatively maintained escape lighting shall be kept illuminated when
                   daylight Is inadequate for escape purposes.

3           9.    The escape lighting generator and prime mover, where provided, shall be
                  tested at frequent intervals and in any case within the 7 days
                  Immediately preceding any specified activity under simulated mains
3                 failure conditions and on full load for approximately one hour.    The
                  results of such tests shall be recorded in a log kept on the premises,
                  which shall be available on request to authorised officers of the
]                 Council.   A certificate by a competent engineer, to the effect that the
                  prime mover, generator and control gear is in efficient working order,
                  shall be submitted to the Council at least once in every 12 months.

3           10.   At least once in every year a properly certified report as to the
                  condition of the escape lighting batteries, where provided, including
        !         details of the examination and, where appropriate, the battery tests,
                  shall be submitted to the Council.
3
            11    Where self-contained battery-operated escape luminaires are installed,
                  the certificate shall state that each luminaire has been energised from
f                 its battery for the rated discharge duration.
            12.   The fire telephones and public address system and the fire alarm system
3                 installed in the main stand shall be maintained in effective working
                  order and shall be tested not more than 48 hours prior to the stadium
                  being opened to spectators (and at least once every week) and immediately
                  prior to the admission of spectators, including a test from the secondary
3                 source of power supply, and the results recorded in a log book. Any
                  defects noted shall be entered in the log book and remedied without delay
                  prior to any event scheduled. Should this not be possible the matter
3                 shall be reported as soon as possible to the Council, London Fire Brigade
                  and Metropolitan Police. The holder shall take all steps in this regard
                  reasonably required by any of these Authorities to minimise the risk to
                  spectators. No spectators shall be admitted to a specified activity
1                 unless these systems are in full working order.
            13.   Television cameras, cables and other portable equipment shall be
                  restricted to the positions indicated on the approved plans or as
h
                  otherwise approved in writing by the Council.

3           14.   A current certificate of a thorough examination by a boiler insurance
                  company to the effect that the boiler, calorifier and all safety devices
                  associated with the installation are in safe condition shall be available
3                 on the premises to authorised officers of the Council.
                  Means of ingress and egress

3           15.   (a) Means of ingress and egress shall be maintained to the satisfaction
                  of the Council to each part of the Stadium as shown on the attached plan
                  and as referred to in (b) below.
3                 (b) Clear and unobstructed gangways shall be kept up to each of the
                  following gates from each part of the stadium and such gates and gangways
3                 shall be of the width specified (where specified).

                                                      11
34                                                                     385/0246K/PH(8)
NOTE - Where two gate numbers are bracketed together the width specified
is the total width.
Location                                         Gate No.             Width
                                                                      (metres)
Main entrance
Directors Entrance                                la)                  3.40
                                                  lb)
Main Gate                                         2a                   2.26
                                                  2b                   2.26
                                                  2c                   2.26
                                                  2d                   2.26
Bovril Entrance                                   5                    5.50
Britannia Entrance                                7a)                 11.92
                                                  7b)
                                                  9a                   3.46
                                                  9b                   3.36
Gates within the ground
Main Gate                                        3a                    3.40
                                                 3b                    3.44
(See also Sec. 3, Part B, Item 2)                4                     6.40
Bovril Gate                                      6                     4.56
Britannia Gate                                   8                     5.00
                                                 10a)                  5.84
                                                 10b)
                                                 11a                   0.91
Next to stairway C                               lib                   4.10
Next to Turnstiles to North Terrace              12a                   3.46
                                                 12b                   3.46
West stand next to stairway                      13a                   1.90
                                                 13b                   1.90
West stand north end                             14
West stand south end                             16
South Terrace to ramp down to
 Britannia Gate                                  15                    4.00
Gate to Car Park

Gates to Pitch
  (i) South Terrace: A 1 , A2, B,C,D,E,F,G
      H   j   |(

 (ii) North Terrace:   L,M,N,0,P,R,S,T,U,V,W




                                      12                3 85/ 0246K/ PH( 8>
 Sites to Penning Barriers
 South Terrace
   (I) Across all lateral gangways (Gangway C)
  (11) Across all lateral gangways (Gangway F)
 (111) Across central lateral gangway (between Line K and West Stand)
 North Terrace
   (i)   Across central lateral gangway (between Line L and West Stand)
  (11)   Across all lateral gangways (Gangway R)
 (111)   Across all lateral gangways (either side of Gangways 0 and T)
  (iv)   At the head of the staircase between the concourse of the East
         Stand and the North Terrace
(c)      Each gate referred to in (b) foregoing shall be available for
         egress during the time that part of the stadium from which such
         gate affords egress is occupied by spectators. In any case not less
         than two separate means of egress shall be available from each
         occupied part of the stadium.
(d)      No exit gate referred to in (b) foregoing shall be secured closed
          while spectators are in the Stadium by means of fastenings other
          than panic bolts, monkey tail bolts, or barrel bolts readily
          operable without the use of a key in the direction of escape unless
       (i)     Such exit gate is manned by a steward who can open it
               immediately in the event of an emergency; and
      (II)     Each gate is secured closed by means of a single padlock and
               hasp and locking bar which can be easily removed. All
               padlocks used throughout the Stadium shall be operable by a
               common key and each steward manning the gates and the chief
               and assistant chief steward together with all senior stewards
               referred to in 25(a) shall have this key.
(e)      'WAY OUT' or 'EXIT' notices shall be provided and maintained over
         each exit, and exit routes shall be indicated as required by the
         Council.
Each staircase and each corridor outlined in green on the attached plans
shall be maintained enclosed with fire-resisting construction.
Non-slip surfaces to each staircase shall be maintained and where
external shall have adequate drainage to the satisfaction of the Council.
A clear gangway shall be kept and maintained from each part of each
storey or floor up to and between each staircase and exit. Each
staircase, exit and exit route and means of access for emergency vehicles
shall be kept completely clear of goods, litter, combustible or flammable
material or other obstruction. Each boiler room, electrical intake room,
void and lift lobby also shall be kept completely clear of goods, litter,
combustible or flammable material or other obstruction.




                                       13               385/ 0246K/ PH( 8>
 19    Each gangway, staircase and stepping shall be kept free of Ice and snow
       whilst the Stadium is in use for any specified activity.
 Crowd Control and Stewards
 20   Before the stadium is used on any occasion for a specified activity the
      folder shall <a> consult jointly with the Fire Brigade and Police
      Superintendent regarding the general arrangements for that activity and
      (b> consult with the Police Superintendent concerning the attendance of a
      sufficient number of police officers for the purpose of maintaining
      lawful and orderly behaviour among persons attending the stadium. The
      holder shall seek to arrange for and use its best endeavours to secure,
      at the holder's expense, the attendance at the stadium of the appropriate
      number of officers of the Metropolitan Police Force, determined by
      agreement between the holder and police. In the absence of such agreement
      the decision of the Commissioner of Police shall prevail.
21    The following facilities shall be maintained and kept available for the
      use o f the Police and the holder and the person nominated by him under
      paragraph 2 hereof:
      (a)    A central control room either in an elevated position affording a
             view of the majority of the terraces and stands or with
             communication to an approved observation point having such a view.
      (b)    A Police briefing and administration room.
      (c)   An efficient and quick means of controlling admission of spectators
            so that the holder or a deputy especially appointed by the holder
            can readily ascertain the number of spectators admitted to each
            part of the stadium and give instructions immediately to close any
            gate or turnstile.
      (d)   An approved public address system controlled from a public address
             room approved by the Council and the Police Superintendent. The
             power supply to the equipment shall be such as to ensure continuous
             operation of the public address system in the event of failure of
             the mains electricity supply. No spectator shall be admitted to a
             specified activity unless the public address system is in full
             working order.
22    (a)   The Council and the Police Superintendent or his representative
             shall be informed as soon as possible of any cancellation of a
             specified activity and consulted regarding any rescheduling of such
             an activity.
      (b)   When considered necessary by the Police Superintendent, the holder
             shall permit entry only by ticket bought before the day the stadium
             is being used for that particular Specified Activity. Each ticket
             shall specify the gate by which the ticket holder should enter the
             ground.
      (c)   The holder shall agree with the Council and the Police
             Superintendent the methods to be used for the segregation of home
             and visiting spectators. In the absence of such agreement the
             decision of the Council shall prevail.


                                           14              385/0246K/PH(8)
    ]
    ]   23   A notice shall be provided in a conspicuous position adjacent to each
             bank of turnstiles directing spectators to enter the ground by way of the
             entrance appropriate to the partlcolar terrace or enclosure to be
    I   24
             occupied.
             The Public Address Control Room shall be manned by a person nominated by
    1        the Holder who shall be responsible, in conjunction with the Holder, the
             Police and, where applicable, the Fire Brigade, for carrying out the
             emergency evacuation procedures for the ground in accordance with
    ]        paragraph 2 ( 1 ii> of Schedule 4.
        25   (a)   At each specified activity the holder shall provide a Chief
                   Steward, an Assistant Chief Steward and such number of stewards and
    1              senior stewards which after consultation with the Police
                   Superintendent is considered sufficient in the circumstances. In
                   no case shall the number of stewards be less than 1 to every 250
    )              spectators or part thereof attending that specified activity in
                   addition to those stewards required to man each final exit gate. A
                   record shall be kept of the name of each steward on duty at each
                   specified activity and the position allocated to each steward
    1              within the ground.

)•           <b>   Each Steward shall be readily recognizable with the same distinctly
                    coloured surcoat or tabard (or such other clothing approved in
                    advance by the Council) worn outside his/her clothing.

)            <c>   Each senior steward shall be readily recognisable by the wearing of
                    a surcoat or tabard which is distinctive from that worn by the
                    stewards.
]            <d>   Each member of staff and each steward shall be properly trained in
                    his/her duties in accordance with paragraph 5 of Schedule 4 to
                    ensure order and safety is maintained, and be fit to carry out
1                   hi s/her du t i e s .
             <e>   Before beginning duty at a specified activity each Steward shall be
                    briefed thoroughly, be handed a copy of his/her duties/instructions
                    and be made fully aware of his/her responsibilities and his/her
                    duty in the event of an emergency. Records shall be kept of such
                    briefings as provided in paragraph 4 of this Schedule.
             <f)   Although operating individually Stewards shall, except with the
                    consent of the Council, be posted in teams of about 8 to 12 so that
]                   in an emergency they can act as a team under the control of a
                    senior steward.
             (g)   No Steward shall leave his/her place of duty without the permission
1                  of the appropriate Senior Steward who shall provide a replacement
                    steward before the position is vacated. This condition shall not
]                   apply to a steward leaving a gate unattended which is secured
                    closed while spectators are in the Stadium only by means of panic
                    bolts, monkey tail bolts or barrel bolts readily operable in the
                    direction of escape without the use of a key.
1



1

                                                  15               3 8 5 / 02 4 6K / P H ( 8 >
1
     <h>    Stewards shall be located throughout the Stadium and particularly
            at key points where control is most needed, such as in gangways,
            vomitories, tops of staircases, gateways on to the pitch or
            providing access from one part of the ground to another and at each
            exit or entrance.
     (i>    Each exit shall be manned while Spectators are in the Stadium for a
            specified activity and shall be opened immediately in the event of
            an emergency and not less than 10 minutes before the end of the
            specified activity. This condition shall not apply to those gates
            specified in (g) above being left unattended.
     (j)    Each Steward, attendant and member of control staff shall be made
             aware of the provisions of Section 11 of the Act, which authorises
            Council officers to enter and inspect Sports grounds at any
             reasonable time.
     (k)    Stewards shall give every assistance in an emergency to disabled
            persons, particularly those in wheelchairs who shall occupy the
            following area reserved for them:-
            The area of the perimeter track adjacent to the southern end of the
            East Stand.
     <1>    Each Steward located in the terraces shall be instructed to ensure
            that seat cushions, where provided, are not removed f rom the seats
            by unauthorised persons when the Specified Activity is over.
first Aid
26   At least one properly equipped, adequately heated, lit and ventilated and
     adequately staffed first aid room of adequate size used only for that
     purpose, with suitable access thereto by first aid personnel from every
     part of the ground and by ambulances, and with suitable sign-posting
     thereto throughout the ground, shall be provided and maintained in the
     position(s) indicated on the attached plan, all to the satisfaction of
     the Council. The first aid room(s) shall each contain adequate blankets,
     pillows, stretchers, couches, buckets, bowls trolleys and screens, an
     internal telephone or radio telephone, a telephone connected to an
     external line, a hot and cold water supply, and a supply of drinking
     water over a sink or wash hand basin and shall be kept in a clean and
     hygienic condition all to the satisfaction of the Council, and a W.C.
     shall be reasonably accessible from such room. Properly trained first
     aid personnel shall be present at each specified activity in the ratio of
     at least 5 to every 5,000 spectators or part thereof.
Miscellaneous
27   Seating shall be in accordance with the attached plan or any revised plan
     approved by the Council. All seating shall be maintained securely fixed
     in position to the satisfaction of the Council.




                                          16               385/0246K/PH(8>
 (a)   No alteration or addition to the Stadium Including any building,
       structure, mobile stall, component, installation, approved heating,
       lighting and ventilation arrangements whether temporary or
       permanent or any deviation from or change to the plans shall be
       made or begun without the prior consent in writing of the Council.
       Execution of any work for which consent has been granted shall be
       carried out to the satisfaction of the Council.
(b)    Notice in writing shall be given to the Council of any proposed
       alteration, addition, deviation or change as aforesaid and such
       notice shall be accompanied by full details and where necessary or
       required by the Council by drawings and calculations in duplicate.
N ot e : Nothing in this paragraph shall be taken to imply that any work
may be undertaken without compliance with any statutory provision.
(a)    Subject to the provisions of the Sporting Events (Control of
       Alcohol etc.) Act 1985, and except with the prior consent of the
       Council in writing or where drink is served at a table accompanying
       a meal or except in those parts of the Stadium not usually open to
       members of the general public no drinks shall be sold or supplied
       otherwise than in plastic or paper beakers or cups. Such beakers or
       cups may have loose fitting plastic or paper lids but otherwise no
       drinks may be sold or supplied in closed containers. This latter
       provision does not, however, apply in respect of the sale from
       trays of drinks in soft containers made entirely of plastic or
       paper.
<b)    Where and when it is considered necessary by the Police
       Superintendent, no person shall be permitted to enter or remain in
       the stadium in possession of any glass, bottle or metal can. The
       holder shall take all reasonable steps to ensure that this
       condition is complied with.
Except as provided in paragraphs 31 and 34 hereof or with the consent of
the Council in writing no cylinder for the storage of compressed air,
oxygen, hydrogen or other gas or liquid under pressure shall be used or
stored in the Stadium
Cylinders for the storage of C02 may be used for the supply of beer
pumps provided that only one cylinder in use plus one spare for each bar
may be kept in such bar or bar store in the Stands. Any other C 0 2
cylinder shall be kept in a store approved by the Council.
The pitch perimeter fences shall consist of steel uprights, approximately
9ft. high, to which is welded stout steel mesh. A four foot high
extension is permitted consisting of a lightweight steel structure with
welded steel mesh. This may be surmounted by three strands of barbed
wire. The fences shall be designed to act as crush barriers all as
described in Schedule 5. Gates shall be provided in the fences to the
satisfaction of the council.




                                    17                385/0246K/PH(8)
    1



    1
        33   The hazards arising from the keeping of petroleum spirit or petroleum
             mixture on the premises, Including petroleum spirit kept in the fuel
w            tanks of plant such as motor mowers Is subject to additional statutory
             control. The usage may need either to be subject to the Petroleum Spirit
             (Motor Vehicles) Regulations 1929 or to be licensed under the provisions
             of the Petroleum (Consolidation) Act 1928. The C o u n c i l ’s Petroleum
]            Section (Queensborough House, Albert Embankment, London SE17TJ - Tel. 587
             4566/7) shall be Informed of any proposal to keep petroleum at the
             premises.
1       34   No temporary sales kiosk or stall (including any mobile stall) shall be
             Installed without the prior consent of the Council in writing. If L.P.G.
]            is used to fuel cooking appliances any tubing or hosing shall be suitably
             armoured. Spare L.P.G. cylinders shall be stored only within an
             enclosure to be approved by the Council in writing.

I       35   All glass in doors, windows, partitions, etc. in each part of the stadium
             accessible to spectators shall be maintained 1n a sound condition.
        36   Each gangway and exitway and the treads of steps and stairways shall be
1            maintained with non-slippery and even surfaces.

jj^     37   Adequate facilities shall be provided for the cleaning of the kitchen
             extract ductwork. Each kitchen cooker hood, filter and associated
             ductwork shall be maintained in a clean condition.




]
1



1



I
I
I
I
I
                                                 18               385/0246K/PH(8)
                                                                        SCHEDULE 3

     The maximum number of spectators that may be admitted to each part of the
     stadium at any one time shall be restricted to the numbers specified In
     the table below:-


LOCATION
South Terrace                   13,600
North Terrace                    9,700
East Stand                      11,000
Hast Stand                       9,600
TOTAL SPECTATOR
ACCOMMODATION FOR
STADIUM                        43,900

1   Those areas of the North and South terraces enclosed by fencing shall not be
     used by spectators.   The fencing shall be maintained in sound condition to
     the satisfaction of the Council.
2   The areas referred to in item 1 foregoing shall be kept free from
    obstructions and all loose materials shall be removed from the terracing.
    Such areas shall not be used for any form of storage.




                                         19               3 85 / 02 4 6K/ PH< 8 )
                                                           SCHEDULE 3
                                                           PART A
Each of the works and each requirement set out In this part of this schedule
shall be complied with before spectators are admitted to any specified
activity after the start of the 1986/87 football season and thereafter shall
be maintained to the satisfaction of the Council
1.   The existing fire telephones in the West Stand fire point and the press
     box shall be overhauled.
2.   An additional fire telephone shall be provided In bar 9.
3.   Additional fire telephones shall be provided within the main stand to the
     satisfaction of the Council.
4.   A 'dedicated' emergency telephone for receiving emergency Instructions
     only shall be provided in the public address control room.
5.   The public address system shall be modified to provide an override
     facility In the following areas:-
           (i)    Executive boxes
         (ii)     Bar areas
       < 1 i 1)   Directors lounge
         < 1V )   Board room
          (V)     Trophy room etc.
6.   The existing sprinkler system at ground floor level shall be extended to
     cover all areas at this level with the exception of the electrical switch
     rooms.
7.   An automatic fire detection system working on the principle of smoke
     detection shall be provided to the satisfaction of the Council in all
     levels of the main stand above concourse level and linked Into the
     existing fire alarm to incorporate the following areas:
         (1)      All executive boxes
        (1 i )    Board room
       (Hi)       Directors lounge
        <1v>      Executive bars and restaurants
         (V)      Trophy room




                                          20              385/ 0246K/ PH<8)
                                                                                   SCHEDULE 4

    1      ACCESS
    Means of access for emergency vehicles shall be as outlined in yellow on the
    attached plan (Drawing No.l). The means of access shall be maintained
    unobstructed and in good condition to the satisfaction of the Council.
    2      FIRE WARNING SYSTEM
         (1)        The fire warning system shall consist of emergency telephones
                    positioned throughout the stadium and the public address system,
                    together with a manual electrical fire alarm system within the main
                    stand. The fire telephone system terminates at the switchboard in
                    the administration block. All emergencies shall be directed in the
                    first instance to the telephone switchboard which has a direct line
                    to the public address control room.
        (11)        The telephone switchboard and the public address room shall be
                    permanently manned whilst spectators are being admitted to and are
                    in the Stadium.
    (iii)            The Public Address Control Room shall be manned by a person
                    nominated by the Holder who shall be responsible, 1n conjunction
                    with the Holder, the Police, and where, applicable, the Fire
                    Brigade, for carrying out the emergency evacuation procedures for
                    the ground.
        (iv)         The fire telephones and public address system and the fire alarm
                    system installed in the main stand shall be maintained in effective
                    working order and shall be tested not more than 48 hours prior to
                    the stadium being opened to spectators (and at least once every
                    week) and immediately prior to the admission of spectators,
                    including a test from the secondary source of power supply, and the
                    results recorded in a log book. Any defects noted shall be entered
                    in the log book and remedied without delay prior to any event
                    scheduled. Should this not be possible the matter shall be
                    reported as soon as possible to the Council, London Fire Brigade
                    and Metropolitan Police. The holder shall take all steps in this
                    regard reasonably required by any of these Authorities to minimise
                    the risk to spectators. No spectators shall be admitted to a
                    specified activity unless these systems are in full working order.
         (v)     The fascia plate on each extension of the system shall display a
                notice in red block letters 'IN CASE OF FIRE DIAL 777'.
        (vi)     The fire alarm mute switch on the indicator panel shall be switched
                to mute whilst the public are in the stadium.
3         FIRE FIGHTING EQUIPMENT
(a) Portable fire appliances and fire fighting equipment with adequate water
     supplies shall be provided in each of the positions indicated in Appendix
     I to this Schedule and maintained to the satisfaction of the Council.




                                                  21               3 85 / 02 46 K/ PH< 8 )
(m)    The testing of hand fire appliances shall be In accordance with the 'Notes
       on Location and Maintenance' set Out In Appendix VI to this Schedule;
       details of the tests shall be recorded 1n a logbook.
(n)   The sprinkler system within the ground floor car park of the main stand
       shall be maintained  In effective working order and shall be tested at least
       once every week, and the results recorded in a log book. Any defects noted
       shall be entered In the log book and remedied without delay prior to any
       event scheduled. Should this not be possible, the matter shall be reported
       as soon as possible to the Council, London Fire Brigade and Metropolitan
       Police.
4     OUTBREAK OF FIRE
The Brigade shall be called to any outbreak of fire, however small, inaccordance
with the procedure detailed in appendix III to this Schedule.
5     FIRE DUTIES
Each member of staff and each steward shall be    fully trained in the procedure to
be adopted in the event of fire. Such training    shall include:
      (a)     the action to be taken on discovery of a fire or other emergency;
      (b)     the method of calling the Fire Brigade;
      <c)   operation of the emergency telephone system;
      <d)   operation of the fire alarm and sprinkler systems and the procedures
             to be adhered to following operation of the fire alarm (main stand
             only);
      (e)   familiarisation with the position of each emergency telephone and fire
            alarm call points within the stadium.
      (f)   the correct method of operation of fire fighting equipment and
             familiarisation with their situation within the stadium;
      (g)   evacuation of the building and location of each assembly point and
             specific action required by individual members of staff;
      (h)   familiarisation with each escape route and the method of maintaining
             such escape routes free of obstruction;
      (i)   the purpose of fire-resisting doors and the need to maintain them in
             good working order. Any defects shall be reported and entered in the
             defects log book;
      (j)   the importance of fire evacuation drills. Such drills shall be
             carried out at least once a month, prior to admittance of spectators
             to the stadium, under the direction of the person nominated by the
             Holder, and a record of each such drill shall be entered in a log




                                          23                385/0246K/PH(8)
               book. The Holder shall notify the Fire Brigade and Police when each
               evacuation drill will take place to enable them to observe the
               standard of staff training;*'
       (k)     briefing of staff and stewards in respect of their duties. Each
               member of staff and each steward shall be briefed on his/her duties
               prior to each specified activity. Particulars of such duties shall be
               posted in staff rooms and other positions approved by the Council and
               such particulars shall be revised from time to time as changes in
               staff and other circumstances require.
6 TRAINING, DRILLS        AND BRIEFING LOG BOOK
A record of the details of each training session, drill and briefing for staff and
stewards shall be entered in a log book.
7.    INSTRUCTION NOTICES
Copies of fire instructions as shown in Appendices II, III, and V to this Schedule
and instructions for calling the Fire Brigade as shown in Appendix IV to this
Schedule shall be displayed in clearly legible characters in the following
positions:
APPENDIX II          Adjacent to each internal telephone, in all staff rooms, in all
                     offices and in all areas where staff are employed.
APPENDIX III         In public address control room.
APPENDIX IV          Adjacent to the telephone switchboard.
APPENDIX V           In night gatekeepers hut.
(e)   Each such notice shall be framed and glazed or otherwise protected against
      loss or defacement.
(f)   Copies of the instructions contained in Appendix II shall be issued to all
      personnel, including police officers, St. John's Ambulance Brigade officers,
      full and part-time staff employed by concessionaires, not having access to a
      staff room.
8.    CURTAINS, HANGINGS AND DRAPERIES
No curtain, hanging or drapery shall be installed unless a sample (not less than
500mm x 700mm in size) of any material proposed for such purpose, has been
submitted to the Council and approval of the use of such material obtained.




                                            24                385/ 0246K/ PH<8>
                            TRACK 9                                       X 209


15   05   10   RC    Hello    its      Control   I've   got    a three      9's
                     call for you.


                     (             )


               RC    No                          (----- - ) child     by the
                     name of


                     Who


               RC    Ronsby




               RC    Yes    this       child   had   taken    some   alcohol
                     from    a   home     streaking     kit    the   mothers
                     got so he better g o and be checked out.


                     Right you are then


               RC    Okay thanks


                     Bye


15 06 59       RC    Thanks bye




15 06 29       DCL   Hello Hello


                     Hello       ambulance       yes    is    one    of   you r
                     supervisors there p l ea se m y love


               DCL   Just a moment
Hello


Yes good afternoon its P.C.                       (---- ) here
South Yorkshire Police operations room


Hello


W e 'v e   got    um     an    incident       at      leppings
lane       um    end     on    the          urn    Sheffield
Wedne sd ay Football Ground.                      We m a y need
a few ambulances              its just to advise you
at    this      stage    (------) a        lot of pushing
and     shoving     and       there   mi gh t       have       been
quite a few injuries.


That's       Leppings     Ln    end    of    the     Football
Ground


Leppings Lane (----- ) Hillsborough.                           All
we are doing            at the momen t is advising
you.


Oka y


That we may need a few,                a few ambulances
to carry the injured


Well       we've        got    er     we've         got        that
facility


(---------- ) come            back    to    you     should       we
require you


Yes


Its     just     sort    of    er    advise       you     at    the
moment


Okay so yo u don't defi ni te ly need us now


Not    at    the    moment,        not       at   the    moment
(delay)


Hello


Hello


We are requesting a fleet of ambulances


Fleet of ambulances


All     ambulances         tha t       are    available        to
Hillsborough please


All ambulances that are available so you
have got quite a few injured then


A lot of them,            ap pa rently at one of the
gates       they    have       been    pushing,         pushing
and shoving I understand that one of the
gates has (--— ) colla ps ed or broke


Okay,       we     will        instigate          an    initial
response and we'll               assess it from there
okay


All, All ambulances y o u ’ve got available
I understand


Well    we    can't       do    that    I will         send   you
our    initial      response          and    we'll      assess.
We've got officers on the scene
                                                                                  f




           F/C   Right can i have y o u r na m e please sir


           RC    Superintendent C lar k


           F/C   Your Superintendent C l a r k


           RC    T h a t 's right


           F/C   (------- )       P.C. h er e S uperintendent Clark


           RC    Thank you very muc h


           F/C   Okay now


           RC    Bye Bye


15 08 13   F/C   Goodbye




15 08 27   DCL   Hello Police


           F/C   Ambulance         (----- )   Leppings     La n e    end,
                  Leppings Lane end.


           DCL   Yes


           F/C       (------------                                       )


           DCL   You     definitely       want   an   am b u l a n c e       to
                     Leppings Lane end


           F/C   A    big   fleet    of   ambulances,    immediately
                     as many as yo u've got love


           DCL   Theres one on its w a y



                              H
               F/C   We want more than one


               DCL   Yes     just       hold       on    while       we   get    the
                     ambulance up there we ' v e got officers in
15   08   51         the vicinity that ca n assess it for whi




15 10 18       DCL   Ambulance service


               B/T


               DCL   Thank you,         ambulance service


                     I     wonder        if        you     should         send    an
                     ambulance,         what       it     is    me    little     lads
                     bee n   messing       about         and   he's    banged     his
                     head


               DCL   Can you give me the address please


                     No


               DCL   No




               DCL   Can     you    give      me    your       telephone    number
                     please




               DCL   Right


                     Ho w long will it be (




                                   S.
Track N o . 11                                           X207

Time       DCL -



1507-49    DCL       Hello

           ?         Hello were y o u w a n t i n g us

           DCK       Right, no w e w e r en 't

           ?         You weren't

           DCL       No

            ?        Oh

           DCL       Alright

1507-57     9•       OK then



1510-25    CF        Hello
            f
           1&/C      Leppings       Loove,

           CF        Yes

           FC        Hello love is supt. Clark there please

1510-30    CF        Hold the line




1512-54    B/ Moor   Hello Batemoore

            CF       Control a 999 call for you

            BMoor    Righto

            CF       No.

            BMoor    Danebrook
           TRACK NO   DESCRIPTION
              10         X-208


TIME

15.05.11              Hello Donc as te r Station

           R.C.       Hello    its   Control      three      nines   for
                      you

           Done Stn   Yes

           R.C.                              its             a   1 year
                      old child by the name of

           Done St

           R.C.       Yes apparently she rung the Hospital
                      and they've ad vi se d the relative to
                      ta k e h e r i n t o h o s p i t a l this child
                      has taken some p ow de r and swallowed
                      s o m e p o w d e r f r o m a h a i r streaking
                      k i t t h a t t h e m o t h e r h a s g o t so
                      t h e y 'v e advised h er to go and have
                      her checked out

           Done Stn   Thank you

15.05.59   R.C.       OK Thanks Bye


15.10.35   Control    Hello Can I h e l p y ou

                      J u s t               t o        l e t        y o u
                      k n o w ........ o p e r a t i o n ........ all the
                      manpower             from all over South
                      Y o r k s h i r e ........... Leppings Lane

           R.C.       OK

           Caller

           R.C.       Right we'll respond             then    thankyou
                      for your help

           Caller     Much obliged to you

           R.C.       Goodbye

15.11.04




                        2
                          SCHEDULE 3 - CONDITION NO.27


The number of spectators admitted to a specified activity shall not exceed
54,324.

The number of spectators admitted to each area of the stadium, listed below,
shall exceed the maximum numbers shown.

Area                                   Maximum No. of Spectators

'pP IOh/   l\0p                        21,000
South Stand (Upper)                     5,567

South Stand (Lower)                     3,310

West Stand                              4,465

West Terrace                            7,200

North West Terrace                      2,900

North Stand                             9,882


                                       54,324




10/DMB232/MS
                          SCHEDULE 3 - CONDITION NO.27


The number of spectators admitted to a specified activity shall not exceed
44,009.

The number of spectators admitted to each area of the stadium,   listed below,
shall exceed the maximum numbers shown.

Area                                   Maximum No. of Spectators

South Stand (Seats)                    7,948

Bramall lane

   Seats                               2,958
   Terrace                             7,354

John Street

   Timber Section Seats                1,200
   Concrete Section Seats              1,490
   Timber Section Terrace
     (right-hand section)              1,048
     (left-hand section)                 589
   Concrete Section Terrace            2,832

Spion Kop

   General Area                       18,250
   Disabled Section                      120

Childrens Section                        220


                                      44,009




10/DMB232/MS
                                                                                               NEWS
t
                                                                                                                                                            crowd control fencing should be used.

     Cup crowd deaths                                                                                                                                       "Here was also a danger that the
                                                                                                                                                            guidelines concentrated too much on
                                                                                                                                                            the prevention of hooliganism at the
                                                                                                                                                            expense of spectator safety.
                                                                                                                                                               "The codes discuss both perimeter
                                                                                                                                                            and radial fencing only in general
                                                                                                                                                            terms and should give much better
                                                                                                                                                            guidance’ he said. ‘All fencing, espe­
                                  *                                                                                                                         cially hi$i perimeter barriers, may be
    . Saturday’s disaster at Sheffield                                                                                                                      beneficial in detering hooligans invad-
                                                                                                                              Railings acting as
                                                                         Turnstiles
                                                                                                                              radial barriers               ing the pitch but is very undesirable in
    95 people were crushed to death ha*                                                                                                                     the event of a disaster.
                f||g direct conflict between
                                                                                                                                                               T here is nothing in the codes which
    safety and police perception of the best                                                                                                                says you must have radial barriers and
    way to contain hooligans in football                            Open gate
                                                                                                                                                            there should now be a major rethink
    crouds, B was clam ed this week.                                                          _ Central                                                     on the desirability of aO fences’.
    The consulting engineer responsible                                                         tunnel                                                         Eastwood, senior partner with
    for safety at Hillsborough was worried
    by crowd control fences there long
    before the incident The fences were
                                                                                              /                                         &
                                                                                                                                                            Eastwood & Partners and consultant
                                                                                                                                                            to stadium owner Sheffield Wednes­
                                                                                                                                                            day Football Club for the last 10
    asked for by the ground’s licensing                                                                                                                     years, said the ground ‘complied fully’
    authority following a direct request by                                                                                                                 with the 1975 Safety of Sports
                                                                                                                                                   Access   Grounds Act and its accompanying
              :e influence on 'traffic paths’                                                                                                               Green Guide setting out specific
         ffi by football fans has been corisi-                                                                                                              standards. His claim was backed
    dered by at least one member of an                                                                                                                      earlier this week by current licencing
    Institution of Structural Engineers’                                                                                                                    authority Sheffield City Council
    committee appraising sports ground                                                                                                                         ‘Our preliminary conclusions indi­
    safety. A request for funds to speed                                                                                                                     cate that the arrangement of barriers
    its work was turned down by the
                                                                                                                                                            and fences met the Act’s require­
    Department of the Environment.
                                                                                                                                                             ments’ said the council’s director of
        IT® controversial fencing that con-                                                                           High perimeter fence                  health and consumer services David
     tributed to the severityof the disaster                                                                                                                 Purchon. ‘Barriers tested so far with­
    w aserected specifically at the request                                                                                                                 stood 259c more than the required
                                                                                                C - I J u 1--------3-------
    of the police, dawned safety engineer                                                       oafefy Barriers                                             load and we have no reason to believe
     Dr 8 1 Eastwood. There was no legal                                                                                                                    any of them in the central pen were
                                                               ABOVE: Layout of the L#J'£ngs Lane stand.
                                                                                                                                                            inadequate.’
                                                               BELOW: Radial barriers and the perimeter fence penned in fans.
                                                                                                                                                               The S tructural’ committee looking .
                                                                                                                                                            in to sports ground safety was estab­
                                                                                                                                                            lished after the Poppleweli review
                                                                                                                                                            following the Bradford fire disaster
                                                                                                                                                            four years ago. ‘It was considered by
                                                                                                                                                            Structural’ members that the Green
                                                                                                                                                            Guide did not take things very for, so
                                                                                                                                                            we decided to get ail the facts of
                                                                                                                                                            previous disasters together, analyse
                                                                                                                                                            them and come up with conclusions'
                                                                                                                                                            said a member.
                                                                                                                                                               It is understood that a part of the
                                                                                                                                                            report is on the subject of ‘traffic
                                                                                                                                                            control’. A request to the DoE for
                                                                                                                                                            funding to speed up the process of
                                                                                                                                                            collation and analysis was refused,
    The destroyed crash barrier.                                                                                                                            NCE has been told. The department
                                                                                                                                                            has provided resources in the form of
    requirement for the side railings that                                                                                                                  a committee member, "however.
    ensured fans w®re trapped in a stoat                                                                                                                       As well as the 95 killed another 125
    central pen on the terraces and                                                                                                                         people were injured, many seriously,
    neither the engineer nor the chib that                                                                                                                  when spectators surged into a 40m
    owned the stadium tad requested                                                                                                                         wide by 15m deep enclosed terrace
    their installation. . .                                                                                                                                 area shortly after the start of last
       1 have long objected in general to                                                                                                                   Saturday’s FA Cup semi final between
    the need for such radial barriers,                                                                                                                      Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.
    which in an emergency prevent spec­                                                                                                                     This section of central terracing im­
    tators moving away from a source of                                                                                                                     mediately behind the goal at the
    danger or trouble, and I was unhappy                                                                                                                    ground’s Leppings Lane end was
    about their installation at Hillsbor­                                                                                                                   already close to its 2200 capacity
    ough’ said Eastwood, who is a Fellow                                                                                                                    when police opened an external gate
    of ICE. ‘But they were asked for by                                                                                                                     near the turnstiles.
    the then licencing authority South                                                                                                                         The intention was to allow the late
    Yorkshire County Council following a                                                                                                                    arriving fans into side terracing where
    recommendation from the police.’                                                                                                                        there was still space available, but
       in calling for an urgent review of                                                                                                                   most rushed through a 3m wide tunnel
    k  ports ground safety codes. East­
    wood maintained that they were not
                                                                                                                                                            beneath the'm ain tovered western
                                                                                                                                                            stand and crowded directly into the .
    specific enough on how and where                                                                                                                        central enclosed terracing.       \



    ft   'in i » V l t   V f l t ’/ 't\'II P W . V V l ' P P
   The total 100m long terraces,
 sloping at 12°, were containedby a 3m
  high steel mesh perim eter. fence
  bordering the pitch and erected in the
                                             Crumbling concrete                                                                     ing. T en spans are affected over up to
                                                                                                                                    30% of their area' said Essex County
                                                                                                                                    Council principal engineer Tony Bag-
                                                                                                                                    di
 early 1970s. It was braced on top of
                                                                                                                                     , Contractor Tarmac Structural Re­
 the earlier perimeter barrier, a Ira
                                                                                                                                    pairs was responsible for the design,
 h i# concrete wall.
    The 2m high steel railings that run                                                                                             installation and maintenance of the
 radially across the 15m deep terraces       Breakdown of the polymer wearing                                                       £20/m2 system. It has appointed
 divide it into three main areas of a
                                             course was this week being blamed for                                                  consultant Travers Morgan, with the
 central enclosed pen and two side           the closure after just five months of                                                  approval of Essex CC and ICI Che­
 terraces and were installed in the mid      Britain’s first bridge to have a fully                                                 micals & Polymers which supplied the
 1980s following police requests for         catbodic protected reinforced concrete                                                 surfacing, to carry out urgent tests.
 better crowd control, said Eastwood.        deck.                                                                                     'We are very anxious to find out the
 The idea was to allow fans of opposing          The l i year old chloride damaged                                                  cause. We do not think it is the
 sides to stand in the same terraced          Army and Navy flyover at the junction                                                cathodic protection but we have asked
 area, segregated by radial, fencing,         of the A130 and the old A12 at                                                       Travers Morgan to examine the
 but this has never actually been             Chelmsford, Essex was resurfaced                                                     whole problem and give us a report as
adopted at Hillsborough.                      only last year at the cost of £125 000                                                soon as possible’ said Tarmac technic­
                                             with two layers of skid resistant                                                     al services manager Doug Irvine.
    About 60 o f the 100 or so varying
                                             polymer concrete. This also contains                                                      Travers Morgan was this week
length crush barriers, sited in three
rows right across the terracing, were        an expensive platinum coated protec­                                                  taking core samples for laboratory
                                              tive titanium mesh anode (NCE 10                                                     examination and testing. In the mean
erected in 1966 and consist of 62mm
diameter horizontal scaffold bars with       November 1988).                                                                       time affected areas including the
                                                 Designed to extend the life of the                                                expensive anode mesh were being
braced steel channel uprights bedded
                                             structure by 10 years, the cathodic                                                   stripped down to the original concrete
directly into the concrete steps. The
                                             protection is apparently still working.                                               base.
remaining crush barriers, with un­
braced steel box legs, were added in         But the two coat 16mm thick ICI                                                           The flyover is expected to re-open
1979 when the ground was first               Thorotop CP Horizontal polymer con­                                                   temporarily to traffic this week pend­
required to obtain a safety licence.         crete on the 15 span flyover is losing                                                ing a permanent solution and neces­
    The terraces’ designation under          its bond and crumbling and delaminat-       Stripping the flyover’s coating.          sary repairs.
the act as a ‘peak viewing area’
demands that all crush barriers and
lower areas of the perimeter fence are
designed to withstand a 595 kg/m run
horizontal loading. The act also speci­      DTp agrees                                      The DTp has already Increased the
                                                                                         money available for inspection in the
fies ^Jiat the area must be capable of
evacuation in eight minutes and East­        bridges need                                coming year by 30%. The depart­
                                                                                         ment’s overall expenditure on bridge
wood stressed that this could be
achieved throu^i normal exist points
                                             extra $380M                                 maintenance has risen from an ex­
                                                                                         pected £36M in the last financial year
without recourse to the seven gates                                                       to a forecast £101M this year.
positioned along the perimeter.              The Department of Transport has
                                                                                             Maunsell recommends 44 propos­
    T hese gates were installed specifi­     admitted it needs up to £38QM extra for
                                             Its 15 year bridge rehabilitation
                                                                                         als for preventing further deteriora­
cally to allow police to enter the
                                                                                         tion of which the DTp is already
terracing from the pitch and were            programme in order to carry out repairs
                                             identified in the 6 Maunsel! &Partners
                                                                                         considering 32 including a greater
nothing to do with crowd evacuation’
                                             report* on concrete bridges.
                                                                                         concentration on maintenance and
he said. ‘But it was always in my mind                                                   inspection.       '
that in a real emergency they would              The report says that a total of
                                                                                             Every effort should be made to
act as a good safety valve.’ The gates’       £880M needs to be spent on streng­
                                                                                         prevent bridge joints from leaking.
spring loaded quick release catches
are designed so they cannot be
                                              thening the structures. Roads &
                                              Traffic Minister Peter Bottomley said
                                                                                         Concrete surfaces exposed to spray       NCE gets a                         '
opened from inside the terracing.
    The perimeter fencing was re­
                                              that the greater proportion of this had
                                              already been anticipated and included
                                                                                         but not to'rain should be impregnated
                                                                                         with silane, then washed down after      new editor
                                                                                         every winter.
latively undamaged during Saturday's          in the existing programme, valued at                                                Ty Byrd takes over this week as editor of
                                                                                             One future design measure could
disaster but one 4.3m long older type         up to S1500M (NCE 26 November                                                       Hew Ciril Engineer io{\ominf>
                                                                                         be an increase in cover to reinforce­
crush barrier was totally destroyed           1987).                                                                              management changes at the magazine’s
                                                                                         m ent '
and scaffold bars cm two others                  The DTp said that the £380M was                                                  publishing company Thomas Telford
                                              an upper bound and expected econo­        . Maunsell recommends that cover
deflected by up to 200mm.                                                                                                         Limited.
                                                                                         in deck soffits over roads should be
    ‘All 13 or so barriers in this central   mies of scale to reduce costs. It would                                                 Byrd has been managing editor of
                                                                                        increased even before a study is
section passed load tests last July’said      bid for extra funds from the Treasury                                               the magazine for nine years and
                                                                                         carried out. • -
 Eastwood. 'We have now tested again          in the normal way.                                                                  becomes only the third editor in
                                                                                           . Research proposals are also high­
the two deformed barriers and they               The report reveals far more wide­                                                NCE’s 17 year history. He takes over
                                                                                         lighted including the need to define
 are still able to withstand a loading        spread chloride attack caused by                                                    the day to day editorial control of the
                                                                                         rates of corrosion so that timings for
significantly above the design load.’        deicing salts than had been expected                                                 magazine from Hugh Ferguson, who
                                                                                        remedial work can be better planned.
    He estimated that the actual loading     Two hundred random ly chosen                                                         remains editor in chief but whose
                                                                                             Research into sealing surfaces
on these two barriers during the crush       bridges representative of the depart­                                                responsibilities have been greatly ex­
                                                                                        against w ater and salts penetration by
 was probabiy around 900kg/m run -           ment’s 5933 were tested in the two                                                   panded to include TTL’s hew weekly
 50% above design limits and equiva­          year study (NCE 3 March).                 using isobutyl silane is likely to be
                                                                                        increased, as are trials of cathodic      New Builder which is to be launched in
 lent to a load of some 400kg on any             TTie repeat says action is needed                                                September.
 person standing nearby.                                                                protection.;
                                             now to arrest deterioration and repair                                                  The new editor joined the staff of
    Such increased loading is possible,                                                      Long term effectiveness and the
                                             defective bridges. About 20% of                                                      NCE as features editor having been
 said Eastwood, because the assumed                                                     maintenance necessary to keep both
                                             tested structures are ‘poor’ meaning                                                 technical editor for three years of
 barrier design crowd density of 5.4                                                    fornis of protection operational need
                                             that drastic treatm ent involving con­                                               Construction News, the International
 people/m2 can in practice be exceeded                                                  to be better understood.
                                             crete or steel replacement may be                                                    Thompson O rganisation weekly
 by up to 50?? when fans are squashed                                                   *The Performance o f Concrete in
                                             necessary. Only 60 bridges are                                                       magazine. Byrd was previously a
 in very closely together.                                                              Bridges by G Maunsell & Partners is
                                             ‘good’, the remaining 99 being classed                                               management trainee with contractor
 David Hayward-                              as ‘fair’,                                 available from HMSO, price £11.95.
                                                                                                                                  George Wimpey.



                                                                                                                                  2DAyMLim AEWCIVILENCINEEK 9
                 PEN 3                                                          PEN 4
                    8ES                                                         g f l l FAicamvi.



         No 149
           005m
          PERSONS                                          \   No 144 \
                                                           \2
                                                           S \

                                             (2.250mJ

                                No                                                                  / .  No 138
                                 4.525m                                                             / .  3.645m
105 PERSONS                   94 PERSONS                                                            A B 3 PERSONS
                 77777,                                        [4.580m)
                     .325m)
                                                 No 13S 4.495m
                                                   92 PERSONS


        154A                                                        /No 127 y
                                           ' \   .85m'              /2^310m y
       425m
       PERSONS
                                                             /PERSONS^
                                                     \No 1
                                                      2.270*0


                                             505m]
                                           /////
                                           / FENCE
                                           /2.455m

                    (0. 9m)                              <0.885m)                                                    (0.9m)
                 G A TE 3                                GATE 4                                                     G A TE 5




SWFC WEST TERRACE - IDEAL DISTRIBUTION OF PERSONS
