          MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

                                   Meeting held 16th October, 1989

Present— Councillors Ms. Fiore (Chair), Baker, Crowder, George, Godber, Griffiths, Lamb,
M oore, Mrs. M ulheam , Mrs. Nelson, Pye and Mrs. E. Smith.

1 Minutes of the Last Meeting
   It was reported that the City Council, at its meeting held on 4th October, 1989, approved the
minutes of the meeting of the Committee held on 18th September, 1989, with the exception of item
(2) of the minutes of the General Purposes Panel held on 7th August, 1989, relating to appointments
to the Sheffield Community Health Council.
r e s o l v e d : That (a) the appointment under the authority previously given by the General Purposes
Panel of Councillor Lamb to serve on the Sheffield Community Health Council for the period
ending 31st August, 1990, in place of Ms. J. Smailes be noted; and
  (b) Mrs. Anne Hewitt of 3 Drummond Crescent, Sheffield 5, be appointed to serve on the
Sheffield Community Health Council for the period ending 31st August, 1992, in place of Ms. J.
Duggleby.

2 General Purposes Panel
r e s o l v e d : That, except so far as they relate to matters delegated to the General Purposes Panel,
the following minutes be approved—
     Meeting of the General Purposes Panel held 15th September, 1989. Present— Councillors
    Butler (Chair), Ms. Fiore, Lamb, Moscrop, Mrs. M ulheam, Mrs. Nelson and Mrs. E. Smith.
★    SAFETY O F SPORTS GROUNDS
       With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its meeting held on 8th September, 1989,
    the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Departm ent reported verbally on the outcome of a
    meeting of the Advisory Group on the Safety of Sports Grounds held on 14th September, 1989.
    Representatives of the South Yorkshire County Fire Service, the Health and Consumer Services
    D epartm ent and the Building Surveyor who were members of the Advisory Group and the
    Managing Director and Secretary of Owlerton Sports Stadium Ltd., and the company’s solicitor
    attended the meeting.
      Resolved: That, in accordance with the recommendations made by the Advisory Group on the
    Safety of Sports Grounds now reported—
      (a) the Safety Certificate issued by the former South Yorkshire County Council (as amended
    by Sheffield City Council) to the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club in respect of the
    Hillsborough Sports Ground be amended as follows—
         (i) Schedule 3 shall be amended to provide for a reduction in the perm itted capacity of the
         Spion Kop terrace from 18,200 to 16,800 spectators;
         (ii) Condition 5 shall be amended to read as follows—
            “W ithout prejudice to the provisions of Section 8 of the Act the Holder shall not cause or
         permit the Sports Ground or any of its installations to be altered (which term shall exclude
         minor remedial works which do not in any way affect the safety of the Sports Ground) in
         any m anner whatsoever without the prior consent of the Council. In addition, no temporary
         structure shall be installed without the prior written consent of the Council. The Holder
         shall supply the Council with copies of such plans, specifications and calculations as the
         Council may reasonably require to enable any application for such consent to be considered
         and shall comply with any conditions attached to that consent” ;
      (b) further to the removal of radial fences and consequential works at Sheffield United
    Football Club, Bramall Lane, in accordance with the Notice of Consent issued on 25th August,
    1989 and in view of the fact that the newly installed barriers have not been tested no spectators
    shall be perm itted in the area surrounding the new barriers until such time as the barriers have
    been tested and found to be satisfactory; and
       (c) a Prohibition Notice under Section 10 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975 be issued
    in respect of Owlerton Sports Stadium Ltd., prohibiting the entry of spectators to the Stadium.
            MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

         Meeting of the General Purposes Panel held 2nd October, 1989. Present— Councillors
        Moscrop (Deputy Chair), Ms. Fiore, Hussain, Lamb, Mrs. M ulheam, Mrs. Nelson, Mrs. E.
        Smith, Mrs. W alton and White.
    ★   ( 1 ) FILM CERTIFICATION
          Resolved: That the requests now reported of the Senior Film Officer for permission to exhibit
        the following films under the conditions relating to Category “ 12” be granted—
        Film                               Present Category
        “Rebel W ithout A Cause”          “PG ”
        “Stand and Deliver”               “ 15”
        “Young Frankenstein”              “ 15”
★       ( 2 ) TRACK BETTING LICENCE
          The Acting Head of Administration and Legal D epartm ent submitted a report on an
        application for a track betting licence submitted by Mr. Graham Mackrell on behalf of Sheffield
        Wednesday Football Club pic, in respect of the Hillsborough Stadium. Mr. Mackrell attended the
        meeting with his Solicitor to support the application. The Acting Head of Administration and
        Legal D epartm ent reported that he had received no objections to the application.
          Resolved: That the application now submitted be granted.
★       (3) SAFETY O F SPORTS GROUNDS
           The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Departm ent submitted a report on a number of
        issues relating to the safety of sports grounds which required members’ attention. The report
        enclosed minutes of the meetings of the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group held on 24th
        August and 14th September, 1989 and a letter from the Engineering Consultants for the Sheffield
        United Football Club Limited indicating that barriers on the Spion Kop and Bramall Lane
        terraces at the Bramall Lane Sports Ground had now been tested and proved to be satisfactory.
        The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Departm ent also reported verbally on a proposal
        of Sheffield United Football Club Limited to permit Sheffield Eagles Rugby Club to hold matches
        at Bramall Lane Sports Ground, stating that the Football Club had given an undertaking that no
        alcohol would be on sale in the Ground when it was open for rugby matches. He added that there
        was also a possibility of rugby being proposed at the Hillsborough Sports Ground although the
        existing safety certificates for the ground did not provide for the holding of rugby matches.
          Resolved: That (a) the contents of the report now submitted be noted;
         (b) no objection be raised for the holding of rugby matches at the Bramall Lane Sports
        Ground;
         (c) the question of the possible use of the Hillsborough Sports Ground for rugby football
        matches be referred for consideration by the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group;
          (d) if necessary, the safety certificate issued in respect of the Hillsborough Sports Ground be
        amended to permit the playing of rugby; and
           (e) the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Departm ent be requested to make
        arrangements for the Panel to visit and inspect the Don Valley Athletics Stadium, now under
        construction, on Thursday, 26th October, 1989, at 10.30 a.m.
★       ( 4 ) AMUSEMENTS W ITH PRIZES
          The Acting Head of Administration and Legal D epartm ent reported verbally on an application
        for the grant of permits for amusements with prizes under the Lotteries and Amusements Act,
        1976 and the Gaming Act, 1968, in respect of premises at the Old Palace Cinema, Manchester
        Road, Stocksbridge.
          Resolved: That the applications now submitted be granted.
★       ( 5 ) TH EA TRE LICENSING
          The Acting Head of Administration and Legal D epartm ent submitted a report on an
        application for the grant of a provisional theatre licence in respect of the Lyceum Development,
        Tudor Way, Sheffield.
          Resolved: That (a) approval in principle be given to the proposed granting of a theatre licence
        in respect of the Lyceum Development, Tudor Way, on the satisfactory completion of the
        building works; and
           MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

       (b) should a theatre licence be granted, it is not the Council’s intention to impose a condition
    precluding the sale of intoxicants, subject to the Council’s approval of the areas where
    intoxicating liquor may be sold and/or consumed in the premises.
    (6 )   EXCLUSION O F T H E PUBLIC AND PRESS
       Resolved: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting during the consideration of
    the remaining items of business on the grounds that, in view of the nature of the business to be
    transacted, if the public and press were present, there would be a disclosure to them of exempt
    information as described in paragraphs 7 and 12 of Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act,
    1972, as amended by the Local Government (Access to Information) Act, 1985, relating to the
    financial or business affairs of other persons and legal matters and advice.
★    (7)   HACKNEY CARRIA GE AND PRIV ATE H IR E LICENSING




    Application for Permission to Install Television Set
      The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Departm ent submitted a report on an
    application for permission to install a television set in a licensed hackney carriage. The applicant
    attended the meeting to support his application.
      Resolved: That the application now submitted be not granted.
    ( n o t e : Consideration of an application for the grant of a cinema licence in respect of
    W oodthorpe Public House, Mansfield Road, was deferred at the request of the applicant to the
    next meeting of the Panel.)

3 International and Anti-Apartheid Panel
r e s o l v e d : That the following minutes be approved—


     Meeting of the International and Anti-Apartheid Panel held 29th September, 1989. Present—
    Councillors Pye (Chair), Mrs. Askham, Chadwick, Crowder, Ms. Fiore, Godber and Hussain;
    Mr. P. Blomfield and Mrs. F. Deria.
    ( 1 ) M INUTES O F LAST M EETING
      The Panel received and noted the minutes of the meeting held on 13th July, 1989.
    (2) SOUTH YORKSHIRE CHIN A SERVICES CENTRE
      Resolved: That (a) the Chair of this Panel, Councillor Pye, be appointed as the Panel’s
    representative to serve on the South Yorkshire China Services Centre Steering Group; and
      (b)   attendance at meetings of the Steering Group be recognised as an approved duty for the
    purpose of the payment of allowances under Section 177(2)(b) of the Local Government Act,
    1972.
    (3) ESTELI, NICARAGUA
      The Panel received a report of the Principal International Officer on the civic delegation to
    Esteli, Nicaragua in July, 1989, which was attended by the Leader of the City Council (Councillor
    Betts), Councillor Ms. Fiore and Mr. S. Howell (International Officer).
    MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

   Resolved: That (a) the contents of the report now submitted be noted;
  (b) the programme of work for the Sheffield-Esteli twinning link set out in the report for the
period 1989-1991 be approved; and
  (c) authority be given for an appropriate officer to attend the next meeting to be held in Evry,
France, on 14th-15th October, 1989, of representatives of European towns which have links with
Esteli.
(4) BRITISH-SOVIET TWIN TOWNS CONFERENCE
  The Principal International Officer submitted a report on the proceedings at the British-Soviet
Twin Towns Conference which took place in Sheffield between 14th-16th July, 1989, and on
subsequent local developments.
  Resolved: That (a) the report now submitted be noted; and
  (b) the Chair of this Panel and the Principal International Officer, or their nominees, be
authorised to attend a meeting to be held in Sheffield on Thursday, 12th October, 1989, of
Authorities involved in the Conference.
(5) DONETSK CIVIC DELEGATION
  The Panel received and noted a report of the Principal International Officer on the civic
delegation from Donetsk, USSR, which visited Sheffield in July, 1989.
( 6 ) KITW E, ZAM BIA
  The Panel received and noted a letter from the Executive Secretary of Kitwe District Council
referring to the secondment to the Publicity Departm ent for October, 1989, of Mr. Alex Chanda,
Public Relations Officer of Kitwe District Council and giving the constitution of the
Kitwe-Sheffield Society recently formed in Kitwe.
(7) LOCAL AUTH ORITIES AGAINST A PARTHEID EDUCATION W ORKING PARTY
  The Principal International Officer submitted a report on the proposed Education Working
Party to be set up by the Local Authorities Against Apartheid.
  Resolved: That (a) the contents of the report now submitted be noted; and
  (b) the report be referred for consideration by the Education Programme Committee for the
appointment of representatives to the proposed Education Working Party with the suggestion
that the Southern Africa Resource Centre should be consulted on the appointment of the teacher
representative.
( 8 ) SOUTH AFRICA
  The Panel received letters from (a) the Prime Minister’s Private Secretary and the Minister of
State at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office in reply to letters by the Leader of the City
Council on the plight of the “Upington 14” ; and (b) the Test and County Cricket Board, the
Rugby Football Union and Mr. R. Cabom , M .P., regarding the Council’s resolutions of 5th July,
1989, relating to sporting links with South Africa.
  Resolved: That this Panel welcomes the initiative of the Leader of the City Council in making
representations regarding the “Upington 14” , shares his concern and wishes to be kept informed
of developments regarding the “Upington 14” .
(9) LOCAL AU TH ORITY RESOU RCE UNIT ON APARTHEID
  The Panel received correspondence from the Local Authority Resource Unit on Apartheid
relating to the establishment of the Unit.
  Resolved: That (a) the Chair and Deputy Chair of this Panel and the Principal International
Officer, or their nominees, be authorised to attend a meeting of Member Authorities of the Local
Authority Resource Unit on Apartheid to be held on Friday, 13th October, 1989, in Camden;
and
  (b)   attendance at the meeting be recognised as an approved duty for the purpose of the
payment of allowances under Section 177(2)(b) of the Local Government Act, 1972.
(10) LOCAL GOVERNM ENT INTERNATIONAL BUREAU
  The Panel received letters from the Local Government International Bureau which gave
details of a new European Community twinning grants scheme and noted that grants under the
scheme would be available in respect of twinning visits, exchanges, seminars and training sessions
within the European Economic Community .
        MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

   (11) TOWN TWINNING GRANTS
     The Panel considered two applications for financial assistance.
      Resolved: That authority be given for the making of town twinning grants as follows—
     (a) £75 towards the cost of a visit to Bochum, West Germany, from 17th-20th September, 1989,
   by five members of the British Cycling Federation, City of Sheffield Team; and
     (b) £200 towards the cost of an overland visit to Zambia, including Kitwe, from October,
   1989-March/April, 1990, by two members of Project Rhino Zambia.

4 Committee Structure
  The Acting Head of Administration and Legal D epartm ent submitted a report drawing the
Committee’s attention to the decision made by the Policy Committee at its meeting held on 26th
September, 1989, regarding the setting up of a Direct Services Organisation Panel to deal with the
contractors side responsibilities of the Council’s existing and proposed direct services organisations,
with the exception of the Works Departm ent, and to the suggestion in his report to the Policy
Committee that the Municipal Enterprise Panel be renamed “Trading Services Panel” .
r e s o l v e d : That (a) the decision made by the Policy Committee at its meeting held on 26th
September, 1989 (page 652 of the printed minutes) regarding the setting up of a Direct Services
Organistion Panel be noted; and
  (b) the Municipal Enterprise Panel be renamed the “Trading Services Panel” forthwith, the
present powers and duties of the Panel remaining unchanged.

5 Town Hall—Prevention of Fouling by Birds
   The Director of Land and Planning submitted a report on proposals for the removal from the
exterior of the Town Hall of accumulated bird droppings and the fixing of netting to prevent birds
roosting on the building. The report indicated that, in response to his enquiries, only one specialist
firm had submitted proposals which complied with the Council’s requirements.
r e s o l v e d : That (a) authority be given for the placing, prior to the confirmation of these minutes by
the City Council, of an order with National Pest Control for the pressure washing of stonework and
the fixing of netting on the Town Hall at a total estimated cost of £64,232 plus V .A .T. and as
outlined in the report now submitted;
  (b) in the circumstances now reported the provisions of Standing O rder 40(1) be excepted in this
case; and
  (c) no action be taken to commence the pressure washing of stonework while the present water
shortage persists.

6 Planning Applications
r e s o l v e d : That, for the purposes of Regulation 4(1) of the Town and Country Planning General
Regulations, 1976, applications for planning permission be made in respect of the following
proposals—                              /



  (a) the use of premises at 108 The M oor as office accommodation for the Sheffield Council for
Racial Equality; and
  (b) the siting of the Publicity Departm ent Mobile Exhibition Unit in Fargate.

7 Sickness Absence
   The Committee received and noted a j oint report of the Acting Head of Administration and Legal
Departm ent, the Chief Publicity Officer and the Municipal Enterprises Board on sickness absence
in their respective areas.

8 Administration and Legal Department
Retirement
  The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Departm ent reported that Mr. P. E. Hall,
Registrar of Births and Deaths and Deputy Superintendent Registrar, had given notice of his
intention to retire on 30th November, 1989.
       MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

reso lv ed: That this Committee places on record its appreciation of the valuable services rendered
to the present and former City Councils by Mr. P. E . Hall, Registrar of Births and Deaths and
Deputy Superintendent Registrar, over a period of 38 years, extends to Mr. Hall its best wishes for a
long and happy retirem ent and directs that a copy of this resolution under the Common Seal be
presented to him.
Local Land Charges Section
  The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Departm ent submitted a report (a) giving the
conclusions expressed in the report of the District Auditor on his review in April, 1988 of the Local
Land Charges Section of the Administration and Legal Departm ent, which indicated that the speed
of service in the Section had deteriorated to about seven weeks and that, until the proposed
computerisation of the system overcame the difficulty in the long term , interim measures were
necessary to deal with the problem by recruiting more staff and introducing flexible working
arrangements; and (b) reporting the results of the investigations carried out by the Acting Head of
Administration and Legal Departm ent into the matters raised in the District A uditor’s report and
the action to be taken in connection therewith. The report indicated that a computer project which
was to be jointly developed by British Telecom pic and the City Council had now been abandoned
by British Telecom at no cost to the Council and, in order to reduce the present delay of 10 weeks, a
system of overtime working had been introduced in the Section with a view to achieving a three
weeks service, staffing levels were being reviewed and the long-term objective of computerisation of
the Section was to be pursued.
r e s o l v e d : That (i) the action proposed by the Acting Head of Administration and Legal

Departm ent in response to the conclusions of the report of the District Auditor and as set out in the
report now submitted be approved; and
  (ii) the report be referred for the information of the Finance Sub-Committee of the Policy
Committee.

9 Town Hall Telephone Service
   With reference to the decision made by the Committee at its meeting held on 18th September,
1989 (page 512 of the printed minutes) to approve in principle a proposal for the acquisition of
equipment for the Town Hall telephone system to facilitate the preparation of the internal
telephone directory for the Council Departments, the Acting Head of Administration and Legal
D epartm ent submitted a further report indicating that financial provision for the proposal was
available by way of leasing and giving further details of the advantages to be gained from accepting
the option recommended in his previous report for implementing the proposal.
reso lv ed : That (a) approval be given to the proposal contained in the report now submitted for the
acquisition of additional computer software and equipment capable of producing complete internal
telephone directory details and a cut sheet feeder at a total estimated cost of £15,670 and in
accordance with the details contained in the report now submitted; and
  (b) the approval by the Finance Sub-Committee of the Policy Committee at its meeting held on
19th September, 1989 (page 643 of the printed minutes) of the relevant Project Report Form CP3,
subject to the City Treasurer determining the means of financing the expenditure be noted.

10 Sheffield Joint Development Initiative—Tourism Overview
  The Committee received a report of the Council’s Officer Group involved with the Sheffield Joint
Development Initiative and a report entitled “Tourism Overview” of the Consultants engaged by
the sponsors of the Joint Development Initiative on a study of tourism in the City Centre and the
Lower Don Valley. The Committee also received a report of the Chief Publicity Officer on
references to the Sheffield Tourist Information Centre in the “Tourist Overview” report.
r e s o l v e d : That (a) the contents of the report “Tourism Overview” and the report of the Chief
Publicity Officer now submitted be noted; and
  (b)      approval be given so far as this Committee is concerned to the recommendations contained in
the report of the Officer Group, now submitted, for (i) the Programme Committees to determine
their respective requirements from the proposals contained in the report “Tourism Overview; (ii)
the initiatives outlined in “Tourism Overview” to be developed in partnership with representatives
of the private sector within the City, specifically the Sheffield Development Corporation, the
         MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

Sheffield Chamber of Commerce and Sheffield Partnerships Limited; and (iii) the appropriate
officers to report back in due course on the development of Phase 2 of the Joint Development
Initiative as outlined in the report of the Officer Group now submitted.

11 Municipal Enterprises
Revenue Budget
  The Committee received and noted reports of the Transport Officer and the Printing Services
Manager on the monitoring of their respective revenue budgets.

Catering Services Audit
  Pursuant to the request made by the Committee at its meeting held on 3rd August, 1989 (page 360
of the printed minutes), the Catering Officer submitted a further report on matters raised in the
audit report of the City Treasurer on the Catering Service. The Chair pointed out that this would be
the Catering Officer’s last meeting with the Committee before he left the Council’s employment to
work in the private sector.

        : That (a) the procedures outlined in the report now submitted be approved for immediate
reso lv ed

implementation by the Catering Officer in consultation with the City Treasurer; and

  (b)     this Committee expresses its appreciation of the valuable service rendered to the City Council
over the last four years by Mr. M. Trunkfield, Catering Officer, and offers him its best wishes for
success in his future career.

Action taken by the General Manager, Markets
  The Committee received and noted a report of the General Manager, Markets, giving details of
action taken by him under delegated powers to let two stalls in The M arket Place, Crystal Peaks
Shopping Centre, Waterthorpe.

Appeal by Market Trader
  The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department reported that, on 4th October, 1989,
a group consisting of the Chair and Deputy Chair (Councillors Ms. Fiore and Mrs. Nelson) and
Councillor Lamb upheld an appeal by a market trader against a decision of the General Manager,
Markets, to terminate the trader’s tenancy on the Moorfoot Market and stated that it was proposed
to review and report back on the Council’s procedures for hearing such appeals.

     The Committee noted the information reported.

Retirement o f Markets Employee
  The General Manager, Markets, submitted a report on the retirement, on 16th October, 1989, of
Mrs. H. Tennant, Handyperson/Sweeper in the Markets Department.

reso lv ed: That this Committee places on record its appreciation of the valuable services rendered
to the present and former City Councils over a period of 29 years by Mrs. H . Tennant,
Handyperson/Sweeper in the Markets Department and extends to her its best wishes for a long and
happy retirement.

12 Exclusion of the Public and Press
           That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before discussion takes place on
reso lv ed :
the remaining items of business on the grounds that, if the public and press were present there
would be a disclosure to them of exempt information as described in Schedule 12A to the Local
Government Act, 1972, as amended by the Local Government (Access to Information) Act, 1985,
as follows—

Item              Paragraph   Reason

13(a) and 14      1           Relating to particular members of staff.

13(b)             9           Relating to terms proposed for the disposal of property.

15                8 and 9      Relating to expenditure and terms proposed for the supply of goods
                               and services.
       MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

13 Municipal Enterprises
(a) Central Transport Service
      trfTNl     T*Uft»                                     WwA          AA   11tM /\W        ftrt^




   Parkway Wholesale Market




14 Publicity Department
  The Chief Publicity Officer submitted a report on administrative, clerical and secretarial staffing
arrangements in her Department.
reso lv ed   :   That approval be given to the proposals contained in the report now submitted for
  (a) the creation of a new post of Clerical Officer Scale 1 bar 2/3; and
  (b) the secondment of the Wordprocessor O perator in the Communications Unit to the post of
Technical Officer in Scale 5 (half time) for the remainder of this financial year to provide technical
support for the development of the Priority Search Business Plan.

15 Financial Regulations 24(a) and 24(b)
  The Committee received and noted reports of the Director of Design and Building Services on (a)
Variation Orders issued in pursuance of Financial Regulation 24(a) in respect of the replacement of
windows and remedial works at Castle M arket Office Block; and
  (b)    a cost statement issued in pursuance of Financial Regulation 24(b) in respect of the provision
of Norfolk Park A rea Housing Office.
( n o t e : A report of the General Manager, Markets, on arrears of rental by a Sheaf M arket trader
was withdrawn from consideration.)




                                                                                                      If   8?
