SOUTH YORKSHIRE FIRE AND CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY


South Yorkshire County Fire Service
H.   E. W right, M.l. Fire E., F.B.i.M.                                                                 West Division Headquarters
         Chief Fire Officer                                                                             Wellington Street,
                                                                                                        Sheffield,
                                                                                                        South Yorkshire S1 3FG
                                                                                                        Telephone: Sheffield
Divisional C om m ander           K .L .Mettam, J.P. Grad I Fire E.                                     STD (0742) 727202


O ur Ref:      W2763/RW/PD                           Your Ref:                                          Date:    '7   .9 .89
                                                                                                                        363
This matter is being dealt with by . . . S t a t i o n . Q . f f i . p e r   tfoodhouse R               Ext. No.................................


       Mr D Bownes
       Licensing Section                                                               ADMiNiSTRA i iQ& & Lc Gml
       Legal & Administration Department                                                  DEFT. SHEFFIELD
                                                                                            HsAO \jr-           ASSISTANT
       Town Hall                                                                                                  HiAQ
       SHEFFIELD
       SI 2HH                                                                        7j      07. SEPT 39

                                                                                      C fasTI
       Dear Sir

       Safety at Sports Ground Act 1975
       Owlerton Sports Stadium, SHEFFIELD

       Following an inspection on 5 September of the above premises the
       enclosed report is forwarded for your attention.  A copy of
       Eastwood & Partner's drawing no. 8863/1 is also enclosed for
       reference.  The capacity figures that are shown on the drawing
       must be ignored because they have not been verified by this
       authority.

       Any reference to paragraph numbers within the enclosed report
       refers to the relevant items contained within the "Guide to Safety
       at Sports Grounds".
                                                /*
        1         Capacities

                  The stadium can be divided into four spectator areas:-

                  area      1:-       The     East Terrace
                  area      2:-       The     Sportsman Terrace and Tavern
                  area      3:-       The     main stand seating area and Panorama room
                  area      4:-       The     Greyhound Terrace and Bar

                  Entrance to areas 1 and 2 are via the two turnstiles adjacent
                  gate 'A' and 'B' off Lowther Road.

                  Entrance to areas 3 and 4 are via the ten turnstiles adjacent
                  gates 'D', 'E' and 'F' off the car park.

                  There are a number of exit gates provided around the
                  perimeter of the ground.    These are designated alphabetically
                  in an anti-clockwise direction starting adjacent the office
                  buildings,  tfates 'A' to 'H' being suitable for means of
                  escape, although some of the approaches to some of the gates
                  require substantial construction work, eg. steps, handrails,
                  non-trip walkways e t c . These are detailed further in this
                  report..


                              All com m unications to be addressed to the Divisional Com mander.
The gates and their respective capacities are as follows
(Para 234)

Gate           Unit Width            Flowrate/Min         Capacity

A                  6                       360                 2880
B                  5                       300                 2400
C                  7                       420                 3360
D                  4                       240                 1920
E                  5                       300                 2400
F                  4                       240                 1920
G                  6                       360                 2880
H                  6                       360          - __   2

Therefore the theoritical evacuation capacity of all the
above gates is 20,640 persons within eight minutes.

It is stressed that this is not a capacity for the ground.
This authority has not calculated the capacity of the
terraces because this is the responsibility of the Building
Department.  However, when there figures are forwarded they
will be checked against the means of escape capabilities of-
the ground and if necessary adjusted accordingly.

Means of Escape

Egress from the previous mentioned spectator areas to the
gates and works necessary to bring these escape routes to
comply with the guide are as detailed below:-

(a)    Area 1

       (i)             Egress from Liversey Street end via Gate 'H'
                       steps or a ramp, with handrails is required
                       from the top gangway adjacent 'H' .

       (ii)            Egress at the opposite end should be via a
                       ramp or steps etc descending down from the NE
                       corner of the terrace around the back of the
                       Sportsman Tavern linking up with the walkway
                       to Gate 'A'.

(b)    Area 2

       (i)         Egress from this area in via the West End
                   towards gate 'B' .

       (ii)        In order to provide an alternative means of
                   escape from the "dead end" area of terracing,
                   a new exit should be formed adjacent to the
                   Sportsman Tavern leading down to the walkway
                   at the rear of the terracing.  The exit should
                   be signed and constructed in accordance with
                   the "Green Guide". This new exit route should
                   be signed so as to terminate at Gate 'A'.

       (iii)       The Sportsman Tavern has alternative exits
                   catering for a maximum capacity within the
                   Tavern of 200 persons.  The floor area of
                   these premises, however, will allow a greater
                   capacity but only if additional exits are
                   provided.  This may be achieved after
                   consultation with this authority.
Adequate egress from the stand seatinjg area is
provided via gates 'C ', 'D ', 'E ' and 'F '.

The Panorama Room and the Racing Tavern and
snack bar, that are situated under the
Panorama room also exit via the above gates,

The capacities for these rooms are as
follows

Panorama = 500
Racing   =200
Snack Bar = 100

The single unit emergency exit route at the
front south corner of the Panorama Room
requires attention.  The outer door should be
fitted with a panic bar mechanism and the
external wooden stairs require maintenance.
The approach to the final exit door from the
Panorama Room should be level throughout.
Also the wall that separates the Panorama room
off from this exit lobby should be made half
hour fire resisting in order to afford
protection for persons using the "judges"
r o o ms .

The inner set of double fire resisting doors
in the Panorama Room that are situated
adjacent the kitchen and betting office
require to open outwards only.    They must be
made single siring and fitted with 25 mm
rebates around the e d ge s. Smoke seals and
intumescent protection to rebates and meeting
stiles should be provided.

The double fire resisting doors at the top of
the stairs opposite the ones mentioned in (iv)
above also require the same attention.

The double doors leading from the Panorama
Room into the Sponsors Box are partially
obstructed by tables and chairs. These should
be rearranged so that the full exit width is
kept clear.

Final exit Gate 'F' is partially obstructed by
a concrete statue.  This requires removing.
                                 V


      (viii)    Another area of concern to this authority is
                the means of escape for staff situated in the
                Hare Control Box.  This room is situated above
                the main seating stand roof.  Access is via
                the betting offices located within the
                Panorama Room.  The travel distance from the
                control room into the betting office is about
                20 metres.  Although the route across the
                stand roof is constructed to a minimum
                standard of half hour fire resistance the exit
                is the betting office is not so constructed
                and due to the louvred windows via which
                betting is carried out, it would be very
                difficult to achieve any standard of fire
                resistance.

                Alternative escape must therefore be provided
                from the Hare Control Box.

d     Area 4

      (i)       The terrace can exit at the North end via
                gates 'D ', 'E ' and 'F ' .

      (ii)      A clear walkway should be provided across the
                front of the Greyhound bar leading to properly
                constructed steps or ramps etc that lead up
                and over the banking behind the East Face of
                the Greyhound bar and then to exit via gate
                'G '. This would alteviate the dead-end
                situation.  (Para 53).

      (iii)     The Greyhound Bar has alternative exits that
                cater for a maximum capacity of 100 persons.
                As with the Sportsman Tavern there is a
                potential, based on the floor area, to
                increase this capacity but only if the exit
                widths are increased accordingly.

Fire Alarm System (Para 162 - 164)

(a)   All buildings within the grounds to which the public or
       staff have access should be provided with an electrical
       fire warning system to alert staff. Areas underneath
       spectator accommodation are to be provided with
       automatic fire detection in the form of heat or smoke
       detectors connected into the main fire alarm system.
       The installation must comply with British Standard 5839
       Part 1 1988 and consultation with the Fire Authority
       should take place before accepting installation designs
       or specifications.

(b)   A scheme has been forwarded to this authority from
      Eastwood and Partners.  A reply will shortly be send to
      Eastwoods stating that subject to some minor alterations
      to the scheme eg location of repeater panels and
      sounders etc, it would appear to be satisfactory.
Ground Safety Control Room (Para 193 - 194)

A central control room must be set aside for supervisory
officers such as Police Safety Officers etc and should
contain:-

(i)             Fire Alarm Control and Indicator P a n e l .

(ii)            Telephone with exclusive line.

(iii)           Public address equipment so that messages can be
                heard under reasonable conditions (including
                emergencies) by all persons of normal hearing in
                any part of the ground to which the public has
                access.  The system should be capable of addressing
                messages to each zone of the premises. The power
                supply to the system should enable it to operate
                after failure of the mains supply and cables should
                have similar protection to that required for the
                fire alarm system.

Emergency Lighting System (Para 166 - 169)

(a)     Emergency Lighting is non-existant except in the 3
        licensed bars and it is understood that even these
        existing systems require upgrading to comply with the
        relevant British Standard.        (

        Emergency Lighting must therefore be provided in all
        parts of the premises accessible to the public and along
        all exit routes with exit signs clearly illuminated.
        Installation should be in accordance with British
        Standard 5266 Part 1 1988 and have a duration of at
        least 3 hours after mains failure.

Signs (Para 57)

(a)     A comprehensive system of signposting which clearly
        indicates routes to the various parts of the ground, and
        to the exits from the ground should be provided.   Signs
        relating to fire safety should be in accordance with
        British Standard 5499 Part 1 1984.  Exit gates
        themselves are to be clearly indicated  and signs should
        be illuminated by the lighting system.

Stewardinq (Para 195 - 201)

Stewards must be provided for crowd control, manning of
exi ts , patrolling the ground etc in accordance with the above
paragraphs of the guide.

Other Fire Safety Items

(a)     The timber seated area requires the following work:-

        (i)          remove rubbish from underneath.

        (ii)         seal the outer faces of the stand to prevent
                     unauthorised access.

        (iii)        seal all gaps in order to prevent rubbish
                      falling into the void beneath the stand (Para
                      149) .
Any LPG cylinders must be stored in accordance with
relevant guidance notes (Para 155).


Vegetation is in need of suppression as this can be a
major hazard during prolonged dry weather.

Walls and ceiling linings within stands, bar areas,
viewing rooms and covered terraces should have a flame
spread classification of not less than Class 1 when
tested in accordance with BS 476 Part 7 (Para 158).

The timber constructed buildings that adjoin escape
routes should be resited to more suitable are a s.

There are some holes within the walls of the boiler
house that is situated under the Sportsman Tavern.
These require infilling with one hour fire resisting
m aterial.

The beer cellar ceiling in the Sportsman Tavern requires
improving so as to provide a minimum half hour fire
resistance.

The beer cellar ceiling in the Greyhound Bar requires
improving so as to provide a minimum half hour fire
resisting.

The electric fan heaters that are suspended from the
ceiling of the Greyhound Bar require the accumulation of
grease and fluff cleaning off.

The electrical switch room situated in the ground floor
snack bar of the Panorama building requires

(i)   holes in the ceiling etc making good with fire
      resisting material.

(ii) a half hour fire resisting door closing into 25 mm
     rebates which should be kept locked shut when not
     in use.

The extract ducting in the above mentioned snack bar
kitchen requires degreasing.

The dry powder extinguisher and the fire blanket in the
above mentioned kitchen require to be hung in wall
brackets or approximately 1.5 metres above the floor.

The CO 2 extinguisher that is situated outside the
"Judges" rooms in the Panorama building has a broken
discharge horn.   This requires rectifying.
                                       1


       (n)   The general electricity supply should be checked and
             certificates obtained to show that it is in good order
             and complies with the current edition of the Regulations
             of the Institution of Electrical Engineers (Para 34).

Yours faithfully
                    /




Divisional Comman



Encs
                         h >0 * ' ' « ' A 'fO '^            E A S T TERRACE                                   2^
                         ^ J L V V y u I C g O & l >H111 TO 3E USED AT PRESENT)




                                                                                             OU1H Y O R K S H I R E C O U N T Y
                                                                                                 F I R E Gi-.:.V.C^

                         VW      1-^P)^)
                                                                                                              iV)

                                                                                             ECK.EO
                                               TOTAL CA PA C IT Y IN T H I S - A # H f e A M
                                               FOR A SAFETY C E R T IF IC A T f* * $ fl +

                                                                                                        voz7n>




W
 N EW STAIRCASE :0
 BE CONSTRUCTED




                                                                M A IN   STAND S O T I T O
                                                                                                                                                        E ASTW O O D & PARTNERS
                                                    I H E PA N O R A M A ’ ROOM | E O I                                                                 Consulting       Engineers
                                                                                                                                                        St. A n d re w s House
                                                                                                                                                        2 3 Kingfield Road
                                                                                                                                                        S h e ffie ld   S11 9A S     t»i.(074ji s»a»7i
                                                                                                                   r                                DRAWN          *r-
                                                                                                                                                    CHECKED

                                                                                                                                  f                 APPROVED                          D R A W IN G No.
                                                                                                                                      C A R PARK.
                                                                                                                                                    L                   <~Y-
....... .            .I;"'-."   I'l"wt»      r;*-
     Sheffield Sports Stadium
        Owlerton, Sheffield



    Report of the Works required
    to be carried out to satisfy
The Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975




 By the Building Surveyorus Division
   Department of Land and Planning
       Sheffield City Council

           September 1989
CONTENTS


1.0    INTRODUCTION AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1.1    Sections
1.2-   Extent of Report
1.3    General Requirements

2.0    IMMEDIATE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
2.1    Introduction
2'.2   Gate A
2.3    Gate B
2.4    Gate C
2.5    Dates D, E and P
2.6    Gate G
2.7    Gate H
2.8    Gate I
2.9    Stock Car Paddock Area
2.10   East Terrace
2.11   South Terrace
2.12   Greyhound Terrace
2.13   Grandstand
2.14   Sportsman Terrace
2.15   Exit Signs
2.16   Sportsman Tavern
2.17   Greyhound Bar
2.18   The Panorama Suite

3.0    WORKS TO BE' CARRIED OUT WITHIN 2 YEARS
3.1    Introduction
3.2    Stock Car Paddock Area
3.3    Greyhound Terrace
3.4    Grandstand/Panorama Suite Area
3.5    Sportsman Terrace/Tavern
3.6    South-West Corner of Stadium Land
3.7    Additional General Requirements

4.0    WORKS REQUIRED TO INCREASE CROWD CAPACITY
4.1    Introduction
4.2    Rugby Football
4.3    Other Activities

APPENDIX - Layout plan of Owlerton Sports Stadium
                            SHEFFIELD SPORTS STADIUM
                               OWLERTON, SHEFFIELD

                          REPORT OF THE WORKS REQUIRING
                          TO BE CARRIED OUT TO SATISFY
                      THE SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

                       BY THE BUILDING SURVEYOR'S DIVISION
                         DEPARTMENT OF LAND AND PLANNING
                             SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL

                                 SEPTEMBER 1989


1.0     INTRODUCTION AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

1.1     SECTIONS

        1.0   Introduction and general requirements
        2.0   Immediate safety requirements
        3.0   Works to be carried out within 2 years
        4.0   Works required to increase crowd capacity

1.2     EXTENT OF REPORT

        The contents of this report are those from rry office only, and do not
        include any coaments or requirements made by the Police, Fire
        Authority, Department of Health and Consurrer Services, the South
        Yorkshire Ambulance Service, the Council's Administration and Legal
        Department (Licensing Authority) or any other department, body of
        organisation.

1.3     GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

1.3.1   Electrical Safety

        All electrical appliances, circuitry and fittings should be inspected
        and tested by a competent person, and a certificate of satisfaction
        should be issued to the Council (as Licensing Authority). It'is very
        important that the competent person is appointed without delay and that
        the works of achieving electrical safety to all parts of the stadium
        are commenced as soon as possible and completed in the shortest
        possible time.

1.3.2   First Aid Facilities

        The number of qualified first aiders and;the provision of first aid
        equipment and facilities within the ground to be agreed between the
        Stadium management and the Council's Department of Health and Consumer
        Services, in respect of each type of'event and crowd capacity levels.

1.3.3   Ambulance and Fire Brigade Access

         For the duration of any event, access for ambulance facilities must be
        maintained via an unrestricted access, and stewarded gate, directly to
         the ground's first aid facilities.
                                 •-',***
        Access for fire appliances to all buildings on the site must d e
        provided for the duration of any event, through stewarded gates. Ths
        position, width and unrestricted height of such access points to be
        agreed by the Fire Authority, and those access points to be marked on
        any safety certificate.
                                         - 2 -



1.3.4    Stewardinq

         In addition to the stewarding requirements in 1.3.3. above, sufficient
         stewards must be in attendance at each event (the numbers to be agreed
         between the managament of the stadium and the Licensing Authority).
         All stewards must be trained in normal and emergency evacuation
         procedures in addition to the recognition of spectator dangers, and
         should be deployed at agreed positions.

2.0      IMMEDIATE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS                __   _______

2.1      INTRODUCTION

2.1.1    The requirements detailed in this section of the report are required to
         be carried out immediately.

2.1.2    The items relate directly to ingress, egress and general safety
         requirements to ensure reasonable safety. However, sane of these
         measures are short term and will require further works which are
         covered in later sections to bring them up to a satisfactory standard.

2.1.3    The report is based on the retention of all the existing seating and
         terracing (except the South Terrace). The provisions of the report are
         however only applicable if a walkway is maintained for uhe spectators
         use through the South Terrace area.

2.1.4    For clarity gates have been identified by letters A to I inclusive,
         starting frcm Lowther Road and working anti-clockwise around the
         Stadium.

         In the interests of safety and maintenance, a permanent identity board
         should be mounted on or adjacent to each gate to assist identification
         to unfamiliar persons.

2.2      GATE A

2.2.1     Paint yellow box with diamond cross hatching, immediately outside
          gates, projecting 3.0 metres by full width of gates, and provide
          adequate stewarding to ensure that obstruction of the gateway is
          prevented when spectators are in the stadium.

2.2.2     Fit suitable panic bolt, able to be opened by any person, from inside
          the stadium (in an emergency situation) without delay or need for
        . additional equipment, e.g. keys.

2.2.3     Carport structure adjacent to Gate A to be demolished. This structure
          consists of timber posts, timber roof purlins and asbestos cement
          sheeting to the roof. The timber roof members are considerably under­
          sized for their span and are stiowing excessive deflection. Snow
          loading could cause collapse.

2.2.4     Inside turnstile 3A adjoining Gate A, the light switch on the wall is
          loose and is considered a danger. The tumstile equipment appears not
          to have been used for some time. It is therefore suggested that the
          turnstile be permanently sealed up.

 2.3      GATE B

 2.3.1    Paint yellow box with diamond cross hatching, immediately outside
          gates, projecting 3.0 metres by full width of gates, and provide
                                       - 3 -



         adequate stewarding to ensure that obstruction of the gateway is
        'prevented when spectators are in the stadium.

2.3.2     Fit suitable panic bolt, able to be opened by any person, frominside
         the stadium (in an emergency situation) without delay or need for
         additional equipment, e.g. keys.

2.3.3    The wicket door in these gates is not accepted as being suitable for a
         means of egress or emergency egress, when spectators are in the
         stadium.

2.3.4     Positive stand open catches, positioned so as not to create a trip
         hazard, and of sufficient strength for the size of the gates, need to
         be fitted.

2.3.5    Loose materials on roof of ladies and gents toilets, immediately inside
         Gate B, to be removed.

2.4     ; GATE C

2.4.1     "NO PARKING" sign to be placed on external face of gates.

2.4.2    Provide adequate stewarding to ensure the gates      are unobstructedatall
         times that spectators are in the stadium.

2.4.3 _ Fit positive stand open catches, positioned so as not to create a trip
        hazard, and of sufficient strength for the size of the gates.

2.4.4    Barbed wire on top of gate not to be within 2.4 metres of adjacent
         ground level.

2.5       GATES D, E AND F

2.5.1    Paint yellow box with diamond cross hatching, projecting 3.0 metres by
         the full width of all three gates and turnstiles, on the surface of the
         ground outside the stadium. Additionally ND PARKING should be painted
         along the front edge of the box.

         If after an initial trial period of 3 months, the yellow box systam is
         ineffective in prohibiting parking of vehicles in this area, a physical
         barrier of concrete bollards or other suitable means must he provided
         to ensure unrestricted egress from any of the gates is maintained at
         all times during the use of the stadium.

2.5.2    All of these gates to remain unlocked and permanently stewarded whilst
         any spectators are in the stadium.

2.5.3    Positive stand open catches, positioned so as not to create a trip
         hazard, and of sufficient strength for the size of the gates, need to
         be fitted.                             —

2.5.4    Barrier recently installed outside Gate F, to segregate parking area
         from entrance area, has already been damaged by vehicular impact. The
         barrier needs to be repaired, strengthened and satisfactorily bedded so
         as to achieve the desired stability.

2.5.5    On the top of the external walling between the stadium and the car
         park, barbed wire has been installed, and is at approximately 1.3
         metres above car park level irrmediately adjacent to Gate F. All
         barbed wire to be minimum 2.4 metres above-adjacent ground level.
                                      - 4 -



2.5.6   Although the gates at D, E and F have been altered so as to be capable
        of opening outwards, it is found on close inspection that one of eacn
        of the double gates needs first to be opened inwards in order to
        release the second gats in each pair. Having released the second gats
        by its vertically mounted hoop handled bolt, both gates can then be _
        opened outwards. This process is unsatisfactory for a major means of
        escape route.

        Further structural alterations are required so as to achieve readily
        available opening outward facilities for both gates in each pair.

2.6     GATE G

2.6.1   Fit suitable panic device, able to be opened by any person from insids
         the Stadium, in an emergency situation, without delay or need for
         additional equipment, e.g. keys. This need only apply when spectators
         are in the Stadium.

2.6.2   Building adjacent to Gate;G appears to be in a delapidatsd condition.
         Loose roof tiles must be removed and broken windows must be boarded up.

2.7     GATE H

2.7.1   Fit suitable panic bolt, able to be opened by any person from inside
        the Stadium, in an emergency situation, without delay or need for
        additional equipment, e.g. keys.

2.7.2   Area iirmediately inside Gate H presently used for storage of plant and
         materials. This area should not be open to spectators, and must be
         adequately fenced off and gated. When recovery plant is being used for
         stock car racing, the opening to this area must be adequately stewarded.

2.7.3   Partially buried barbed wire in this area- to be removed.

2.8     GATE I

2.8.1   Identification plate "I" to be positioned on inside of gats.

2.8.2   Barbed wire over top of gate to be removed or increased in height to
        minimum 2.4 metres.

2.9     STOCK CAR PADDOCK AREA

2.9.1    Provide additional floodlighting to paddock area and track access road.
         The level of illumination must be sufficient in all parts of the
         paddock and the access road, to enable the ground surface and any otner
         potential hazards to be seen.

2.9.2   Make gcod to paddock ground surfaces to form an even walking surface.

2.9.3   Provide fire fighting appliances, at a suitable positioner positions,
         of such type and number so as to be suitable for extinguishing a
         vehicle fire.

2.9.4    When vehicles are being refuelled, the stadium management must devise a
         safe system to ensure that a NO SMOKING rule is enforced for both
         competitors and spectators who may be near to that operation.

2.9.5    Spectators attending events other than stock car racing should not have
         access to this part of the ground.
                                       - 5 -



2.9.6    Spectators attending stock car events must not be allowed to use the
         banking to the rear of the East Terrace as an access to, or egress
         frcm, the stock car paddock area.

2.9.7    Loose barbed wire to wall between Gates H and I to be removed. Any
         barbed wire must be a'minimum of 2.4 metres above adjacent ground
         level.

2.10     EAST TERRACE

2.10.1   Refix or replace loose timbers to advertising hoardings along rear of
         terrace.

2.10.2   Provide adequate fence, capable of withstanding 3.4 KN/M, along the
         rear of the terrace, so as to prohibit spectators from entering into
         the vegetation or under the advertisement hoardings.

2.10.3   Prohibit the use of the track along the rear of the terrace by any
         vehicles when spectators are in the stadium.

2.10.4    Remove all litter and debris frcm the terrace after every event.

2.10.5    Provide 1200 mm high fencing with gate(s) across the ends of the East
          Terrace abutting the track access road. The construction should be
          strong enough for its purpose ar>d have vertfcal balusters at 100 mm
         ’maximum centres. The gate(s) must be steward controlled during stock
;         car events, but may be left open during other, events where the track
          access road is not used. The width of the gate(s) should satisfy means
          of escape requirements from the East Terrace for spectators to use Gate
          H in an evacuation.

2.10.6   Fix Warning Notices each side of track access road in clearly
         illuminated and visible positions, stating BEWARE VEHICLES CROSSING.

2.10.7    Provide new gate for opening in perimeter wall midway alongterrace,
         and ensure it is in position and locked during every event.

2.10.8    Clear out drainage channel to terrace front.   ■

2.10.9    Remove all loose structures and items of plant     and other loosematerial
          from the useable terrace area before it is used by spectators.

2.10.10 Rotted front and rear facias to snack bar to replace.

2.11      SOUTH TERRACE

2.11.1    This terrace requires extensive re-building tomake it safe to use,
          therefore, it must not be used for spectators until such works have
          been carried out.

2.11.2    To maintain full access around the stadium, the terrace will require a
          path with a smooth even surface to be constructed so as to connect the
          Greyhound Terrace to the track access road adjacent to Gate H. The
          path must be of a width capable of satisfying means of escape require­
          ments from the Greyhound Terrace and be not less than 1500 nm wide.
          Throughout its length it should be adequately balustraded and
          illuminated.
2.11.3   Provide 1200 nm high fencing with gate (s.) across the end of the South
         Terrace abutting the track access road. The construction should be
         strong enough for its purpose and have vertical balusters at 100 mm
         maximum centres. The gate(s) must be steward controlled during stock
         car events, but may be left open during other events where the track
         access road is not used. The width of the gate(s) should satisfy means
         of escape requirements frcm the Greyhound Terrace for spectators to use
         Gate H in an evacuation.

2.11.4   Remove shale overspray from terraced passage in front of Greyhound Bar.
         Make good to any uneven surface.

2*11.5   Clean out any drainage gulleys which are blocked.

2.11.6   The perimeter wall or other suitable structure must be continued
         between the site of the former totalizator board and the track access
         road, (if this is adjacent to the site of the pathway through the South
         Terrace) so as to prevent any spectator gaining unauthorised access to
         the greyhound track or any of its operating mechanism.

2.11.7   The access gate from the greyhound terrace should be removed.

2.11.8   Barbed wire on the stadium external wall to be removed where less than
         2.4 metres above adjacent ground level.

2.11.9   Remove bench seat frcm south terrace.

2.11.10 Iirmediate action must be taken to alter ground levels to achieve public
        safety where approximately 900 mm vertical drop in levels exists to
        East end of former 'Totalizator Board' on line of walkway used by
        spectators.

2.11.11 The extensive areas of thistles and nettles in the vegetation to the
        back of this terracing is considered to be very dangerous.

2.11.12 Exit from this terracing towards Gate G is very uneven and overgrown
        with vegetation. It is very dangerous for this route to be used in the
        hours of darkness.

2.12     GREYHOUND TERRACE

2.12.1   Remove, and prevent the use of, crates on the terrace. Loose materials
         such as these should not be allowed to be used as seats or for standing
         on.

2.12.2   Replace corroded or damaged corrugated sheeting to rear of terrace, or
         seal to prevent exposed rough edges.

2.12.3   Prevent beer glasses and bottles being taken onto the terracing.   If
         drinks are allowed on terraces, plastic containers must be used.

2.12.4   Clean and maintain yard gulleys to terrace front, in an operative
         condition. Any broken gratings are to be replaced, preferably with
         screw down type covers.

2.12.5   Make good to uneven tarmac to terrace front to provide an even walking
         surface and better drainage.
I                                           - 7 -
I
I


    2.12.6    Fix any loose wiring to prevent it being pulled or further damaged.
              - Any electrical connections or joints must be within approved junction
              boxes.

    2.12.7    The concrete terracing to the northern end is cracked, and some parts
              are loose - satisfactory repairs must be carried out._

    2.12.8    The top riser of the terracing is greater than other risers on the
              terracing. Particularly outside the Greyhound Bar this could cause
              a trip hazard. The edge of this nosing needs to be highlighted in
              yellow or white paint.

    2.12.9    'Pit' area at south end of terrace is constructed on the line of the
              track perimeter wall. The perimeter wall adjacent to this needs to be
              increased from 800 rrm to approximately 1000 rrm. The opening in the
              perimeter wall requires to be gated.

    2.12.10 .Loose materials and debris on terracing to be removed before spectators-
            are admitted to any event.

    2.12.11 Timber barrier rail in terraced area to be removed iirmediately.

    2.12.12 Access between rear of Terrace and toilet block, to be gated to prevent
            unauthorised access.

    2.12.13 If Gate G is to be used as an exit gate for spectators (in any circum­
            stances) either the route(s) mast be clearly defined and balustraded,
            or loose materials stored at the rear of the Greyhound Terrace must be
            removed or adequately fenced off.

    2.13      GRANDSTAND

    2.13.1    Repair to a. satisfactory standard, all broken or damaged seats and .
              seat backs. All protruding bolt heads, etc., must not present sharp
              edges, or cause snagging of clothing.

    2.13.2    Refix or replace all broken or worn floorboardingtothe seating
              gangways. All loose boarding to be secured.

    2.13.3    Prohibit beer glasses and bottles from being taken onto the seating.

    2.13.4    Clean all accumulations of rubbish and materials from beneath seating
              tiers, and ensure no build-up of rubbish occurs in the future.

    2.13.5.   Prohibit sitting on steps, gangways and balustrading associated with or
              forming part of the seating.
                                                        *
    2.13.6    Secure loose balustrading to all sections of seating.

    2.13.7    At southern end of South seating unit open risers to 1st and 2nd steps
              to be closed down to 100 mm maximum.

    2.13.8    Balustrading to ends of seating units to be iraximum 900 rrm high above
              pitch line of terracing.

    2.14      SPORTSMAN TERRACE

    2.14.1    Barbed wire within 2.4 metres of terrace level should be renoved frcm
              around the low roof of the building of the southern end of the terrace.
          This must however be replaced by other materials which prevent this
          roof from being used as a "vantage point" by spectators.

2.14-2    Remove projecting screws from wall in front of the low roof referred to
          in 2.14.1 above.

2.14.3     Re-hang steel gate, between the terrace and the greyhound track access
           road, to swing outwards from the terrace. The hinges ofsuch a gate
           must be on the track side of the gate opening.It should be   ensured
           that the gate is capable of being held in the open position and that it
         • is unlocked at all times during any event.

2.14.4    Clean out all yard gulleys to terrace front, and replace any damaged
          gratings with screw down type gratings.

2.14.5     On the large double doors at the rear ofthe terrace a suitable   NOEXIT
           sign should be affixed.

2.14.6    Wiring loom overhead from Sportsman Terrace to offices is within easy
          reach. These cables must be increased in height to at least 2.4 metres
          over this area.

2.14.7    Wires at eaves level to the back of the terracing is hanging down and
          now within easy reach of spectators - it is suggested that all wiring
          in these areas should be trunked.

2.14.8     Steel purlin in 6t’
                             n bay of roof (from tosouthern end) is badly
           corroded and considered to be in need ofurgent replacement.

2.14.9     Sloping coping to top of wall outside entrance to "Sportsman Tavern" to
           be extended to end of wall.

2.14.10 Guttering to entire length.of sportsman terrace to clean out and clear
        of vegetation.

2.14.11 Materials and plant to be    removed from rear access road. This is a
        dedicated means of escape    route and should not be obstructed in any
        way. Any permanent plant     storage adjacent to the roadway should be
        adequately balustraaea to    form a separate area.

2.14.12 Openings to underfloor void of betting booths to be sealed - Adequate
        means, of natural ventilation to be provided.

           Before sealing, earth needs to be removed so that timber and_ steel
           floor members are clear of ground. All timber and steel members to be
           checked for deterioration, and steelwork painted before being sealed
           in.

2.14.13 Remove loose building and maintenance materials from area between rear
        of terrace and toilet block.

2.15       EXIT SIGNS

2.15.1     In all spectator areas, exit signs should be provided so as to guide
           soectators to a place of safety and to the designated exits for means
           of escape purposes. The Fire Authority should be consulted as to the
           positions of these signs and the designated emergency evacuation exits
           relevant to a particular area.
2.15.2    The signs are to have white arrows and instructions on a green
          background, and comply with BS 5378 Part 1, 1980. The signs must be
          mechanically fixed, durable, and adequately illuminated.

2.16      SPORTSMAN TAVERN   ■

2.16.1    Low level void (at midpoint of length of building on the track frontage)
          to seal so as to prohibit debris and refuse being deposited there.

2.16.2    Manhole to the North East corner of the building needs re.bedding....af____
          loose masonry.. 'Balustrading to be built into the construction to
          provide spectator safety to the present 1.5 metre unguarded difference
          in height of ground levels.

2.16.3    The waste pipe entering into the manhole (see 2.16.2 above) is
          unprotected against damage, and the rodaing eye cap to the pipe is
          missing - Repairs and replacement are necessary.

2.16.4     Access to underfloor space, of these premises to be sealed - Adequate
         ' means of natural ventilation to be incorporated by the use of
           225 x 225 mm airgrates at 'maximum 1.0 metre centres. Before sealing
           all rubbish to be extracted and steelwork cleaned and painted.

2.16.5    Vegetation in guttering to rear    ofpremises to be   cleaned     out.

2.17      GREYHOUND BAR

2.17.1    Part of rear pathway between emergency exit and rear steps to be
          adequately surfaced.

2.17.2    Timber gate immediately adjacent to rear emergency exit is capable of
          opening outwards and blocking emergency escape route. Since the
          storage area that it serves does not appear to be used, the gate
          should be permanently fixed shut.

2.18      THE PANORAMA SUITE

2.18.1    The treads of the bottom flight ofsteps, on the external means of
          escape at the southern end of the building, are to be replaced.

2.18.2    White/green arrowed directional signs to tunnel under Panorama room
          indicate ingress direction. These coloured signs should be for egress
          and emergency egress purposes. Alternative coloured signs required for
          ingress routes.

3.0       WORKS TO BE CARRIED OUT WITHIN 2 YEARS

3.1       INTRODUCTION

3.1.1.    The requirements in this section of the report should be carried out as
          soon as possible, and certainly before the expiration of 2 years from
          the date of this report.

3.1.2     Sane of the items in this section are given the extended period of time
          on the basis that the works in Section 2.0 of this report are carried
          out as a matter of immediacy.

3.1.3     If further deterioration is noted, it may be necessary to reclassify
          works as then requiring immediate action.
                                     - 10 -


3.2     STOCK CAR PADDOCK AREA

3.2.1   Bottom of banking to East Terrace to be fenced off to    stop
        unauthorised access to the vegetation.

3.2.2   In connection with 3.2.1 above, consideration should be given to
        forming a purpose made stairway from the mid point at the rear of the
        East Terrace, down the bank to the Stock Car Paddock. This would ease
        spectator congestion along the access road to the paddock, and would
        achieve an additional means of escape (if necessary) from the East
        Terrace.

3.2.3   A separated pathway for pedestrians only should be laid along the
        Stock Car Paddock access road. This pathway should be surfaced and
        balustraded from the vehicular roadway.

3.3     GREYHOUND TERRACE

3.3.1   Fractured and damaged roof sheeting to be replaced.

3.3.2   The cracked terracing outside the entrance to the Greyhound Bar
         requires to be repaired.

3.3.3   All structural steelwork to be wire brushed, and repainted. Any
        severe corrosion found must be reported to the City Council's Chief
        Licensing Officer without delay.

3.3.4   Timber hut in North West corner of terrace to be removed. -

3.4     GRANDSTAND/PANORAMA SUITE AREA

3.4.1   Timber seating units to be removed, and any replacement to be
        constructed of non-combustible materials.

3.4.2   Cracked asbestos cement roof sheeting of main canopy to be replaced.

3.4.3   Repaint all structural steelwork.   Any corrosion to be wire brushed .
         before re-painting. If corrosion is found to be severe, it must be
         reported to the City Council's Chief Licensing Officer without delay.

3.5     SPORTSMAN TERRACE/TAVERN

3.5.1   All structural steelwork to be wire brushed, and repainted. Any_
        severe corrosion found must be reported to the City Council's Chief
        Licensing Officer without delay.

3.5.2   Broken asbestos wall sheeting to rear of betting booths (approximately
        at central point of terrace) to be replaced.

3.5.3   Shattered asbestos cement roof sheeting to rear of Sportsman Tavern to
        be replaced.

3.5.4   Access steps from centre doors to rear roadway to be formed in
        accordance with plans submitted to, and approved by the City Council
        as Licensing—Authority.

3.6     SOUTH-WEST CORNER OF STADIUM LAND

3.6.1   The growth of grass, weed and other low vegetation to be inhibited by^
         either cutting or use of chemicals, so as to reduce the risk of fire in
         sunnier months, and to maintain designated escape routes, through the area.
                                      - 11 -


3.6.2    The presently derelict building adjacent to Gate G must be either
          restored and be used, or demolished.

3.7      ADDITIONAL GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

3.7.1    All external perimeter walls to Stadium to be inspected and all
          necessary works carried out to achieve safety and security.

3.7.2    Exposed reinforcement in track perimeter walling, to be covered by
          suitable means to be agreed with the City Council's Building Surveyor.

3.7.3    Clean out all manholes on the site, and rod aTEl'engths of drainage to
          achieve a clear flowing drainage system. - Any consequential repairs
          to be carried out at the time. The works of cleansing and repairs to
          be carried out to the satisfaction of the City Council, and to be
          monitored throughout by the Council's Building Surveyor.

3.7.4    All trees, bushes and shrubs overhanging or encroaching into the
          spectator areas to be kept well trimmed back.

4.0      WORKS REQUIRED TO INCREASE CRCWD CAPACITY

4.1      INTRODUCTION

4.1.1    Before any consideration is given to increasing the crowd capacity
          above the present figure of 4000, all the works in Sections 1.3,
          2.0 and 3.0 must be carried out.

4.1.2    Any increase in crowd capacity must be considered in the light of
          legislation and knowledge current at the time of the request.

4.1.3    Due to the diversity of activities at the Stadium, it may be necessary
         to design requirements to cater for a specific spectator group, and not
         to increase capacity for all.events.

4.2      RUGBY FOOTBALL

4.2.1    Any increase in crowd capacity for this purpose must be considered only
         when total segregation of opposing supporters has been achieved.

4.2.2    In order to achieve segregation of opposing supporters, it will be
          necessary to have structural alterations within the ground to separate
          the two parts of the ground, the provision of refreshment facilities in
          each part, and separate turnstiles of adequate numbers to cater for
          estimated demand.

4.2.3    An increase in crowd capacity for this purpose would also necessarily
          involve the installation of properly designed and positioned crush
         barriers in any used terrace areas.

4.2.4    Proposals for this purpose would need to be the subject of very
         detailed discussions between all members of the SSGA advisory group.

4.3      OTHER ACTIVITIES

4.3.1    Requests for increase of crowd capacity for other than Rugby Football
         must be considered according to 4.1.2 above, and in addition the
         knowledge of trends of behaviour of fans at the time.


M14ABW
               Report to the
SAFETY IN SPORTS GROUNDS
     WORKING PARTY




OWLERTON SPORTS STADIUM
       PENISTONE ROAD




                                                     JUNE 1989



 HEALTH AND CONSUMER “
       SERVICES
   D ire c to r: D.W . Purchon, M IE H , AM InsfcW M .
                       REPORT TO THE SAFETY IN SPORTS GROUND WORKING PARTY


OWLERTON STADIUM
PENISTONE ROAD, SHEFFIELD

1.0     Introduction

  1.1   This report has been produced as a result of an inspection o f ‘the Owlerton
        Stadium carried out by Health and Consumer Services and commenced on
        24th May, 1989, as part of the annual inspection of the ground made by
        members of the Safety in Sports Ground Working Party.

        This inspection was carried out under the provisions of the Safety in Sports
        Grounds Act 1975 (As amended) and Home Office Circular 72/19-87.

  1.2   The inspection undertaken by Health and Consumer Services has been carried
        out with reference to the agreed responsibilities as set out by the General
        Purposes Panel of the City Council in September, 1987. However, where items
        have been noted which may be the responsibility of other members of the
        Working Party, these items have been included for the sake of completeness
        and as an aid to discussion.                                          i

  1.3   A development introduced into the inspection routine for this round of
         inspections has been a Safety Management Audit. The central aspect of this
        Audit being the carrying out of interviews with key members of the C o m p a n y
         staff who are identified as having a responsibility for safety.

2.0     Structure of the Report

  2.1   The main body of the report will briefly describe and assess safety
        provision at the stadium in the light of relevant sections of the 1986
        edition of the "Guide to Safety in Sports Grounds".   General conclusions and
        recommendations will also be made.   The detailed inspection report is
        included as an appendix to the report and will include recommendations for
        action relating to individual items noted. Where appropriate, photographs
        of items identified during the ins'pection were taken. These photographs will
        be available at Working Party Meetings and are given reference numbers in
        the inspection report.

 -2.2   The appendices included within this report are as follows:-

        Appendix   1        -          Safety Management Structure
        Appendix   2        -          Inspection Report
        Appendix   3        -          First Aid Provision
        Appendix   4        -          Outline Plan of Stadium

3.0     Safety Management Audit

  3.1   The introduction to Chapter 2 of the "Green Guide" states that "effective
        ground management is an important factor in achieving proper safety and the
        management should constantly look to improve safety standards wherever
        possible."

  3.2   In order to assess the level of safety management performance and capability
        at the Company it was proposed to interview a number of key staff involved
        in safety management.
                                          - 2 -


      The first interview was eventually carried out with Mr. John Carter
      (Promotional Director and nominated Safety Officer) on 14th June, 1989.
      The results of this interview are such that it was not deemed appropriate to
      .interview any further members of the staff.

3.3   Comments on Safety Management

      3.3.1 Throughout this Departments dealings with the Owlerton Stadium, the
            Promotional Director and the General Manager - Mr. John Carter, has
            always freely accepted the responsibilities of Safety Officer.
            Mr. Carter's perceptions of the management structure of the Company
            are as shown as in Appendix 1. The links shown in red indicate his
            perceptions of the safety management line of command.

      3.3.2 At the time of the visit the Company did not have a written Safety
            Policy Statement as is required by the Health and Safety at Work Etc.
            Act 1974. Neither were they aware of the legal requirements of the
            Reporting of Injuries, diseases and Dangerous Occurrences Regulations.
            The company do operate an Accident Book system, however, this only
            relates to accidents involving staff.

      3.3.3 The Safety Officer has no formal job description and as there is no
            Safety Policy Statement there is no clear indication as to how
            responsibility for specific items is delegated down from the Board to
            individual staff.
                                t


      3.3.4 Though the Safety Officer has had some 30 years experience of running
            sports stadiums, he has had no significant formal training relating to
            safety.  He does recognise the need for training and would be willing
            to attend any events which were found to be suitable.

      3.3.5 A pre-event inspection of the stadium is undertaken by the Grounds Man
            and the Chief Engineer.  No records are made of this inspection and
            there are no post-event inpsections made.

      3.3.6 The Safety Officer is not aware of the basic content of the Health and
            Safety at Work Etc. Act 1974. He is aware of the existence of the
            "Green Guide" and has provided copies of the guide for a number of
            staff.  He feels that the ground doesn't fully comply in all areas but
            is not aware in any detail of the grounds shortfalls.

      3.3.7 Subsequent to the restrictions imposed by the present uncertainty
            surrounding the leasing arrangements of the ground, the Company
            Secretary feels that considerable expenditure has been made in terms
            of ground improvement and maintenance.  He estimates that 90% of
            expenditure over the recent year has been on aspects of safety.
            Should further expenditure be necessary then the money would be made
            available following a presentation by the Safety Officer to the Board
            of Directors.

      3.3.8 There appears to be almost no training-of full-time and event day
            staff in safety matters.  The Company have'not held any fire or
            emergency drills.  They rely entirely on informal briefings of staff.
            Mr. Carter stated that the Company did not have any laid down
            emergency procedures for evacuations, bomb scares or crowd problems he
            felt that the required course of action was patently obvious’.

      3.3.9 The provision of first aid cover differs with the event being held.
            For stock, car racing the first aid cover is provided by the.St. John's
            Ambulance Brigade who provide of the order of 5 or 6 staff ajnd an
            equiped ambulance.   For dog racing no first aid cover is provided.
                                                - 3 -


               For Rugby League matches Mr. Carter is not aware of what first aid
               provision is made, he regards this as the responsibility of the
               Sheffield Eagles rather than being his own responsibility.

        3.3.10 In previous years the Safety Officer, has been involved in the
               development of a comprehensive Safety Management Plan. This
               development was instigated by David Moore of this Department and any
               progress was as a result of efforts by Mr. Moore.   I can see no
               evidence of any further development of the Safety Management Plan
               however, Mr. Carter did indicate a superficial enthusiasm for the
               project and a commitment to it.

4.0     Physical Inspection of the Stadium

  4.1   Though a detailed report of the physical conditions prevailing in the
        Stadium is included as an Appendix to this report, the following comments
        represent an over-view of the conditions found and an indication as to the
        compliance or otherwise with the relevant sections of the "Green Guide".

'4.2    General Fabric and Structure

         4.2.1 The "Green Guide" in chapters 3 and 4 requires that "all components,
               installations and structures should have the strength and durability
               and be maintained in such a manner as to perform safely their required
               functions and inspections and tests should be carried out by suitably
               qualified persons on behalf of the management to ensure that the
               safety standards of the "Green Guide" are maintained."

         4.2.2 Typical of the defects found which could be regarded as being contrary
               to the intent of the "Green Guide" are:-

               accumulations of debris, cracked and worn terracing, cracked and
               leaning perimeter wall, rusting steel work, rotten and defective
               advertising hoardings, climbing access to lighting pylons, trailing
               electrical cables, unsafe electrical installations.

         4.2.3 The severity of the defects varied considerably from minor repair
               items to more significant structural issues. However, the level of
               maintenance to the stadium does pose considerable concern.  Detailed
               recommendation as to remedial works and timescales have been included
               in the inspection reports in the Appendix.

  4.3    Ingress/Egress

         4.3.1 The "Green Guide" chapters 5,6 and 7 requires that "spectators should
               be admitted at a rate which is compatible with disperal arrangements",
               "there should be a smooth and unimpeded passage through exit routes",
               "the disposition and construction of stairways should be such as to
               help provide smooth and unimpeded ingress and egress".

         4.3.2 Typical of the conditions found which could be regarded as being
               contrary to the requirements of the "Green Guide" are as follows:-

               inadequate signing, inadequate restrictions on access to the south
               terrace, trip points, inadequate turnstile provision, inadequate
               restriction spectator accesss to pit road etc.

         4.3.3 Recommendation action for remedial works and timescales are included
               in the detailed inspection reports.
                                                 - 4 -


4.4    Terraces and Viewing Slopes

       4.4.1 The "Green Guide" in chapter 8 requires that "arrangments should be
             made to encourage the even distribution of the crowd on the terraces
             to provide ease of access and egress; to control and facilitate
             movement, particularly if a local emergency should arise during the
             event; and to contain pressures before they reach dangerous
             proportions ."                            •

       4.4.2 Typical of the situations found which nay be regarded as being
             contrary to the requirements of the "Green Guide" are as follows

             totally defective condition of the south terrace, excessive horizontal
             distances between barriers, inadequate barrier heights.

             Details and recommended works are included in the inspection report.

4.5    Roofed Stands with Seated Accommodation

       4.5.1 The "Green Guide" requires in chapter 10 that safety considerations
             for stands with seated accommodation should be similar to those for
             the other parts of the ground but makes specific reference to the risk,
             of fire.

       4.5.2 Typical of the defects found which would be regarded as being contrary
             to the requirements of the "Green Guide" are:-

             cracked and worn wooden treads, cracked and worn seating with rusty
             metal supports, inadequate seat dimensions etc.

       4.5.3 Recommended action for remedial work and timescales are included in
             the detailed inspection reports.

4•6    Fire Safety

       4.6.1 At chapter 11 the "Green Guide" suggests that "safety from fire is
             achieved by measures which will restrict initiation, rate of early
             growth and latter spread of fire; provide and protect escape routes;
             segregate higher fire risk areas; provide warning (and where necessary
             detection) of fire; and assist fire fighting operations.

       4.6.2 Though a comprehensive inspection with regard to fire safety was not
             carried out, the following items are typical of those which were noted
             and are therefore worthy of further discussion

             use of unprotected wooden flooring in the main stand area, storage of
             flammable materials in wooden storage facility etc.

.0     Conclusions

5.1    The company undertakes most of its Safety Management responsibilities in an
       informal way.  This leaves the way open for misunderstandings, erroneous
       assumptions and ineffective accountability.

 5.2   Senior Management are particularly unaware of safety   issues.
                                            - 5 -


 5.3    The stadium gives the impression of being almost totally devoid of
        investment into maintenance and repair. Though this may be mitigated in
        part by the uncertainty surrounding the leasing arrangments, the state of
        maintenance and disrepair does give rise to concern.

 5.-4   The use of the stadium of a multi-event arena makes it of prime importance
        that Safety Management is formalised.

.0      Recommendations

 6.1    The Company should be encouraged to formalise their arrangements for Safety
        Management in order to clearly define areas of responsibility and lines of
        accountability for the safety issues, including the maintenance and repair
        of the premises. In this way, needs for training and support will be'
        identified.

 6.2    The Company should be encouraged and assisted to formulate and maintain   a
         comprehensive Safety Management Plan which would include adequate
         contingency and emergency planning.

-0.3    It is almost certain that the Interim Report   of the Taylor Inquiry will make
        recommendations as to first aid provision at   sports grounds.   In the light
        of this situation it is recommended that the   Company should be required to
        provide first aid facilities as laid down in   Appendix 3 to this report.

 6.4    The Safety in Sports Ground Working Party should discuss the detailed
        inspection reports and formulate a consensus list of requirements.




        EPU/JH/HG
        24th July, 1989
        SPTAAG
                                                                                                                          Appendix 1
                                        OWLERTON STADIUM - MANAGEMENT STRUCTURE


                                                   BOARD OF DIRECTORS




L’romoLloual Director                              Managing   Director                                      Financial Director
(Also General Manager
and Safety Officer)




Chief Engineer                                     (Dogs & Stock Car)                            (Rugby League)


                                                                         I
 Second Engineer                       4 Gate Stewards            3 Crowd Stewards            Eagles Appointed Safety
                                                                                                     Of ficer


  Ground Staff

                                                                                  First Aid        Gate Stewards        Crowd Steward




SPECTATOR SAFETY MANAGEMENT HIERACHY

INDIVIDUALS IDENTIFIED FOR INTERVIEW
                                                     SAFETY IN SPORTS GROUNDS     -   OWLERTON STADIUM                           APPENDIX 2

                        |          “ ' ' ... .....    )                                      i
                                                                                                                                  1
                        I          ITEM/                                         PHOTO                                   TIME     I
       LOCATION         1     .AREA AFFECTED                  DETAIL              REF               ACTION               SCALE    |      OFFICER
                        1                                                       (O/F/F)                                           1
                        1                                                                                                         1                1
                        I                                                                                                    "" "1.
General Observations.   I Lighting.                  There were a number                  The lighting should be                  1
                        1                            of lights provided                   surveyed to ensure that it              1
                        1                            around the Stadium.                  is adequate, and any                    1
                        1                                                                 necessary improvements                  1
                        1                                                                 undertaken.                             1
                        1
                        1                                                                                                         1
                        1 Public address system.      A number of loud­                   The public address system     Wi thin |
                        1                             speakers were                       should be surveyed to make    1 year. |
                        1                             provided.                           sure it is adequate and any             1
                        1                                                                 necessary action taken.                 1
                        1
                                                                                                                                  1
                        1 Electrical wiring.          Much of the               AC/1/13   All the electrical wiring     Immed- I
                        1                             electrical wiring was               should be tested by a         iate.     |
                        1                             not provided in any                 competent person and                    1
                        1                             trunking, some wiring               rendered safe and suitable
                        1                             is redundant, some                  trunking should be                     1
                        1                             unsafe.                             provided.                              1
                                                                                                                                 |
                        I Signs.                      No Exit, or any other               Provide suitable Exit and     Immed-   |
                        1                             signs were provided.                directional slow signs,,1     iate.     j
                        1                                                                 also signs to discourage                1
                        1                                                                 smoking.                               11
                        1
                                                                                                                                1
Greyhound Terrace       I Greyhound Bar external     The pebble dashing         AC/1/9    Remove all loose pebble       Ongoing |
                        I wall                       was cracked and                      dashing and re-pebble dash,   Mainte- I
                        1                            fallen off and was                   and remove fallen debris      nance. I
                                                     collecting on the                                                          1
                                                     terracing underneath.                                                      1
                        1                                                                                                       i
                                                                                                                                1
                        I Access gate to the         The gate is rotten       AC/1/8      Replace the gate and          Immed- |
                        I south terrace.             and is inadequate as                 barrier with an adequate      iate.   I
                        1                            a barrier.                           barrier and gate.                     1
                        1                                                                                                       1
                        1                                                                                                       1
                        1 Terracing.                 The terracing is         AG/1/II     It is- not reasonably
                        1                            sloping forward.                     practical to take any                  1
                        1                                                                 action to remedy the                   1
                        1                                                                 situat io n .                          1
                                                                                                                                          (1 )
                                     SAFETY IN SPORTS GROUNDS     -       OWLERTON STADIUM

           l                      ! )                                                                                1
           1         ITEM/         1                             PHOTO                                      TlkE     |
LOCATION   I     AREA AFFECTED     1         DETAIL               REF                   ACTION               SCALE   j       OFFICER
           1                       1                            (O/F/F)                                              1
           1                       1                                                                                 1
           1                       1                                                                                 r   ■
           1 Terracing.            1 Cracked worn               AC/1/22       The whole terracing should    Ongoing |
           1                       I terracing.                               be surveyed and all cracked   Mainte- I
           1                       1                                          and worn terracing must be    nance. I
           1                       1                                          replaced.                             1
           1                       1                                                                                1
           1                                                                                                        1
           1 Wooden crush barrier. 1 The wooden crush                         The crush barrier should              1
           1                       I barrier is inadequate                    be replaced if it is
           1                       I and it-is not certain                    designed as such.  Building
           1                       1 it will function in                      Surveyor to comment. i                 1
                                   I this particular
                                   I position.                                                       !
                                                                                                                    1
           1                       1
                                   I                                                                 {              1
                                                                                                                    1
           1 Exits.                1 No Exit signs were         AC/1/15       Suitable Exit and     |       Before |
           1                       I provided.                                directional slow signis       start   |
           1                       1                                          should be provided. j         of      I
                                   1                                                                        season. I
                                   I
                                   1                                                                                1
                                                                                                                    1
           I Terracing.            1 The terracing at the                     The terracing must'be         Ongoing |
           1                       1 bottom near the                          relaid to remove the          Mainte- I
           1                       1 barrier wall is worn                     uneveness and any trip        nance. 1
           1                       I and uneven.                              points.                               1
                                   1                                                                                I
                                                                                                                    1
           1 Barrier wall to the   1 The barrier wall is        AC/1/16       Building Surveyor to
           1 track.                I cracked and leaning.                     comment.                               1
           1                       I
                                   1                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                     1
           1 Roofing to the          I Missing and loose        AC/1/17       The loose fascia must be      Immed-   |
           1 terracing.              1 fascia board.                  t
                                                                              taken down and remaining      iate.    |
           1                         1                                        fascia made safe.                      1
                                     |
                                     I                                                                               1
                                                                                                                     1
           1 Structural steelwork.   I The protective                         Building Surveyor to
           1                         I paintwork is peeling.                  comment.                               1
           1                         1                                                                               1
                                                                                                                     1
           I Terracing               I Wooden and plastic       AC/1/19      All the crates must be         Immed-   |
                                     1 crates .                              removed.                       iate.    I
           1                         1                                                                               1
           1                         1                                                                               1
           1                         1                                                                               1
                                     1                                                                               1          (2)
                   1                                    SAFETY           —IN
                                                         ■ —........ ... 1 .1 SPORTS
                                                                                ■ 1 ———GROUNDS      -
                                                                                                  ..........
                                                                                                               OWLERTON STADIUM
                                                        /       1\               .     .     .

                       1                                                                                                                        1             1
                       I              ITEM/                                                       PHOTO                                         I TIME        I
LOCATION               I          AREA AFFECTED                        DETAIL                      REF                       ACTION             I SCALE       j    OFFICER
                                                                                                 (O/F/F)                                        I             I
                                                                                                                                                I             I
                       1                                                                                                                        1             1
                       I Roof.                                  Evidence of penetr­              AC/1/20           The roof must be repaired.   I Ongoing     1
                                                                ating dampnesss.                                                                I Mainte-     I
                                                                                                                                                I nance.      I
                       I                                                                                                                        1|            |
                                                                                                                                                              1
                       I Rear wall to the                       The corrugated                   AC/1/21           The corrugated sheeting      I Ongoing {
                       I terracing.                             sheeting is broken,                                must be repaired and         I Mainte- 1
                                                                rusty and has flaking                              repainted as necessary.      I nance. I
           !           i                                        paintwork.
                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                1             1
                                                                                                                                                              1
                       1 Wooden snack bar to                    The hut is used as a             AC/1/22           The wooden hut must be       1 Before      1
                       I top right hand corner.                 site for the accumul­                              repaired and not used for    I start       I
                       I                                        ation of debris with                               storage.                     I of          I
                                                                loose louvre to the                                                             I season.     I
                       I                                        window.                                                                         I             1
                       1                                                                                                                        1|            1I
                       1       The scaffolding tower.           The scaffolding tower            AC/1/23           The scaffolding tower must   I     Before |
                                                                is not secured.                                    be adequately secured and     I    start    I
                                                                                                                   the access ladder removed.   I     of       I
                       i                                                                                                                         I    seasori; I
               r       1                                                                                                                         11           1|
                       I       Lighting pylons.                 There are lighting               AC/1/24           Suitable partitioning must   I Within      I
                       I                                        pylons completely                                  be provided to discourage    I 1 year      |
                       I                                        round the circuit and                              persons from climbing the    I             I
                       |                                        there is free access.                              pylons .                     I             I
                       1                                                                                                                        1i            |i
                       I Exit between Greyhound                 The main Exit area               AC/3/4            The trip point should be     I Befdire     I
                                                                                                                                                                       •
                       I Terrace steps and Main                 has a slope and                                    removed.                     1 next        |
                       I Stand seating.                         terrace steps. The                                                              1 inspec-     1
                       I                                        junction is steep.                                                              I tion.       |
                       I
                       1                                                                                                                        1             1
                       I Boundary wall to                       Cracked.                         AC/2/3            Building Surveyor to
                       I Greyhound terrace.                                                                        comment.
                       I                                                                                                                        I
                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                                                              1
                       I W.C. access path site.                 Rubble path. Trip                AC/3/6            The rubble must be removed   I Within      |
                       I Greyhound Bar at the                   hazard and missiles.                               and the path concreted.      I one         |
                       1 rear.                                                                                                                  I year.       |
                       I                                                                                                                        1             1
                                                                                            1                                                   1              1
                           1                                1                               1                                                   1              I       (3)°
                                    SAFETY IN SPORTS GROUNDS     -   OWLERTON STADIUM


                   ITEM/                                        PHOTO                                  TIME
LOCATION       AREA AFFECTED                 DETAIL              REF               ACTION              SCALE     OFFICER
                                                               (O/F/F)


           Rear,of the Greyhound    Much vegetation,           AC/3/7    Fire Officer to comment.
           terrace, Greyhound       rhododendron trees,                  Vegetation must be removed,
           Bar.                     bushes and long
                                    grass.

           Derelict kennels rear    There is broken            AC/3/8    The building must be          Before
           of the Greyhound         glass, loose roof                    boarded or otherwise           next
           terrace.                 slates et c .                        secured.                      inspec­
                                                                                                       tion

           Barbed wired.            Loose barbed wire.         AC/3/9    The barbed wire must be       Immed­
                                                                         removed.                      iate.

           Boundary wall to the      Barbed wire on the        AC/3/10   Barbed wire to be in excess   Before
           rear of the Greyhound     top and the sides.                  of 2.4 m above ground          next
           terrace area.                                                 level.                        inspec­
                                                                                                       tion

           Electrical substation.   Loose and defective        AC/3/12   Secure the wooden louvres.    Ongoing
                                    wooden louvres to                                                  mainte­
                                    door.                                                              nance .

           Area to the rear of      Unrestricted public        AC/3/13   Police to comment on
           the Greyhound terrace.   access.                              security.

           Static caravans.         LPG cylinder supply.   AC/3/11       The fcPG cylinder should be   Immed­
                                                                         adequately secured.           iate .

           Provision of Exits.      The "Green Guide"                    Consultations should be
                                    specifies 12 metres                  held with the Police and
                                    to the nearest Exit,                 Fire Brigade to see if it
                                                                         is reasonably practicable
                                                                         to provide an other Exit
                                                                         route.
                                                      SAFETY IN SPORTS GROUNDS         -   OWLERTON STADIUM

                      I                       w                                               1        I ;    . . ..                1            “ I ’. .
                      I           ITEM/                                         i PHOTO       1                                     I    TIME       |
      LOCATION        I       AREA AFFECTED   I         DETAIL                  I REF         I               ACTION                1    SCALE      I       OFFICER
                      I                       I                                 I (O/F/F)     1                                     1               1
                                              I
                      1                       1                                               r. . . . . . . . . . .            r        .. . r
MAIN PAVILION         I                       I                                               i                                     i           i
                      1|                      11                                              i                                     i           i
Main Stand Seating.   1    Paving.            I Worn and uneven                 I   AC/3/14     The worn paving must be             1 Before i
                      i                       I paving.                                       1 renewed and uneven paving           I next |
                      i                                                                       1 repaired. Ensure that the           1 inspec- I
                      i                                                                       I paving is free from trip            1 tion      I
                      i                           I                                           I points.                             I           I
                      i                           1                                           l1                                    1
                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                |
                                                                                                                                                1
                      I    Seating.               I Cracked and worn            I AC/3/16     1 The wooden treads must be           I Ongoing |                       '
                      1                           j wooden treads.                            1 replaced and repaired.              I mainte- I
                      I                       I                                                I                                    I nance. I
                      |                       1                                               1I                                    11              11
                      I Seating.              I Wooden      structure and   1 AC/3/15           Consultations should be             I                1
                      1/                      I seats .                                       1 held with the Fire Officer          I                I
                      I                       I                                               1 to see if there is any               I               1
                                              I                                               1 reasonably practicable way          1                I
                       I                      .                        «                        of providing greater fire           I               I
                      'I                                                                        protection to the wooden
                       I                      I                                                 seating area.                        I              11
          •
                      |                       |                                               1                                     11              1
                      1                       I Cracked and worn            I AC/2/16              The worn and cracked             I Ongoing |
                      I,                      I seating, and rusty                                 seating must be replaced,        I mainte- I
                                              I metal supports to                                  the rust removed and the         I nance. I
                      I                       I seating.                                           metalwork repainted.              I               I
                      1                       1                                                                                     1I              1i
                      I Rear of seating.      1 Void at the rear            I AC/3/17              The void needs to be             I Before        1
                                              I approximately 100mm         I AC/3/19              partitioned off to ensure        I next          I
                      I                       I wide.                       I                      that no debris can be            I inspec-       1
                                                                            I                      accumulated in the small         I tion          I
                      I                       I                             I                      void area, or it must be     1                   I
                      I                       I                             I                      regularly cleaned.
                      I                       1                             |
                                                                                                                                11                  1i
                      I Absence of suitable   I Cigarette ends were         I AC/2/15              Provide suitable signposts   I Immed-            I
                      I signposts.            I found.                      1                      discouraging smoking.        I iate.             I
                      I                       I                             I                                                   1                   I
                      1                       I                             1                                                   1                   I
                                              I                             1                                                   I                   I
                      I                                                     1                                                   I                   I           (5)
                      1                       1                             1                                                   1                   I
                                             SAFETY IN SPORTS GROUNDS     -   OWLERTON STADIUM
                                                                                      .f \
                                             1                                      '
                                                                                    ■ V.v'                    ' '           1
                   I        ITEM/            I                            PHOTO                                     TIME     I
     LOCATION      I    AREA AFFECTED        I         DETAIL              REF               ACTION                 SCALE    I   OFFICER
                                             I                           (O/F/F)                                             1
                   I                                                                                                         I
                   1                         ']....      ''.. . ' ~                                                          1
                   I Seated area.              I Large vo^d underneath             The void should be                Within I
                   I                           I the seated area.                  partitioned off with an           1 year I
                   I                                                               access door provided for                  I
                                             I                                     cleaning.                                 I
                   I
                   1                         1
                                             1                                                                               1
                                                                                                                             1
                   I Seating.                1 The seating provided                It is not reasonably                      I
                   I                         I is approximately                    practicable to remedy this                I
                                             I 410mm wide whilst the               situation.                                I
                   I                         I "Green Guide"                                                                 I
                   I                         I specifies 460mm wide.                                                         I
                   1
                   1                         I
                                             l                                                                               I
                                                                                                                             1
                   I Paved area by main      I Choked rainwater                    Clean out all surface water      Ongoing, |
                   I stand seating.          I surface gullies.                    gullies.                         mainte- I
                   1                         I                                                                      nance. 1
                   j
                   1                         1
                                             1                                                                               1
                                                                                                                             1
                   1 Structural supporting   I Large electrical          AC/2/17   Suitable trunking should be      Within I
                   I columns.                I wiring and cut off                  provided to all the              1 year |
                                             I electrical wiring to                electric wiring. All                      I
                   i                         I structural steelwork.               redundant wiring should be
                   i                         I                                     removed.                                 I
                   i
                   i                         1                                                                              1
                                                                                                                            1
Rear of Seating.   I Lighting.               I Fluorescent lights        AC/3/21   The fluorescent lights           Before I
                   I                         I accessible, and one                 should be provided with           next   I
                   I                         I is missing.                         suitable coverings and the       inspec- I
                                             I                                     missing tube should be           tioh    j
                                             I                                     replaced.                                I              •
                                             1
                                             1                                                                              I
                                                                                                                            1
                   I Glazing to area.        I The glazing is            AC/3/22   Consider suitable safety         Within I
                   I                         I ordinary standard                   glazing as replacement.          1 year I
                   I                         I glazing.
                   |                         1
                                             1                                                                              |
                                                                                                                            1
                   I Structural steelwork.   I Rusting in places.                  Building Surveyor to                     I
                   I                         I                                     comment.                                 I
                   1
                   1                         I
                                             1                                                                              1
                                                                                                                            1
                   I Corridor behind         1 Absence of signs.         AC/3/24   Provide suitable Exit and        Before I
                   I seating.                i                                     other signs to comply with       start   I
                   I                         i                                     British Standards.               of      I
                                             i                                                                      season. I
                                                                                                                                       (6)
                                                  SAFETY IN SPORTS GROUNDS -   OWLERTON STADIUM
                                                  1
                                              \
                      I        ITEM/          I                           PHOTO                                  TIME   I
      LOCATION        I    AREA AFFECTED      I         DETAIL             REF               ACTION              SCALE  I      OFFICES
                      I                       I                          (O/F/F)                                        I
                      I                       I                                                                         I
                                              1                                                                  ...... 1
Rear of Main Stand.   I Lighting.             I Some lighting is                   The lighting should be               I
                      I                       I provided.                          surveyed to ensure that it
                      I                                                            is adequate.                            I
                      I                                                                                i
                      I Public address.       I Loudspeakers are                   The public address system             I
                      I                       I provided.                          should be surveyed to                 I
                      I                       1                                    ensure that it is adequate.           I
                      1
                      1                       |                                                                          |
                                                                                                                         1
                      I Paving.               1 Worn and cracked                   The paving should be          Ongoing |
                      I                       I paving in places.                  repaired or renewed but no    mainte- I
                      I                                                            trip points left.             nance. I
                      1
                      1                       1
                                              1                                                                          |
                                                                                                                         1
                      I Exit Gate.            I No signs are             AC/3/25   Provided suitable Exit        Immedi- I
                      I                       I provided.                          signs to British Standards.   ate.    I
                      1
                      1                       1
                                              1
                      I Speedway Souvenir     ! Loose slabs used for               Properly secure the slabs     Before    1
                      I Shop.                 I steps.                             or otherwise provide safe      next     |
                      I                       I                                    and stable steps.             inspec-   I
                      I                       I                                                                  tion      I
                                              I
                      I                       I                                                                          I
South Terrace.        I Terracing.            I Brick terrace with       SP/1/1    Not fit for use. Provide      Immedi- I
                                              I decayed concrete                   adequate barriers or          at e .  I
                      I                       I infill.                            stewards to prevent access.           I
                      I
                      1                       I
                                              1                                                                          1
                                                                                                                         1
                      I Rear boundary wall.   1 Adequately secure.       SP/1/2    Police to comment on                  I
                      I                       i                                    security.                             I
                      I
                      1                       i
                                              1                                                                          1
                                                                                                                         1
                      I Rear of terrace.      I Fire hazard caused by    SP/1/3    Fire Authority to comment.            I
                      I                       I vegetation.                                                              I
                                              1
                                              1                                                                          1
                                                                                                                         1
                      I                       I Accumulation of          SP/1/3    Remove missiles and           Immedi- |
                      I                       I missiles and weapons.              weapons.                      at e .  I
                      1
                      1                       1
                                              1                                                                          1
                                                                                                                         1
                      I Perimeter wall.       I Cracked and leaning.     SP/1/3A   Building Surveyor to                  I
                      I                       I                                    comment.                              I
                      I                       I                                                                          I
                      I                       1                                                                          I          /7^ 1
                                                                                                                           I
                                               SAFETY IN SPORTS: GROUNDS    -   OWLERTON STADIUM

                                               1
                      I         ITEM/          I                            PHOTO                                 TIME
      LOCATION        I     AREA AFFECTED      I          DETAIL             REF                  ACTION          SCALE     OFFICER
                                               I                           (O/F/F)
                      I                        I
                      1                        1
                      I Pit e nd .             I Accumulation of           SP/1/4    Remove barbed wire.          immedi­
                      I                        I barbed w i re .                                                  ate .
                      I                        I
                      I                        I Easy access to                      Provide adequate barriers    Immedi­
                      I                        I terrace from pit                    or stewards to prevent       ate .
                      I                        I access road.                        access .
                      1                        1
                      I                        1
Perimeter of track.   I Hare wire              I Risk of injury if                   Adequately steward to        Immedi­
                      i                        I unauthorised access                 prevent unauthorised         ate .
                                               I to hare wire.                       access .
                                               1
                                               1
                      i
Pit area.  Rear of    1 Pit area.              I Accumulations of                    Remove debris    area        Ongoing
east terrace.                                  I bottles, stones and                 accessible to "problem"      mainte­
                      I                        I wood which could be                 spectators.                  nance .
                      I                        I used as missiles and
                      I                        I weapons.
                      1
                      1                        1
                                               1
                      1          »             I Exposed* junction box     SP/1/5    Make safe.                   Immedi­
                      I                        I and electrical                                                   ate .
                      I                        I wiring.
                      1
                      1                        1
                      I Hut adjacent to blue   I Storage of engine                   Fire Authority to comment
                      I gate.                  I oil.                                on fire risk.
                      1
                      1                        I
                                               1
Pit area - rear of    I Lighting.              I May be inadequate.                  Area to be surveyed after
                                                                                                                                 i
east terrace.         I                        I                                     dark.
                                                                                                                                 1
                      1
                      1                        |
                                               1
East terrace.         I Southern end/pit       I Inadequate provision      SP/1/6    Provide adequate barriers    Immedi­
                      I access.                I made to deter                       or stewards to prevent       ate .
                                               I spectators from                     unauthorised spectator
                      I                        I entering pit access                 access to pit road or
                      I                        I road or trailer                     recovery trailer position.
                      1                        I parking area.

                      I Turnstile provision.   I No turnstiles                       Police to comment re
                      I                        I provided.  Access via               segregation problems.
                                               I Sportsman or south
                      I                        I terrace.
                                              SAFETY IN SPORTS GROUNDS    -   OWLERTON STADIUM
                                                                                        1   t
                     I        ITEM/                                       PHOTO                                          TIME    |
       LOCATION      I    AREA AFFECTED       I         DETAIL             REF                  ACTION                   SCALE   |       OFFTCER
                     I                                                   (O/F/F)
                     I
                     i                                                                                                           (
East terrace.        I Signing.               I N6 directional or        SP/1/7        Provide adequate signing to       Immedi- |
                     I                        1 exit signing.                          British Standards.                at e .   I
                     I
                     I                                                                                                            I
                                                                                                                                  1
                     I Crush barriers.        I 0.9 ra high and 3.9                    Building Surveyor to                       1
                     I                        I metre gaps.                            comment.                                   J
                     I
                     1                                                                                                            J
                                                                                                                                  1
                     I Rear boundary.         I Easy access to car       SP/1/9        Police to comment re                       1
                     1                        I park and land at                       security.                                  j
                     I                    r   1 rear.                                                                             1
                     1
                     1                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                  1
                     I Snack bar.             I Poor repair, broken                    Replace glazing or                Ongoing I
                     I                        I glazing.                               overboard.                        maittte- I
                                                                                                                         nance. I
                     1
                     1                                                                                                            I
                                                                                                                                  1
                     I Electrical             I Loose cables and poor    SP/1/8        Installation to be mad<2          Immedi- |
                     I installation.          I connections.                           safe and cable trunkin 5          ate.     I
                     I                                                                 provided.                                  1
                     |                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                  1
                     I Advertising hoardings. I Rotten and in poor                     Building Surveyor to                       I
                                              I condition.                             comment.                                   I
                     1
                     1                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                  1
Sportsman terrace.   1 Area to rear of        1 Perished brickwork to    SP/2/5        Building Surveyor to                       1
                     I Sportsman terrace.     I steel column support.                  c o m ment.                                1
                                                                                                                                  |
                                                                                                                                  1
                     I Void below Sportsman   I Accumulations of dry     SP/2/7        Material to be removed and        Within j
                     I Bar and terrace.       I combustible material.    SP/2/8        void s e a l e d .                one      I
                     I                                                   SP/1/15                                         year.    |
                     1
                     1                                                                                                            I
                                                                                                                                  l
                     I Area to rear of        I Accumulations of         SP/1/12       Remove debris or secure           Ongoing }
                     I Sportsman terrace.     I debris and potential     SP/1/14       area to prevent spectator         mainte- I
                     I                        I missiles and weapons.    SP/2/9        access (see below).               nance. I
                                                                         SP/2/9                                                   I
                     I
                     1                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                  1
                     I Rear access route.     I No limitation on         SP/l/13       Police to comment on                       1
                     i                        I spectator access.                      securi ty.                                 I
                     i
                     i                                                                                                            I
                                                                                                                                  1
                     I Perimeter wall.        I Leaning and cracked.     SP/l/22       Building Surveyor to
                     I                                                                 comment.
                                                                                   •                                 I               I       i n)
                                                  SAFETY IN SPORTS GROUNDS    -   OWLERTON STADIUM

............. i......                             1
                                                                                           !                                    1
                        I           ITEM/                                     PHOTO                                    TIME     I
       LOCATION         1       AREA AFFECTED     1        DETAIL              REF               ACTION                SCALE    1     OFFICER
                        I                         i                          (O/F/F)                                            1
                        I
                        1     i                   I                                                                   .." .... 1...
Sportsman terrace.      I Signing.                I No directional or                  Provide signs to British       Immedi- I
                        1                         1 access / exit signs.               Standard.                      ate.    I
                        |
                        1                         1
                                                  1                                                                           1
                                                                                                                              1
                        I Terrace steps,          I Front fall exists,       SP/1/20   Not reasonably practical to            i
                        i                         i                                    improve this situation.                i
                        i
                        i                         i
                                                  i                                                                           i
                                                                                                                              i
                        I Access to scoreboard.   I Unprotected access to    SP/1/19   Take steps to prevent          Before I
                        I                         I scoreboard.                        unauthorised access.           next    I
                        I                                                                                             inspec- I
                        I                         I                                                                   tion.   I
                        1
                        1                         1
                                                  1                                                                           1
                                                                                                                              1
                        I Electrical              I Low level loose          SP/1/24   Provide trunking.              Within I
                        I installation.           I wiring.                                                     ■i    one     I
                        I                         I                                                                   year.   I
                        1                         1                                                                           )
                                                                                                                              I
Sportsman terrace       I Electricul              I Bundles of electrical    SP/1/16   Remove all redundant cable     limned i- 1
(south end).            I installation.           I cable at low level       SP/1/17   and re-hang remaining cable    a te .    I
                                                  I and with defective                 on adequate supports at                  I
                        I                         I support.                           high level.
                        1                         1                                                                             I
                                                                                                                                t
                        I Exit staircase.         I Inadequate handrail      SP/1/18   Provide additional             Before    I
                                                  1 provision.  Existing               handrails.   Re-fix existing   next      |
                        I                         I handrail loose.                    handrail and cut back          inspec-   1
                        I                         1 Vegetation overgrown.              vegetat ion.                   tion.     |
                        1
                        1                         1
                                                  1                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                1
                        I Roof.                   1 Split sheeting           SP/1/21   Repair roof as necessary.      Ongoing |
                        I                         I allowing water                     Building Surveyor to           mainte- 1
                                                  I penetration.                       comment.                       nance. I
                        I                         I
                        I                         1 Gutters blocked and                Repair as necessary.           Ongoing 1
                        I                         I downpipes missing.                                                mainte- I
                        I                         I                                                                   nance. 1
                        1
                        1                         1
                                                  1                                                                              I
                                                                                                                                 1
                        I Entrance gate light     1 Inexpert repair.         SP/2/4    Repair or remove light         Trained I- 1
                        I unit.                                                        uni t .                        ate.       I
                        I                         I                                                                              1
                        I                         1                                                                              1
                                                  I                                                                              I
                        1                         1                                                                              I        (10
                                  APPENDIX 3




FIRST AID PROVISION AT SPORTS GROUNDS




Interim Provision prior to Publication of First Aid
•por-nmmendations by the Taylor Inquiry




1.   First Aid Room

     The first aid room should be provided at the Stadium which should
     comply to the requirements of the approved Code of Practice relating to
     the Health and Safety (First Aid) Regulations 1981, i.e.

     (a)   the room should be readily available at all Cimes when a specified
                    is being undertaken and should not normally be used for
           a c t i v i t v
           any purpose other than the rendering of first aid.

     (b)   the room should be positioned as near as possible, taking into
           account the location and layout of the_establishment, to a point
           of access for transport to hospital.

     (c)   the room shall be provided with a wash hand basin, adequate
           supplies of hot and cold water (the cold water to be portable),
           soap and hand drying facilities.

     (d)   the room should be effectively ventilated, heated, lighted and
           maintained;   all surfaces should be easy to clean.

     (e)   the room should be,kept clean and suitable arrangements for refuse
           disposal should be provided.

     (f)   the room should be large enough to accommodate 5 patients with
            sufficient room for peopi-e to w o t k around the couches.

     (cr) the door should be large enough to allow access for a stretcher,
          wheelchair, carrying chair, or wheel carriage.

     (h)   suitable facilities (for example one or more chairs) should be
           Drovided close to the first aid room to allow individuals to wait
           for treatment.   These chairs should be kept clean and properly
           maintained.

     (i)   the room should be clearly identified as a first aid room.    Any
           signing should comply with the Safety Signs Regulations 1980.

     (j)   che room should be provided with effective means of communication
           to and from the central control point and the emergency services.
           In most Stadia the appropriate means will be by means of a
           telephone link with an exclusive external line.
                                          - 2 -




2.     Equipment

       The first aid room shall be provided with equipment and "consumable"
       fxrst ^id supplies to the satisfaction or the agency providing the
       medical first'aid cover.         This equipment would normally include
       stretchers, Ambu, bags and a selection of masks, intravenous cannulae
       and a v a r i e t y of intravenous fluids, a semi-automatic defibrillator and
       a supply of bandages and temporary splints for the sort of common
       injury that may arise at a mass gathering.

3.     Personnel

       Formal arrangements should be made with a suitable agency to ensure
       that first aid and medical personnel are provided, whenever a specified
       activity is taking place, the provision to be to the following
       guidelines:—

       Upto 5,000 spectators          -    1 on site qualified medical
                                            practitioner.
                                            1 qualified first aider per 1,000
       Over 5,000 spectators          -    As above plus one qualified first
                                            aider for every additional 2,000
                                            spectactors.
       Over 10,000 spectators         -     As above but the qualified medical
                                            practitioner with have exclusive
                                            responsibility for spectators.

     4. First Aid Requirements after Publication of Guidance on First Aid from
        the Taylor Inquiry

        First aid provision shall be in accordance with any recommendations
        from the Taylor Inquiry except that any such requirements will not be
        less than those s p e c i f i e d in the interim arrangements quoted above.




     EPU/JCH/PB
     16th June 1989
     SPTAAD
                 ( HO !   BE USED Al P R i S H I I |
                                                                                     N O W LERTO H SPORTS
                                                                                      ■5 J A D 1 U K




               I 0 1 A L CAPA Cl IV IM THIS APPIICAIIOII                     a ;-.

               FOR -A SAFETY CERTIFICATE 6 7 8 1.




                                                                HEW

IIE'.v   -r,
                                                               fEIICE   X/

                 —        ii—          vt         r—
                                        i''
                          H A i i T s t t ID n i l l l l C '                         E A S TW OO D & PARTNERS
                 TIIC rAHOftAMA* HOCH | t O I                                        Consulting     Engineers
                                                                                     S». A n d re w s Housa
                                                                                     2 3 Klngflald Road
                                                                                     S h effield   S11 SAS      1.1, I O M 1 I I I I U I



                                                                                                                       SCALE


                                                                             CHECKED

                                                                                                                 D R A W IN G No.


                                                                             OAT
                                                                                                                88 63           /   1.
