          HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                                      305

    Resolved: That (a) consideration of Case No. 18/90, now reported and relating to a hackney
  carriage vehicle licence, be deferred at the request of the applicant pending the carrying out of
  tests on the other three vehicles now mentioned for which the licensee also holds licences; and
    (b) the restriction imposed on the previous owner of the hackney carriage vehicle referred to in
  Case 19/90, be removed.
  Advertising on Private Hire Vehicles
    The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported verbally on an application for
  permission to display advertisements on the exterior surface of the front doors of private hire
  vehicles. The applicant attended the meeting to support his application.
    Resolved: That the Council’s arrangements for the granting of permission for the display of
  advertisements on the exterior surfaces of the front doors of hackney carriages be extended to
  include private hire vehicles.
     At this point in the proceedings, the meeting was re-opened to the public and the press.
★ (3) SEX ESTABLISHM ENT
    The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported verbally on an application for the
  renewal of a sex shop licence in respect of premises at 755 Attercliffe Road, Sheffield.
    Resolved: That consideration of the application now mentioned be deferred to the next
  meeting of this Panel and the Head of Administration and Legal Department be requested to
  submit a full report on the application.
★ (4) FILM CERTIFICATION
    Resolved: That the requests contained in the report of the Senior Film Officer now submitted
  for permission to exhibit the following uncertificated films under the conditions relating to the
  category stated be granted—
  Film                                     Proposed Category
  Anam Cara                                 “Sheffield PG”
  Crimestrike                               “Sheffield 15”
★ (5) SAFETY O F SPORTS GROUNDS
  Safety o f Sports Grounds Advisory Group
    The Panel received and noted the minutes of meetings of the Safety of Sports Grounds
  Advisory Group held on 9th March and 6th and 24th April, 1990.
  Hillsborough Sports Ground (Sheffield Wednesday)
  South Stand Seating and Exits
    The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on a proposal
  submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners, Consulting Engineers, for works to be carried out
  in the South Stand atthe Hillsborough Sports Ground (SheffieldWednesday) to the covered
  seating and the uncovered seating and to provide rails to the front wall andassociated stairway.
  The report enclosed letters from the Consulting Engineers dated 29th March, 9th April and 8th
  May, 1990, and from the South Yorkshire County Fire Service dated 12th April and 1st May,
  1990, and a memorandum from the Building Surveyor dated 18th May, 1990.
    Resolved: That (a) approval be given to the three proposals contained in the report now
  submitted subject to the incorporation into the proposed schemes of the comments of the Safety
  of Sports Grounds Advisory Group as detailed in Section 3 of the report;
    (b) all works on the three proposals are to be completed by the start of the 1990/91 football
  season; and
     (c) the Head of Administration and Legal Department be requested to obtain further relevant
  information relating to the recent changes in North American legislation concerning non-
  continuous centre handrailing for consideration by the Home Office.
  North Stand Seating
    The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on a proposal
  submitted by the Consulting Engineers on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club for the
  widening of gangways in the North Stand at the Hillsborough Sports Ground and for the
306         HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

  provision of openings along the front of the North Stand, in response to comments of the Chief
  Fire Officer and the Director of Health and Consumer Services. The report enclosed letters from
  the South Yorkshire County Fire Service dated 26th September, 1989, and 1st May, 1990, an
  extract from the Annual Report for 1989 of the Director of Health and Consumer Services and
  letters from the Consulting Engineers dated 12th April, 1990, and 21st May, 1990.
    Resolved: That (a) approval be given to the proposal detailed by the Consulting Engineers in
  their letter of 12th April, 1990, and plans Nod. 12267/17 and 18, subject to compliance with the
  comments of the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group detailed in Section 3 of the report
  now submitted but excluding Item 3.1.2;
    (b) the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group be requested to report back to this Panel, as
  soon as possible, on their requirements regarding Gate A; and
    (c) all work connected with the proposal is to be completed by the start of the 1990/91 football
  season.
  North Stand Heating for Hospitality Suites
    The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on a proposal
  submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners (Consulting Engineers) on behalf of Sheffield
  Wednesday Football Club to carry out improvements to the heating of the hospitality suites at the
  Hillsborough Sports Ground. The report enclosed copies of letters from the Consulting
  Engineers dated 12th March, 1990, and the South Yorkshire County Fire Service dated 18th
  April, 1990, and memoranda from the Building Surveyor dated 17th May, 1990, and from the
  Director of Health and Consumer Services dated 25th April, 1990.
    Resolved: That (a) approval be given to the proposal outlined by the Consulting Engineers in
  their letter of 12th March, 1990, subject to compliance with the comments of the Safety of Sports
  Grounds Advisory Group as detailed in Section 3 of the report now submitted; and
   (b) the Consulting Engineers be advised of the comments of the Safety of Sports Grounds
  Advisory Group concerning the use and installation of natural gas in stadia within the City.
  West Stand Rails
    The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on a proposal
  submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club for
  the fixing of rails to the front wall of the West Stand. The report enclosed copies of a letter from
  the Consulting Engineers dated 19th April, 1990, and a memorandum from the Building
  Surveyor dated 17th May, 1990.
    Resolved: That (a) approval be given to the proposal detailed by the Consulting Engineers in
  their letter dated 19th April, 1990, and plan No. 12267/2B; and
      (b) all work on the proposal is to be completed by the start of the 1990/91 football season.
  West Stand Hand Rails
    The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on a proposal
  submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club for
  the installation of hand rails around the staircase at the back of the West Stand of the
  Hillsborough Stadium. The report enclosed a letter from the Consulting Engineers dated 12th
  April, 1990.
    Resolved: That (a) approval be given to the proposal detailed by the Consulting Engineers in
  their letter dated 12th April, 1990, and plan No. 12267/2A; and
      (b) all works on the proposal are to be completed by the start of the 1990/91 football season.
 Bramall Lane Sports Ground (Sheffield United)
 Emergency Land Line Telephone System
    The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on action which he had
 taken in conjunction with the Chair of the Panel in authorising a proposal submitted by Messrs.
 Eastwood and Partners, Consulting Engineers, on behalf of Sheffield United Football Club to
 install an emergency land line telephone system at the Bramall Lane Sports Ground. The report
 enclosed copies of letters from the Consulting Engineers dated 12th April, 1990, and the Chief
 Metropolitan Ambulance Officer dated 25th April, 1990, and a memorandum from the Building
 Surveyor dated 11th May, 1990.
