H lL L S W fL O O x H   D (W   R X



 F l( J b   (< + )
                                                  Wandsworth
                                                   Chief Executive & Director of Administration
                                                   Gerald Jones



                                                   Wandsworth Borough Council
                                                  Administration Department
                                                   The Town Hall Wandsworth High Street
                                                   LONDON SW18 2PU

                                                   DX 59054 WANDSWORTH NORTH DX
                                                   Direct line 0 8 *8 7 1 6073
                                                   Switchboard 081-871 6000
The Chief Executive,                               Fax 081-871 7560
County Councils,                                   Contact        MR. N.H. POWLSON
District Councils,                                 Our ref        HOU/NHP/MKW
London Borough Councils' in England.               Youf ref


                                                   Date      y   October, 1990




                                                  2 3 OCT 1990
Dear Colleague,

Report of the Trustees to the Clapham Junction
Railway Disasteir.

The Trustees of the above Fund have now produced their final report and
I enclose a copy for your information. At the time of the Clapham
Junction railway disaster Wandsworth Council and the Trustees to the'
disaster fund received considerable assistance from other authorities
who had suffered disasters in their areas and it was felt tha;t, in turn
information on our experiences may be helpful to other authorities.

In producing their report the Trustees have included within it
information concerning some of the fund raising activities which
occurred prior to the Trust being set up and also a copy of the leaflet
which was issued by the various social services departments to those'
directly affected by the disaster.  These they might prove to be
valuable reference material for an authority who, when faced with a
disaster, needs to take action in respect of these matters within hours ■
of the disaster occurring.

Needless to say, should any other authority be faced with a situation
similar to the Clapham rail disaster in the future I would be more than
happy to assist with more detailed information,on our experiences.

 Yours sincerely,




 G. K. JONES
 Chief Executive, and
 Director of Administration
       MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES POLICY WORKING GROUP

        Meeting to be held on Friday, 1st September, 1989 at 2.00 p.m.
                      in the Town Hall (Conference Room)


                                 A G E N D A


SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
Report of the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department.
                                           (Copy herewith)
1



          REPORT OF ACTING HEAD OF ADMINISTRATION & LEGAL DEPARTMENT CONCERNING
          SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS TO SPECIAL MEETING OF THE MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE
          AND GENERAL'SERVICES POLICY WORKING GROUP
                               V'-
    1.    Purpose of Report

          To update members upon the action taken as a result of the Inquiry of Lord
          Justice Taylor into the Hillsborough Disaster and to enable members to
          give consideration to further action which is required. This report
          contains a summary of the action which has been taken so far and
          enumerates a number of issues which require views from members.

    2.    Summary of Action Taken

    2.1   Following the publication of Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report on the
           4th August, 1989, copies of the Report were made available in the Members
           Library.

    2.2   A copy of the Interim recommendations contained in the Report is attached
           at Appendix A. The items marked with an asterisk required implementation
           prior to commencement of the football season.

    2.3   Immediately after publication of the Report, the Acting Head of the
           Administration & Legal Department wrote to Sheffield Wednesday Football
           Club, Sheffield United Football Club and Sheffield Sports Stadium asking
           for confirmation of the action they had taken to activate those
           recommendations.

    2.4   The Acting Head of the Administration & Legal Department also wrote to the
          Police, the Fire Service, the Building Surveyor and the Director of Health
          & Consumer Services for their views upon the interim recommendations and
          the action which needed to be taken as a matter of urgency.

    2.5   On the 9th August, it became known that a pre-season match was taking
          place at Sheffield United Club. To regulate the position, the Chief
          Executive, in the absence of the Acting Head of the Administration and
          Legal Department, issued an interim Safety Certificate to the Club. This
          contained basic safety provisions and also made specific reference to the
          interim recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor, which required
          implementation forthwith.

    2.6   The Chief Executive also issued a Notice of Amendment in respect of the
          certificate issued to Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to reflect the
          items which needed immediate implementation pursuant to Lord Justice
          Taylor's interim recommendations.

    2.7   The action of the Chief Executive was approved by the General Purposes
          Panel on the 17th August. The General Purposes Panel also approved
          further amendments relating to the use of the North Stand at Sheffield
          Wednesday Football Club and the use of the North West Terrace at Sheffield
          Wednesday Football Club. A copy of the resolution of the General Purposes
          Panel is attached at Appendix B.

    2.8   Most of the interim recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor have been
          implemented. The following paragraph provides more detail about this.

    3•    Implementation of Recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor

          Revised capacities have been calculated and the appropriate
          reduction made. Arrangements have been made to count the number of
          spectators entering each self-contained area. Written agreements have
been entered into with both the Football Clubs and the Police setting out
responsibilities for crowd safety and control and the filling of terraces.
Stewarding arrangements have been improved in accordance with Lord Justice
Taylor's interim recommendations. Gates in radial or perimeter fences
have been painted in a distinctive colour. The Football Clubs have
confirmed that gates to the pitch will be kept open during specified
activities- Police Officers have been allocated in respect of each
perimeter fence. Cutting equipment has been made available. Inspections
of crush barriers have taken place and arrangements are in hand for
replacement of those affected by corrosion. The question of layout of
barriers has also been addressed. The Clubs have also inspected
turnstiles. Signposting has been reviewed and also the information
printed on tickets. Police planning has also been revised and the
co-ordination of emergency facilities. The first aid and medical
facilities as required in recommendations 39 to 42 of Lord Justice Taylor
have also been effected. Members should, however, note that a
satisfactory response has not been received from Sheffield Sports Stadium
concerning these general safety issues.

Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
(a)    Revised capacities for calculation have been mad? in accordance
       with Chapter 16 of the Green Guide and a deduction of 15? made to
       improve the safety margin. The revised capacity is reflected in
       the notice of amendment of the Safety Certificate. Thus,
       recommendations 1 and 2 of Lord Justice Taylor have been
       implemented.

(b)    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club have indicated that they propose
        to limit the number of spectators entering each self contained pen
        or area using a computer system. The detail of this is provided in
        the agreement they have entered into with the Police in accordance
       with recommendation 4 of Lord Justice Taylor. It is not clear from
        this how they propose to achieve a closing of access to the pen or
       area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached. The Acting
       Head of Administration and Legal Department wrote to the Club on
        the 16th August for clarification of this matter. Response has not
        yet been received.

(c)    A copy of the agreement between the Club and the Police    as requif   ’l
        by recommendation 4 is attached.

(d)    In accordance with recommendation 5, the Club have agreed to
        appoint stewards on the perimeter track for the purpose of checking
        crowd conditions for possible overcrowding or distress. There will
        be a need to revise the Safety Certificate to reflect the new
        levels of stewarding.

(e)     Discussions between the Football Club and Police are taking place
         and training sessions to ensure that officers and stewards are
      - fully briefed and trained with regard to the recognition of crowd
         densities, signs of distress and crowd dynamics.. There  is a need
         for enquiry to be made as to the full details of this.

(f)    In accordance with recommendation,7, the gates and perimeter fences
        have been painted in a different colour from the rest of the fence
        and marked "emergency exit".

(g)    In accordance with recommendation 8, the requirement for perimeter
        fence gates to remain open during specified activities has been
        made a condition of the Safety Certificate. Sheffield Wednesday
        Football Club have also confirmed that this will be done.
In accordance with recommendation 9, the   Club have confirmed that a
Police Officer will be stationed at each   gate in the $enf£ and will
be easily identifiable by the stewards.    He will be able to make
contact with the Police Control Room and   will be in control of that
gate.

In accordance with recommendation ‘foj k i s has been made a
condition of the Safety Certificate. The Club have also indicated
that they have provided four sets of bolt cutters. Two sets will
be dispersed at each fence area, stored in boxes, clearly marked
"emergency equipment". The stewards for each area will be trained
in the use of this equipment and it will be the policy of the Club
to ensure each steward is regularly deployed in the same area with
the same responsibilities.

In accordance with recommendation 11, the Club have confirmed that
crush barriers have been inspected and that those showing corrosion
will be repaired or replaced. The Acting Head of Administration
and Legal Department has written to the Club asking for the details
of inspections and details of which barriers have been repaired or
replaced. Sitej^ meetings have been arranged with the Building
Surveyors, the Fire Service and Environmental Health Officers in
order that further progress can be made in this area.

In accordance with recommendation 12, site meetings have been
arranged with all interested parties to discuss this complex:
matter.

In accordance with recommendation 18, the turnstiles have been
inspected. The Club has provided a report of the examination.
This is attached. The Club have also provided statistics assessed
by the Health and Safety Executive which assess the potential rate
of flow. It must be appreciated that this is purely speculative
and further steps will have to be taken to undertake further tests.
This will be essential to ensure compliance with recommendation 19.
The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department wrote to the
Club on the 17th August asking for this information for the third
time. It has not yet been supplied.

No action has been taken, as far the Acting Head of Administration
and Legal Department is aware to install closeacircuit television.

In accordance with recommendation 22, the signposting has been
reviewed. An inspection has been undertaken by the Chief Licensing
Officer who confirmed that it complied with recommendation 22.

In accordance with recommendation 23, the Club have confirmed that
the printing of tickets has been reviewed and styled in accordance
with the recommendation. A copy has not yet been supplied.

In accordance with recommendation 24, the Club have confirmed that
tickets will be printed with the request that spectators should be
in position not later than 45 minutes before commencement of the
game.

Recommendation 25 has not yet been addressed from the point of view
of the Local Authority.

In accordance with recommendation 26, Mr. P. Hayes, Deputy Chief
Constable has been designated as the Senior Officer.
(s)   With reference to recommendation 35, the Police and Ambulance
       Services have nominated senior officers. Enquiries will need to be
      made to establish the proposed liaison. Essentially, the
       co-ordination of emergency services is a matter for those
       Authorities.

(t)   The requirements of recommendation 39 have been incorporated in the
       amended Safety Certificate. The requirement to employ a medical
       practitioner in accordance with recommendation 41 has also been
       made a condition. The Club have confirmed that both these
       recommendations will be implemented. Similarly, it has been made a
       condition of the revised Safety Certificate that one fully equipped
       ambulance where a crowd of 5,000 or more is anticipated shall be in
       attendance. Again, this has been confirmed by the Club. It will
       be necessary for the Local Authority to take the advice of the
       Ambulance and Emergency Services to ensure that compliance with
       recommendations 40 and 43 is achieved.

Sheffield United Football Club

(a)   A revised calculation of the capacity in accordance with
       recommendations 1 and 2 have been made by the Building Surveyor and
       incorporated in the interim Safety Certificate issued to the Club.

(b)   The Club proposes to use the computerised counting system to limit
       the number of spectators entering each terraced area to comply with
       recommendation 3* When the number of spectators admitted to any of
       the terraced area reaches within \Q% of the capacity figure, the
       computer monitor operator will inform Police Control who will take
       the appropriate action to close down the necessary turnstiles. The
       Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department has written, to
       the Club seeking exact details of the procedures to be followed.
       They responded on the 21st August indicating that the computer
       monitor operator will inform Police Control by telephone and Police
       Officers will then be given instructions to instruct the turnstile
       operator to close down the necessary turnstiles. Consideration
       will need to be given as to whether or not this is the best
       practical means of ensuring that the terrace is closed off before
       its maximum capacity is reached.

(c)   In accordance with recommendation 4, the Club has supplied a   copy
       of the written agreement with the Police setting out
       responsibilities for crowd safety and control.

(d)   In accordance with recommendation 5, the Club have indicated that
       they propose to deploy six crowd safety stewards on the perimeter
       track to monitor specific areas for possible overcrowding and
       distress. It will be necessary to revise the stewarding figures in
       the Safety Certificate to reflect this fact.

(e)   With reference to recommendation 6 that Police Officers and
       stewards are briefed and trained with regard to recognition of
       crowd densities and signs of distress, I have not had any
       information to the effect that action has been taken "to implement
       this recommendation.

(f)   With reference to recommendation 7, the perimeter fence gates have
       been removed at Sheffield United Football Club. The Club have-
       painted the frame of the gate in a different colour and erected
       emergency exit signs above each gate. The Chief Licensing Officer
       has inspected this.
j


    (g)   To comply with recommendation 9, the Club have confirmed that
           Police Officers will be provided as required and their identity
           known to stewards and other officers in the vicinity. The Police
           Officers will have radios to make contact with the Control Room.
           It should be noted that the agreement entered into with the Police
           also deals with stewarding aspects.

    (h)   To comply with recommendation 10, the Club have confirmed that they
           will provide four bolt croppers. These will be used by stewards of
           the Club. The Club have asked the Fire Service to provide
           instructions for stewards in their use.

    (i)   In accordance with recommendations 11 and 12, the Club have
           supplied a letter from their Consultant Engineer, Messrs. Eastwood
           and Partners who have confirmed that a visual inspection has been
           carried out. The letter confirms that some rusting has occurred
           but that none of the barriers is sufficiently infected by rust for
           it to be necessary to carry out emergency strengthening or
           replacement before commencement of the football season. They also
           confirmed that a review of barriers has revealed that in some
           places they do not comply fully with the criteria in the Green
           Guide and that drawings are being prepared showing the extra
           barriers which will be required so that tenders can be invited.
           This matter will need   to be given full consideration bythe
           Building Surveyor and   Fire Service and a further report supplied to
           members in due course.
                   t

    (j)   With reference to recommendation 18, the Club have instructed an
           independent turnstile servicing company to carry out an inspection.
          A copy of their report has not been supplied.

    (k)   In considering recommendation 19, the Club have responded as
           follows: "I can confirm that the correlation between the viewing
           areas of the Spion Kop (southern end), New South Stand, John Street
           Stand and Terraces and the turnstiles serving those areas is such
           that all spectators intended to be admitted to those areas can pass
           through within one hour. In the Bramall Lane End Stand and Terrace
           areas on the Spion Kop (main area) servicing is necessary to some
           turnstiles before this criteria can be met. We hope tocomplete
           the work prior to thestart of the season on the 22nd August but if
           this is not possible, will reduce the capacity in those areas
           accordingly and inform you prior to the game taking place. This
           matter has been referred to the Building Surveyor and the Fire
           Service for their comment for independent checks to be made.''1

    (1)   I have no information that closeJcircuit television has been
           installed.

    (m)   The Club have confirmed that the signposting has been reviewed in
           accordance with recommendation 22. The Chief Licensing Officer has
           also inspected the ground and confirmed that this is the case.

    (n)   The Club has supplied a copy of their current tickets which seem to
           conform with recommendation 23.

    (o)   The Club do not request   supporters to be in their places by a
           specified time.                                   ^

    (p)   The comments made in relation to Sheffield ^Wednesday Football Club
           are equally pertinent to Sheffield United. This is also the case
           concerning the recommendations pertinent to co-ordination of
             emergency services.

    (q)      To comply with recommendation 39, the Club have confirmed that they
             have made arrangements with the St. John Ambulance Brigade to
             ensure at least one trained First Aider for 1,000 spectators is in
             attendance. This has been made a condition of thp interim safety
             certificate.

    (r)      Consultation wiljt need to take place with the Ambulance Service and
             other appropriate professionals to discuss this recommendation.

    (s)      The Club have confirmed that they will employ a medical
              practitioner in accordance with the provisions of his
              recommendation. This is also a condition of the Safety
              Certificate. The Club have not confirmed that he is trained and
              competent in advanced First Aid. Again, this is a matter which
             needs to be taken up with the appropriate professionals.

    (t)      With reference to recommendation 42, the Club have confirmed that
              they have made arrangements with the Ambulance Authority for the ,
             necessary ambulance cover. Again, this is a provision in the
              interim Safety Certificate.

    (u)      With reference to recommendation 43, this is a matter which will
              require consultation by the Local Authority with the appropriate
             professional bodies.

3   Sheffield Sports Stadium

    The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department wrote to Sheffield
    Sports Stadium asking for the proposals on the implementation of the
    interim recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor. The Club have not
    provided the necessary details. The Building Surveyor, the Fire Service
    and Environmental Health Officers are to visit the Sports Stadium to
    undertake a detailed inspection of the Ground with a view to establishing
    whether or not it is safe for the admission of spectators. The Acting
    Head of Administration and Legal Department has written to the Sports
    Stadium indicating that unless a satisfactory response is received to our
    letter seeking their proposals for implementation of the interim
    recommendations, then the Council have no choice but to consider issuing
    prohibition notice relating to the premises. It is anticipated that a
    full report will be made to the General Purposes Panel at the end of
    September once the members of the Advisory Group have reported back
    following their inspections.

    Matters for Consideration

1   Visits

    At its meetings on the 17th August, the General Purposes Panel stated an
    intention to visit all sports grounds with the City. All three Clubs have
    been notified of this request and a suitable date for a visit will
    arranged.

2   The function of members in the future.

    It is clearly essential that there is a tightening up of existing
    procedures and a clarification of the terms of reference for dealing with
    the issue of Safety of Sports Grounds. At present, the General Purposes
    Panel has delegated authority to deal with Safety of Sporta Grounds
    issues. In the past, matters have been referred to the General Purposes
Panel for decisions as and when they were necessary. Members have
indicated an intention to participate more fully in this area; indeed,
this is required by the.interim recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor.
The function of the Advisory Group must be to advise members and assist
them in providing enough information for members to make an informed and
rational decision as and when required. The Advisory Group is made up of
the Police, the Fire Service, the Building Surveyor, a representative from
the Department of Health and Consumer Services and the Ambulance Service
since the interim recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor were published.
Prior to Lord Justice Taylor’s Inquiry, the meetings of the Advisory Group
were not as tightly controlled as they should have been. This has now
been improved. Arrangements have already been made for the Acting Head of
Administration and Legal Department to nominate a senior officer to Chair
the meetings of the Advisory Group and for full detailed minutes to be
taken. When the approved departmental structure has been completed, one of
-the new Assistant Heads of Administration and Legal Department (Legal) will
undertake the function. It is suggested that one way of members becoming
more involved in this issue would be for them to be supplied with agendas
of the meetings prior to the meeting taking place and minutes of meetings    j
which have taken place. It is recommended that this is implemented.

Inspections

There is a statutory duty upon the local authority to inspect designated
sports grounds at least on an annual basis. In his interim
recommendations, Lord Justice Taylor has said that he feels more frequent
inspections would be of benefit. It is suggested that it may be
appropriate to undertake quarterly inspections, once during the close
season, once at the commencement of the season, once in the middle of the
season and once at the end. This would obviously require a substantial
devotion of resources. It is recommended that this is implemented.

Emergency Procedures

In the normal course of events, matters will obviously be referred to a
Sub-Committee of the Council for consideration. The delegated authority
in respect of these functions is vested the General Purposes Panel.
Recent events have highlighted the need for a proper emergency system to
be set up. In view of the fact that the Licensing Department is part of
the Administration & Legal Department, it would seem logical for this
emergency delegation to be granted to the Acting Head of Administration &
Legal Department in consultation with the chair of the General Purposes
Panel. Members are asked to comment upon this.

Resources
                                                        .A-'
The existing structure of the Licensing Section is shown in the attached
diagram. It consists of a Chief Licensing Officer, a Principal Licensing
Officer, three Licensing Officers and an Administrative Assistant. The
Section was originally comprised of five staff which were increased to six
by the addition of the Administrative Assistant’s post in 1986 upon the
abolition of South Yorkshire County Council. The increase was to take
account of the additional responsibilities taken on by the Section upon
abolition of South Yorkshire County Council.

The Section is responsible for the processing, issuing, monitoring and
enforcing of numerous licences and consents; for example hackney carriage
licences and private hire licences, public entertainment licences, cinema
licences, theatre licences, street collection permits, sex shop permits,
mini bus -licences and the licensing of sports grounds. The work requires
a comprehensive knowledge of the relevant legislation and much of the work
is carried out under delegated powers.

The Effect of the Hillsborough Disaster

This has had repercussions throughout the Section since the Chief
Licensing Officer has been engaged full time since April in dealing with
the Inquiry and subsequently the interim recommendations of Lord Justice
Taylor.

One of the recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor is that "each Local -
Authority should review its arrangements for issuing, monitoring,
enforcing, reviewing, amending and renewing safety certificates." It is
clear that at present, this requires a substantial devotion of officer
time and that this is likely to continue indefinitely. Whilst the Chief
Licensing Officer is engaged full time on this task, other important
duties are neglected.

It is clear that further resources need to be devoted to the issue of
safety of sports grounds. (It is anticipated that it will require between
7556 and 100/6 of one persons time to deal with safety of sports grounds
issues in the short term. This will entail dealing with the existing
designated sports grounds in the City, namely Sheffield Wednesday Football
Club, Sheffield United Football Club and Sheffield Sports Stadium. It is
hoped that by next Spring, a workable and well understood administrative
system will be in effect which should mean that there will be no need to
repeat much of the work which has been done to improve the administrative
systems. However, the World Student Games Facilities are currently under
construction and will have a significant impact in respect of the work on
safety of sports grounds.

It is anticipated that additional staff will be required to fulfill these
functions. A proposed new structure is shown in diagram form and attached
to this report. The proposal is that an additional post of Chief
Licensing Officer with specific responsibility for sports grounds is
created. There is also a need for an additional Licensing Officer who
will have direct responsibility to the Chief Licensing Officer for sports
grounds. Also attached to this report are draft job descriptions.    In
addition to their specific duties relating to sports grounds, it is
anticipated that these two officers will as and when necessary provide
support to the existing structure which will continue to deal with the
general licensing functions.

The benefits of the changes

The increase in staff should ensure that the Licensing Section can
continue to function efficiently and provide a reasonable level of
service. It should enable the Licensing Section to improve its service
delivery and enable a review of licensing systems to be undertaken, and
proper enforcement of legislation to take place. During the last two
years, it has become clear that the quantity of work carried out within
the Licensing Section has increased. There has been an increase in the
number of private hire vehicle licences issued in particular as well as a
general increase in most areas. The World Student Games Facilities will
also in all probability require public entertainments licences requiring
additional devotion of time from the Licensing Section.  In the light of
the Hillsborough Disaster, it is important that a proper allocation of
resources is made and consideration needs to be given to the allocation of
resources and priorities in other areas.
The cost of the proposals

Taking account of the recent pay offer, the cost of implementing
the proposals in a full year will total £26,460, taking account
of salaries and additional costs. Clearly, some of this will be
recoverable by way of licensing fees which can be charged for the
issue and amendment of safety certificates for sports grounds.
There is statutory authority to enable the Council to charge fees
for the issue, amendment and transfer of Safety Certificates.
The fee charged must be commensurate with the work actually and
reasonably done. No charge has ye t been made for the issue and
amendment of certificates since the first amendment and certificate
which were issued recently.                     The original certificate
issued to Sheffield Wednesday Football Club was that which had been
issued by   the former County Council. The Acting Head of Administration
and Legal   Department has sought the views of the various bodies
which have an input into Safety of Sports Grounds issues to enable
a full discussion to take place about       thelevels    of charges which
should be   levied. A full report will      be made to membersonce further
information is available in this respect. For the future, however,
it is anticipated that in accordance with Lord Justice Taylor's
recommendations, certificates will be issued on an annual basis
and thus a charge will be made annually. This charge will reflect
the inspections which take place and the administrative procedures.
There may be a need for additional devotion of resources to cover
the necessary expenditure.

Recommendations

Members are asked

1.   to note the contents of this report and to authorise the creation
     of two additional posts of Chief Licensing Officer and Licensing
     Officer to deal with Safety of Sports Grounds issues.

2.   the proposals being discussed and agreed with the appropriate
     Trade Unions in line with the Council's (Responding to Change)
     agreement.




1RPADW/JS
                                       A C T I N G HE AD O F A D M I N I S T R A T I O N A N D L E G AL D E P A R T M E N T
 PR ES EN T

 P02i                                                      PRINCIPAL         SOLICITOR


 POlf                                                      ASSISTANT         SOLICITOR


 POld                                                   CH I E F    L I C E N S I N G OFFICER




 S c . 6.                    P R I N C I P A L LI CE N S I N G
                             OFFICER


                                                                                            I
S c . 4/5       LI CE N S I N G                     LICENSING                     LICENSING
                OF FI CE R                          OFFICER                       OFFICER


S c . 1/3                                                                                                      ADMIN.
                                                                                                               ASST.

                                  ASSISTANT           HE AD O F A D M I N I S T R A T I O N A N D   L E GA L   DEPARTMENT


PROPOSED



P02i                                                         PRINCIPAL        SOLICITOR
                                                                       I
POlf                                                        ASSISTANT         SOLICITOR


                                           I                                                                        I
POld                              CH IEF L I CE NS IN G                                                CHIEF LICENSING
                                  O F F I C E R (GENERAL)                                            O F F I C E R f S P O R T S GRO UN DS )




S c . 6.                          PR IN C I P A L    LI CE N S I N G
                                  Of f i c e r   (g e n e r a l )


                                                            I                           I
S c . 4/ 5    LI C E N S I N G                      LI CE N S I N G             LICE NSING                 LICENSING
              O F F I CE R                          OF FI C E R                 OFFICER                    OFFICER




Sc.    1. 2/3
                                                                                                CLERICAL
                                                                                                OFFICER
SSJpggfi
                                       City of Sheffield
                                       JOB DESCRIPTION
    DEPARTMENT
                           Administration           and    Legal

           u

DIVISION/SECTION
                           Licensi ng



      POST TITLE
                           C hie f   Licensing        Officer       (General)




           GRADE
                           POid




 RESPONSIBLE TO
                           Assistant       Solicitor



RESPONSIBLE FOR
                           PrincipalLicensingOfficers
                           Licensing Officers
                           Admin. A s s i s t a n t




   ' HOLIDAY AND
 SICKNESS RELIEF

                           To be c o v e r e d     by C h i e f L i c e n s i n g   Officer    (Sports       Grou nd s)
                           and A s s i s t a n t   Solicitor
                           To p r o v i d e c o v e r for C h i e f L i c e n s i n g O f f i c e r   ( S p or t s
                           Grounds) and P r i n c i p a l L i c e n s i n g O f f i c e r




 PURPOSE OF JOB



                           To e n s u r e that the s t a t u t o r y l i c e n s i n g     functions         of the
                           Co un ci l are m a i n t a i n e d a nd e nf o r c e d .




                   ■Hsum




                   ._.
                                      Workina for                        w
 SPECIFIC DUTIES
            AND
RESPONSIBILITIES

        These duties ~ust at all times be carried out in compliance with the
        Council's Equal Opportunities Policy.

        ].    To e n s u r e that the l i c e n s i n g f u n c t i o n s of the C i t y C o u n c i l f r o m time
              to time a l l o c o t e d to the A d m i n i s t r a t i o n end L egal D e p a r t m e n t a r e
              p ro p e r l y c a r r i e d out in a c c o r d a n c e w i t h s t a t u t o r y r e q u i r e m e n t s and
             ..the Co-un-cil's policies.

        2.    To assi st the A s s i s t a n t          S o l i c i t o r in e n s u r i n g the p r o p e r s u p e r v i s i o n ,
              t r a i n i n g and d i s c i p l i n e   of all e m p l o y e e s in the L i c e n s i n g S e ct i on .

        3.   To p r e p a r e r epo rts on l i c e n s i n g m a t t e r s ror t he A s s i s t a n t S o l i c i t o r
              and a p p r o p r i a t e Co mm it t e e s , a n d to institute, m a i n t a i n a n d o p e r a t e
              p r op e r p r o c e d u r e s to e n s u r e t h a t all r e le va n t m a t t e r s a r e b r o u g h t
              to the a t t e n t i o n of any C o m m i t t e e or O f f i c e r of the C o u n c i l r e q u i r e d
              to m a k e a d e c i s i o n on a n y of the l i c e n s i n g m a t t e r s r e f e r r e d to in (1)
              above.


        4.   To liaise w i t h Members, o t h e r d e p a r t m e n t s of the C o u n c i l                   and outside
              b odi es on all m a t t e r s a f f e c t i n g the L i c e n s i n g S ec t io n.

        5.   To m a i n t a i n a s e r vi ce to t h e g e n e r a l p u b li c on l i c e n s i n g m a t t e r s ,
              i n c l u d i n g d e a l i n g w it h e n q u i r i e s a n d c o r r e s p o n d e n c e .

        6.   So far as r es o u r c e s permi t, to e n s u r e that t he r e q u i r e m e n t s i m p o s e d
              u pon l ic e n s e e s by law a n d by l i c e n c e c o n d i t i o n s a r e c o m p l i e d w i t h
              a nd in this c o n n e c t i o n to c o p o r d i n a t e the acti.vities of the C o u n c i l ' s
              O ff i ce rs a n d the police , f i r e a n d o t h e r r e l e v a n t a u t h o r i t i e s .

        7.   To be r e s p o n s i b l e for all m o n i e s r e c e i v e d by t he L i c e n s i n g S e c t i o n
              and to m a i n t a i n pr op e r r e c o r d s to t he s a t i s f a c t i o n of the C i t y
              Treasurer.

        8.   To take s t a t e m e n t s a n d to p r e p a r e r e p o r t s on a ny m a t t e r s w h e r e legal
              p r o c e e d i n g s m a y be c o n t e m p l a t e d a n d to a p p e a r in a ny C o u r t p r o c e e d i n g s
             w h i c h i n v o l v e the C o u n c i l ' s l i c e n s i n g f u nct io n.

        9.   To a s s i m i l a t e and i m p l e m e n t the i n c r e a s i n g i t e ms of n e w l e g i s l a t i o n
              r el e va nt to the C o u n c i l ' s l i c e n s i n g f un c ti on s, w h i c h is b o t h v a r i e d
             and complex.

       10.   A s s i s t a n c e in r e s e a r c h of n e w l e g i s l a t i o n a n d     the    relevant       case
              law a f t e c t i n g the l i c e n s i n g f u nc t i o n .




        A n y other duties and responsibilities as may be determined after negotiation
        between management, the post holder, and the appropriate Trade Unions.




     ISSUE DATE
                                    JOB DESCRIPTION
     DEPARTMENT
                        Administration and Legal



DIVISION/SECTION
            it
                        Licensing                                            ’ .. .7



          POST TITLE
                        Licensing Officer
      -


             GRADE
                        Sc.4/5


 P.ESPONS13LE TO
                        Chief Licensing Officer


R E SPO N SIB L E FOR




     HOLIDAY AND
 SICKNESS RELIEF        To be c o v ere d by e t h e r Licensing Officers.

                        To provide cover         for other Licensing Officers.




  F-RPOSSOrJ03


                         Council   are m a i n c a i n e c   =nc enforced.




                                    Working for Sh                                i a t T | 0
                                                                                  1 W 1 I IV I
                                                                                                 n
                                                                                                 u
                                         CHAPTER 24 - THE RECOM M ENDATIONS

         3 1 5 . The recommendations which follow are the minimum necessary to ensure that existing football
grounds can for the present be safely used, based upon the evidence which I have heard at Sheffield and other
, inform ation I have received. They complement the recommendations which Mr Justice Popplewell set out
  after b is inquiry at Bradford.

★ 3 1 6 . Those which are asterisked should be carried out before the 1989/90 season starts. The rest should be
started forthwith and completed as soon as possible.
                     *

 M axim um Capacities for Terraces
 ★           1. Where a viewing terrace is divided into pens or areas which are self-contained, the Safety Certificate
           should specify the maximum number of spectators to be admitted to each such pen or area.

           A pen or area is to be deemed “self-contained” notwithstanding that it has a gate or gates affording access to
           another pen or area and whether such gate or gates be open or shut.

 ★          2 . Each figure for maximum capacity should be assessed in accordance with Chapter 16 of the Green
           Guide (“the Green Guide figure”) subject to the following quaiifications:-

           (a) in arriving at “the Green Guide figure”, proper and realistic allowance must be made for all factors
               which should reduce the permissible density in accordance with the range of maximum figures specified
               in paragraphs 221 and 222 of the Green Guide;

           (b) after assessing “the Green Guide figure”, a deduction of 15% should be made to improve the safety
               margin.

 ★             3 . Arrangements should be made:-

           (a) to limit the number of spectators entering each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity
               figure assessed in accordance with Recommendation 2 above either electronically, mechanically, by a
               ticketing arrangement, by counting or otherwise, and

           (b) to close off further access to such pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.


 F illin g and Monitoring Terraces
 ★           4 . There.should be a written agreement between the club and the police setting out their respective
         ■ responsibilities for crowd safety and control and in particular for the filling of each self-contained pen or
           ether terraced area and the monitoring of spectators in each such pen or area to avoid overcrowding. Any
           variation of the agreement in respect of an individual match should be agreed in writing in advance.

     ★    '      5. At each match, there should be on the perimeter track, for each self-contained pen or other terraced
              area, a steward (if the club is monitoring that area) or a police officer (if the police are monitoring it) whose
              so le duty is to check crowd conditions in that area for possible overcrowding or distress throughout the
              period the area is occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed should be in addition to any other steward
              or police presence. H e should have ready access to the police officer authorised under Recommendation 9
              below, and by radio to the control room.


     Fences and Gates
                 6. All police officers and stewards with duties in relation to the terraced areas and especially those with
              duties under Recommendation 5 above, should be fully briefed and trained with regard to the recognition of
              crowd densities, to the recognition of signs of distress and to crowd dynamics. Training should include
              demonstrations at the ground and photographs, designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise
              different crowd densities.

     ★         7. All gates in radial or perimeter fences of pens or other self-contained areas should be painted in a
              different colour from the rest of the fence and marked “ Emergency Exit” .
I

    ★         8. Where there are perimeter fences, all gates to the pitch should be kept fully open during the period
        •   when spectators are on the terrace.

    ★         9. There should be in respect of each gate in a perimeter fence (or group of gates if they are close together)
            a police officer authorised to decide whether or not to allow spectators through a gate to relieve overcrowdi ng.
            The officer so authorised in respect of each gate should be identified for each match and known to be so by ail
            stewards and police officers in that vicinity. H e should be able to make radio contact with the control room
            either himself or via an officer dose at hand.

    ★         10. Suitable and sufficient ratting equipment should be provided by the club at each ground where there
            are perimeter fences to permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release numbers of spectators if
            necessary. Agreement should be reached as to whether the equipment should be used by police, the fire
            brigade or stewards. Whoever is to use it should be trained to do so. Whether to use it should be a decision of a
            nominated senior police officer at the ground.


    Crush Barriers
    ★          11. All crush barriers should be visually inspected immediately for signs of corrosion. Any barrier found
            to be affected by a significant degree of corrosion should be repaired or replaced.

    ★         12. The layout of barriers in each pen or terraced area should be reviewed immediately to ensure that it
            complies with the criteria contained in Chapter 9 of the Green Guide. If it does not. the assessment of the
            maximum capacity figure for that pen or terraced area, in accordance with Recommendation 2 above, should
            reflect the fact.


    Safety Certificates
              13. There should be an immediate review of each Safety Certificate by the responsible local authority,
            which should consult the club in respect of which the Certificate is issued, the police, the fire service, the
            ambulance service and the building authority. Such a review should include an inspection of the stadium. Its
            object should be to ensure that the operative conditions of the Certificate are complied with and to add or
            substitute any condition shown to be necessary as a matter of urgency following the findings and
            recommendations in this report.

              14. Any local authority within whose area there exists a sports stadium designated under the 1975 Act for
            which no Safety Certificate has yet been issued should proceed forthwith to remedy the situation.

              15. Every Safety Certificate should be reviewed by the local authority at least once annually and each
            Certificate should require to be renewed annually.


               16. Each local authority should review its arrangements for issuing, monitoring, enforcing, reviewing,
            amending and renewing Safety Certificates. Such review should require that there exists or is provided an
            accountable administrative structure whereby the functions of the local authorin' are regularly and
            effectively supervised by senior officers and elected members and decisions are properly taken in accordance
            with the local authority’s rules.

               17. To assist the local authority in exercising its functions, it should set up an Advisory Group consisting
            of appropriate members of its own staff, represerj.tatives.-of the police, of‘the fire and ambulance services, of
            the building authority, of the club and of a recognised supporters’ club. The Advisory Group's terms of
            reference should encompass all matters concerned with crowd safety and should require regular visits to the
            ground and attendance at matches. The Advisory Group should have a chairman from the local authorin',
            and an effective procedure. Its resolutions should be recorded and it should be required to produce regular
            written reports for consideration by the local authority.


    Duties of each Football Club
    *         18. Each turnstile should be inspected and its potential rate of flow measured. Thereafter, regular
            inspections should be made to ensure that each turnstile remains capable of admitting spectators at the rate
            anticipated.



                                                                 58
*      .19. The correlation between each viewing area in the stadium and the turnstiles serving it should be such
     as to.ensure that all the spectators intended to be admitted to that viewing area can pass through the
     turnstiles within one hour. I f that cannot be done, the capacity of that viewing area should be reduced
     accordingly.

*     . 20, Turnstiles should be closed when the permitted capacity of the area served by them is about to be
     reached and arrangements should be made to ensure quick and effective communication with turnstile
     operators for this purpose,

       2 1 » Closed circuit television should be so installed as to enable crowd densities outside the ground, within
     concourse areas and in pens and other standing areas, to be monitored before and throughout a match.

*      22. All signposting for spectators both outside and inside the ground should be comprehensively
     reviewed. It shouid, in relation to the arrangements for each match, be unambiguous, eye-catching, simple
     and clear and should be designed to ensure the rapid movement of spectators to their appropriate viewing
     area.

*     23. Information on tickets shouid be unambiguous, simple and clear and should correlate absolutely with
     the information provided in respect of each match both outside and inside the ground. Retained ticket stubs
     shouid contain information necessary to guide spectators once inside the ground.

*     24. Information on tickets requesting spectators to be in position by a particular time should be reviewed
     by clubs in conjunction with the police to ensure that it corresponds with the planned arrangements for
     admitting spectators to the ground.

       25, Each club should consult with a recognised supporters’ club as to the provision of pre-match
     entertainment aimed at attracting spectators to the ground in good time.


Police Planning
*      26. The C hief Constable of each police force in whose area there is one designated stadium or more
     should nominate a chief officer to liaise with the management of each football club and local authorin'
     concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.

*      27. The Operational Order for each match at a designated stadium and the pre-match briefing of all
     officers on duty there should alert such officers to the importance of preventing any overcrowding and, if any
     is detected, of taking appropriate steps to remedy i t

*■     28. The Operational Order for each match at a designated stadium should enable the police to cope with
     any foreseeable pattern in the arrival of spectators at a match and in their departure. It should provide for
     sufficient reserves to enable rapid deployment of officers to be made at any point inside or outside the ground.

*     29. The option to postpone kick-off should be in the discretion of the officer in command at the ground.
     Crowd safety should be the paramount consideration in deciding whether to exercise i t

         30. There should be available in the police control room the results of all closed circuit television
      monitoring outside and inside the ground and the record of any electronic or mechanical counting of numbers
      at turnstiles or of numbers admitted to any area of the ground. Officers in the control room should be skilled
      in the interpretation and use of these data.


C o m m u n ica tio n s
       31. There should be sufficient operators in the police control room to enable all radio transmissions to be
     received, evaluated and answered. The radio system should be such as to give operators in the control room
     priority over, and the capacity to override, others using the same channel. Additional channels should be
     used, where necessary, to prevent overcrowding of the airwaves. Consideration shouid be given to
     sound-proofing the control room against excessive crowd noise.
                                                                                  V




                                                           59
           32. To complement radio communications, there should be a completely separate system of land lines
         with telephone links between the control room and key points at the ground.

           33. Within the control room, there should be a public address system to communicate with individual
         areas outside and inside the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole ground. Important
         announcements shouid be preceded by a loud signal to catch the attention of the crowd despite a high level of
         noise in the ground. This arrangement should be prominently advertised on ever}' programme sold for every
         match.

           34. U se should be made where possible of illuminated advertising boards to address the crowd.
         Consideration should also be given to the use by police officers of a simple code of hand signals to indicate to
         the control room the existence of certain emergencies or requirements.


Co-ordination of Emergency Services
★           35. The police, fire and ambulance services should maintain through senior nominated officers regular
         liaison concerning crowd safety at each stadium.

★          36. Before each match at a designated stadium, the police should ensure that the fire service and
         ambulance service are given full details about the event, including its venue, its timing, the number of
         spectators expected, their likely routes of entry and exit, and any anticipated or potential difficulties
         concerning the control or movement of the crowd. Such details should be readily available in the control
         rooms of each of the emergency services.

★          37. Contingency plans for the arrival at each designated stadium of emergency vehicles from all three
         services should be reviewed. They should include routes of access, rendezvous points, and accessibility
         within the ground itself.

★          38. Police officers posted at the entrances to the ground should be briefed as to the contingency plans for
         the arrival of emergency services and should be informed when such services are called as to where and why
         they are required.


First Aid, Medical Facilities and Ambulances
★          39. There should be at each stadium at each match at least one trained first aider per 1,000 spectators. The
         club should have the responsibility for securing snch attendance.

           40. There should be at each stadium one or more first aid rooms. The number of such rooms and the
         equipment to be maintained within them should be specified by the local authorin' after taking professional
         medical advice and should be made a requirement of any Safety Certificate.

★          41. The club should employ a medical practitioner to be present at each match and available to deal with
         any medical exigency at the ground. He should be trained and competent in advanced first aid. He should be
         present at the ground at least an hour before kick-off and should remain until half an hour after the end of the
         match. His whereabouts should be known to those in the police control room and he should be immediately
         contactable.

★          42. At least one fully equipped ambulance from the appropriate ambulance authority should be in
         attendance at all matches with an expected crowd o f 5,000 or more.

           43. The number of ambulances to be in attendance for matches where larger crowds are expected should
         be specified by the local authority after consultation with the ambulance service and should be made a
         requirement of the Safety Certificate.




                                                             60



    •>
       S H E F F I E L D    C I T Y   COD    N C I L

          MEETING OF THE GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL
  (MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME)

                  held 17 th August, 19,89


PRESENT:   Councillors Butler (Chair), Hussain, Lamb, Moscrop, Mrs.
           Mulhearn, Mrs. Nelson, Mrs. E. Smith, Mrs. Walton and
           Whi te.                          •             "



SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
           The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
submitted a report on the issue and amendment of General Safety
Certificates under the provisions of the Safety of Sports Grounds
Act 1975.
           Chief Inspector Beale of the South Yorkshire Police
attended the meeting to give the Police observations on the
proposals contained in the report and Mr. K. T. Addy, a Director
of the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and Dr. Eastwood,
Consultant Engineer, attended the meeting to give the observations
of the Football Club.
           The Chair asked for a letter dated 16th August, 1989, from
the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club requesting a written ruling
prior to the coming Saturday's match on the question of access to
and capacity in the North Stand at the Hillsborough Football Ground,
which letter had not been circulated to members of the Panel before
the day of the meeting, to be considered as an urgent item.
RESOLVED: That (a) in accordance with the provisions of Section
100B(4)(b) of the Local Government Act 1972, as amended by the Local
Government (Access to Information) Act 1985, the request in the
letter now submitted from Sheffield Wednesday Football Club be
considered as a matter of urgency in view of the impending
commencement of the Football Season;
           (b) confirmation be given to the action taken by the Chief
Executive in (i) issuing to the Sheffield United Football Club an
interim Safety Certificate under the provisions of the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act 1975 and (ii) amending the current Safety
Certificate issued to the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, all in
accordance with the details contained in the report and copy
documents now submitted;
            (c) the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
be authorised to issue a further Notice of Amendment in respect of
 the Certificate issued to the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club (as
amended) as follows:-
            (i) Schedule 3 of the amended Certificate shall be further
amended to state that (A) the maximum capacity for the upper area of
 the North West Terrace at the Hillsborough Football Ground shall be
2,300 and (B) the maximum total capacity permitted in the North        __ C
 Stand shall be reduced to 9 ,700 and the maximum total capacity          ^
 permitted in the Hillsborough Football Ground shall be 4 3 , and
          (ii) for the sake of clarity, additional Condition 10 of
 the amended Certificate shall be amended to reflect the fact that
 only the upper part of the terracing of the North West Terrace shall
 Meeting of the General Purposes Panel                    "    Page 2
 (Municipal Enterprise and General Services Programme) 17.8.89



             (d) approval be given to the proposed arrangements now
   reported for the upper part of the North West Terrace at the
   Hillsborough Football Ground to be used on a contingency basis as
   and when requested by the Police.
             (e) having heard the representations of Chief Inspector
   Beale on behalf of South Yorkshire Police and the representations of
*■ Mr. Addy and Dr. Eastwood on behalf of the Sheffield Wednesday
   Football Club concerning the use of the North Stand (i) in view of
   the need for segregation^footbal1 supporters and taking account of
   the operational plans of the Police, the North Stand shall be filled
   only through turnstiles located in Penistone Road; and (ii) taking
   account of the undertaking by the Sheffield Wednes/day- Football Club
   to provide two additional turnstiles (currently serving the Spion
   Kop Terrace) to serve the North Stand, the capacity for the North
   Terrace shall be reduced to 9,700;
             (f) the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
   and representatives of the South Yorkshire Police and the Sheffield
   Wednesday Foqitball Club be requested to monitor the operation of the
   Hillsborough Football Ground particularly with regard to the
   functioning of the North Terrace until the end of September, 1989,
   and report back to this Panel on the outcome of such monitoring;
   and
              (g) the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
   be requested to make arrangments for this Panel to visit and inspect
   the Hillsborough and Bramali Lane Football Grounds and the Owlerton
   Sports Stadium in the near future.
                                                SC cO vb


                                   (   \   -
D R A F T


Statement of David Malcolm Bownes, Chief Licensing Officer, Administration
and Legal Department, Sheffield City Council_______________________________

My name is David Malcolm Bownes.   I am employed by Sheffield City Council

in the Administration and Legal Department as Chief Licensing Officer.


I have been employed by Sheffield City Council since September, 1971 and

have held my current post since 11th July, 1977.


I obtained a Higher National Certificate in Public Administration from

Sheffield City Polytechnic in


The responsibilities of my job are:-

(a)   to manage the Licensing Section;


(b)   to provide reports on licensing matters for departmental management

      and committees and to institute, maintain and operate proper

      procedures to ensure that all relevant matters are brought to the

      attention of any committee or officer of the Council required to make

      a decision on any licensing matter;


(c)   to liaise with Council members, other departments of the Council and

      outside bodies on all matters affecting the Licensing Section;


(d)   to maintain a service to the general public on licensing matters,

      including dealing with enquiries and correspondence;


(e)   in so far as possible to ensure that the requirements imposed upon

      licensees by law and by Licence Conditions are complied with, and in

      this connection to co-ordinate the activities of the Council's

      officers and the Police, Fire and other relevant authorities;


(f)   to be responsible for all monies received by the Licensing Section

      and to maintain proper records to the satisfaction of the City

      Treasurer;
(g)   to take statements and prepare reports on any matters where legal

      proceedings may be contemplated and to appear in any court

      proceedings which involve the Council's licensing function;


(h)   responsibility for implementation of the Safety of Sports Grounds

      licensing system;


(i)   to assimilate and implement the increasing items of new legislation

      relevant to the Council's licensing functions, which is both varied

      and complex.

                             io p j                            >?
The Licensing Department- deals with                             ^.imbe^-e^licensing systems, for

example,       T^LO               t /V \/G L U                             [<,         /b ^ b       M t/ltb

VV> h- It             & P & AStT' 0A i             /frvb   i)/ll                  C /rv /fan /ft    AT

fr    /)?•#■           Q£-                l- li-     /ivr A/tr     /) - / ^ / » i T.




Legislation

On 1st August, 1975 Royal Assent was given to the Safety of Sports Grounds

Act 1975 which established a "Certification" system for sports grounds

capable of holding more than 10,000 spectators.                                  When a sports ground had

been designated by the Secretary of State and application would need to be

made to the Certificating Authority for a General Safety Certificate under

the 1975 Act.


Certificating Authorities must attach to a Safety Certificate such terms

and conditions as they consider necessary or expedient to secure

reasonable safety at the stadium when it is in use for specified

activities.      The terms and conditions have to include

(a)    The maximum number of spectators to be admitted to the stadium and;
(b)   Terms and conditions as to the number, size and situation of

      entrances to and exits from the stadium and the means of access to

      any such-entrances or exits and requiring those entrances, exits and

      means of access to be properly maintained and kept free from

      obstruction and as to the number, strength and situation of any

      crush barriers .//^Certificate conditions must also be framed with

      reference to a plan attached to the Certificate.

Section 10 of 1975 Act provided for an emergency procedure which could be

used by the Council if it thought that a serious risk to spectators at a

sports ground was present.     The procedure involved applying to a

Magistrates' Court for an Order prohibiting or restricting the admission

of spectators   to the sports ground.


Under Section    11 of the 1975 Act the person authorised by      the Local

Authority or the     Chief Officer of Police, or the Building     Authority,or

the Secretary   of State, could on production of his authority enter a

sports ground   to make inspections and examine records and       make enquiries

as he thought fit.     On Local Government Reorganisation on 1st April, 1986

(when the South Yorkshire County Council was abolished and its functions

passed in the main to District Councils) the reference to the Building

Authority was changed to the Fire Authority.


In 1976 the Home Office issued the ''Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds

(Football)" which is a guide to measures for improving spectator safety at

Football Grounds, i.e., at rugby union and rugby league grounds as well as

at soccer grounds.     It is a voluntary code^and has no legal forc e j.   The

Green Guide makes comments on such matters as the spacing of crush

barriers, estimation of safe ground capacity, terraces, etc.        The Guide

makes the point that deviations from individual guidelines are possible

without necessarily detracting from the overall safety of the ground.            A

flexible approach should be maintained to take account of the particular

circumstances at individual grounds.
A revised edition of the Green Guide was issued in 1986 following the

Bradford Disaster and the Popplewell Inquiry.


The Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act, 1987 amended the 1975

legislation in a number of areas.   In particular, the old Section 10 of

the 1975 Act was replaced by a more wide ranging provision which gave

local authorities the power to issue a^ Prohibition Notice in respect of

either whole stadia or parts of them.   A Prohibition Notice can only be

issued where the Local Authority is of the opinion that a serious risk to

spectators is present in the stadium.   A Prohibition Notice may include

directions as to the steps which will have to be taken to reduce the risk

to a reasonable level and these may require alterations or additions to

the ground or things to be done or omitted, which would contravene the

terms or conditions of a Safety Certificate for the ground or for any

stand at the ground.   A prohibition or restriction contained in a Notice

may take effect immediately if there appears to be reason for it, or after

a specified period contained in the Notice.     An appeal may be lodged with

the Magistrates' Court against a Prohibition Notice but that appeal does

not stop its operation.   The Court may either cancel or affirm the Notice.


There are no powers in the Act which enable the Certificating Authority to

require the safety works to be carried out other than by means of a

Prohibition Notice which necessitates the closure of all or some part of

the stadium.


Thus, it may happen that if work is required to be done which does not

justify the closure of all or part of the stadium, the Local Authority

finds itself without any statutory power.


In the new Section 10B of the Act it is the duty of each Certificating

Authority to enforce the provisions of the Act and regulations made under

it and also to carry out frwelvc-moat-hly inspections of stadia, and to have

regard to guidance given to them by the Secretary of State.
The 1987 Act also made provision for Safety Certificates for various

stands at sports grounds.   Also, in order to give effect to various

Popplewell comments on indoor sporting activities, the definition of

public entertainment which require licensing was extended.


The Safety of Sports Ground Regulations 1987 (Statutory Instrument

1987/1941) sets out the prescribed form of application for a Safety

Certificate and also refers to appeal procedures, etc.


Home Office Circulars

Home Office Circular 71/1987 introduced the provisions of Part 2 of the

1987 Act and gives advice on the effects and operation of them.      There is

also specific references to the new Prohibition Notice procedure and a

draft Prohibition Notice.


Home Office Circular 72/1987 sets out the Statutory Guidance on

inspections which is mandatory.


Administration of the Certificating Function by South Yorkshire County
Council

The County Council set up and "Officer Working Party (Sheffield District)"

which consisted of representatives of the Fire Service, the Police, the

Building Authority (Sheffield City Council) and the South Yorkshire County

Council Administration Department.   This Working Party was set up

following a report to the South Yorkshire County Fire Service Committee in

                        Its terms of reference were




The Safety of Sports Grounds (Designation) Order 1978 (Statutory

Instrument 1978 No. 1091^ designated the Sheffield Wednesday Football

Stadium as requiring a Safety Certificate with effect from 1st January,
On 8th September, 1978 Sheffield Wednesday Football Club submitted their

application for a General Safety Certificate to the South Yorkshire County

Council.   (1.79).


The Officer Working Party on behalf of the South Yorkshire County Council

engaged in detailed discussions with the Football Club about safety works

that would be required.


As a result of these consultations between the Working Party and the Club

on 8th June, 1979 a list of "Matters requiring attention at the Sheffield

Wednesday Football Ground, Hillsborough, Sheffield" was sent to the Club

for its attention.


The County Fire Services Committee of the South Yorkshire County Council

at its meeting on 29th November, 1979 approved the issue of a General

Safety Certificate and the terms and conditions of that Certificate to

Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.    This decision was ratified by the full

County Council meeting on 19th December, 1979.     The grant of a Certificate

was made subject to remedial works to the south stand steel columns and

the emergency lighting system being carried out.     The Safety Certificate

document itself was issued on 21st December, 1979 under the signature of

Mr. F. A. Mallett, the Chief Executive of the County Council.     (1.211).


The Officer Working Party (Sheffield District) carried out regular

inspections of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club in accordance with the

South Yorkshire County Council policy of twice yearly visits to football

league grounds in South Yorkshire.    Detailed noted of Working Party

meetings and inspections were prepared and for example purposes, a copy of

the notes of the meeting held at Hillsborough on 11th August, 1983 is

attached to this statement. (3.25).    At the Working Party inspection on

11th August, there were two representatives from the Sheffield Wednesday

Football Club, two from the South Yorkshire Police, one from the South

Yorkshire County Fire Service, two from the Sheffield City Council
                                              -7-


      (Building Authority) and one from the South Yorkshire County Council

      Administration Department.   For illustrative purposes, I would refer to

      the last two paragraphs on the first page of the notes of the Working

      Party visit.   In the first of the two paragraphs it is clear that a

      problem    in relation to the brickwork at the rear corner of     thestand

      nearest    the north west terrace had been raised    at the previousmeeting of

      the Working Party and this was further explored at the meeting on 11th

      August.    In the second paragraph, Dr. Eastwood     (the Club's Consulting

      Engineer) gave details   of testing of the crush barriers on theterrace and

      indicating that appropriate remedial action had been taken, where

      necessary and that the first five year cycle of the barrier testing had

      thus been completed.


20.   The County Council was occasionally made aware of various problems in

      connection with the use of the stadium.       An example as to how these

      matters were dealt with can be seen by reference to a letter from the

      South Yorkshire County Fire Service to the Sheffield Wednesday Football

      Club regarding a test which the Fire.Service did of the emergency

      procedures at a match on 4th October, 1983.       (3.33).   There was particular

      concern that stewards could not hear the emergency procedure announcement

      on the public address system, which resulted in stewards failing to carry

      out their emergency procedure duties.     Consultations then took place

      between the Club and the Fire Officer with reference to the County Council

      which resulted in the satisfactory resultion of the public address system

      problem.   The system itself was checked and found satisfactory by the

      County Fire Service 29th October, 1983, the test proved satisfactory.

      (3.34 and 3.37).
                                                -8-


      Sheffield City Council as Certificating Authority (with effect from
      1st April, 1986)

21.   At the meeting of the General Purposes Panel (which is a Sub-Committee of

      the Municipal Enterprise and General Services Programme Committee of the

      City    Council) a report was considered from the Head of       Administration and

      Legal Department on Safety     of Sports Grounds.   The Panel adopted the

      recommendations contained in the report which were:-


      (a)    All the powers and duties of the Council under the Safety of Sports

             Grounds Act 1975 be delegated to the General Purposes Panel.


      (b)    The emergency procedure powers under Section 10 of the 1975 Act be

             delegated to the Head   of Administration and Legal     Department in

             consultation with the   Chairman or Deputy Chairman     of this Panel orof

             the Municipal Enterprise and General Services Programme Committee as

             appropriate.


      (c)    The power to authorise Officers under Section 11 of the Act be

             delegated to the Head of Administration and Legal Department.    The

             Panel's decision was subsequently confirmed by a full meeting of the

             City Council which took place on



22.   The General Purposes Panel considered a more detailed report on the Act

      and the administrative system used by the County Council at the Panel's

      meeting on 6th May, 1986.      The full report is attached to this statement.

      The following extracts of the report are worthy of note:-


      Existing Administrative Arrangements

             The County Council system for administering the Act is based on two

             main components - (a) bi-annual inspections of the stadium and (b)

             meetings of an Officer Working Party.    The bi-annual inspections

             consist of representatives from all the interested authorities and

             involve thorough inspections of the stadia and the identifying of any
r



                                           -9-

         defects.   The defects are at the time of visit brought to the

         attention of the Certificate holder and its technical representative,

         if one is present.    Depending on the nature of the faults found (if

         any), steps are then agreed between the Authority and the Certificate

         holder to rectify them or so arrange matters that no risk to the

         public occurs.   The Working Party consists of representatives from

         the Police, Fire Service, Building Surveyors and the County Council -

         it considers in detail various matters (such as the spion kop

         development at Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground) and also any

         outstanding items from the bi-annual inspections.    The Working Party

         is effectively a co-ordinating body, which attempts to ensure that a

         balanced and consistent approach is maintained to current issues at

         the sports grounds.   Any recommendations it makes are subject to

         approval by this Panel.


    The Health and Safety Executive

         Recommendation 9 of the Popplewell Committee's Interim Report reads

         as follows:-


         "There should be urgent consultation between the Health and Safety

         Executive and the Fire Authorities and Local Authorities as to how

         best to co-ordinate and communicate their inspections and reports".


         Bearing this in mind, the local office of the Health and Safety

         Executive was invited to participate in the administrative system for

         Safety of Sports Grounds.    This invitation was declined.   The

         Executive would apparently take no direct part in the certification

         system.    In view of this problem the Home Office was contacted and

         the position explained; it appears that negotiations are under way-,

         between the Home Office and the H.S.E. about Popplewell's

         recommendation, but as yet there has been no useful outcome.       In

         these circumstances the Council could keep the Health and Safety
r


                                                       -10-

                     Executive informed of all developments in Sheffield and to invite

                      their comments on them.     It would then be the responsibility of the

                     Executive to decide whether or not to respond.


                 Review of the Administrative System

         23.     At its meeting on 7th September, 1987 the General Purposes Panel

                 considered a report on the future administration of the Council's

                 Certificating function.


        24.      The report accepts that the Council, as the Certificating Authority, will

                 act on the basis of advice from experts (such as the Fire Service), the

                 question arose as to how that advice may best be formulated.      In this

                 respect it was recommended that a "Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory

                 Group" should be established which would consist of representatives from

                 the Police, the Fire Service, the Building Surveyor's Division and the

                 Department of Health and Consumer Services.     Both the Building Surveyor's

                 Division and the Department of Health and Consumer Services are part of

                 existing Council structure.    It was envisaged that the Working Group would

                 function as a forum for discussion between' Officers and its most regular

                 use would probably be the discussions of advice to the Council before they

                 were finally formulated by the appropriate Authority.


                 It was also anticipated that meetings of the Group would be held at the

                 request of one or more Authorities and on receipt of a request the

                 Administration and Legal Department would arrange a meeting and despatch a

                 list of items to be discussed.     At the conclusion of the meeting a further

                 list of items would be prepared and the details of action agreed to be

                 taken by each Authority would be noted.      It was then envisaged that

                 detailed written advise would be provided by each discipline and acted,

                 upon as appropriate.




    HB3AAG/JJJ
DATE            REFERENCE   SUMMARY

FIRST-AID FACILITIES:

21.2.79         1.125       Letter from Chief Executive to the
                            Area Health Authority asking for
                            advice on the adquacy both of first-
                            aid and medical facilities at
                            Hillsborough.

6.3.79          1.130       Letter from the Area Health
                            Authority saying that the
                            specialist in community
                            medicine would give appropriate
                            advice.

12.3.79         1.132       The adviser from the Area Health
                            Authority asking to attend the
                            meeting to discuss the facilities.

30.3.79         1.138       Notes of the meeting of the Officer
                            Working Party at which first-aid
                            requirements were discussed. It was
                            noted that the specialist in
                            community medicine had agreed to
                            provide advice on first-aid and
                            medical facilities.

2.4.79          1.139       Meeting of Officer Working Party
                            the Club accepted in principle the
                            idea of permanently ????????
                            first-aid facilities.

18.4.79         1.141       Meeting of the Officer Working
                            Party. It was noted that the
                            specialist in community medicine
                            had not yet completed his
                            investigation into first-aid and
                            medical facilities.

31.5.79         1.151       Letter from the specialist in
                            community medicine including a
                            series of observations on
                            medical and first-aid requirements.

8.6.79          1.152       A list of matters requiring
                            attention at Sheffield Wednesday
                            Football Ground - a detailed list
                            of first-aid facilities is set out
                            in this document.

15.8.79         1.170       Meeting of the Officer Working
                            Party at which it was agreed that
                            the Club be requested to provide •
                            the proposed first-aid permanent
                            structure in the 1980 close season
                            and subject to the Club first
                            agreeing to provide the
                            recommended equipment immediately.
          DATE       REFERENCE   SUMMARY

          12.11.79   1.196       Officer Working Party notes.
                                 Citing both police and first-
                                 aid facilities in close
                                  proximity to each other.

          21.12.79   1.211       Letter to the Sheffield Wednesday
                                 Football Club indicating that the
                                  existing first-aid facilities are
                                  accepted on an interim basis only
                                  pending the erection of purpose
                                  built facilities in the 1980 close
                                  season.

          11.9.81    2.87        The Officer Working Party agreed to
                                 press the Club as to when it
                                 intended to provide the new police
                                 and first-aid facilities.

          14.9.81    2.88        Letter from the County Council to
                                  Eastwoods about first-aid
                                  facilities. The Club were asked to
                                  give a firm indication when the nev
                                  police and first-aid facilities are
                                  to be provided.

          7.10.81    2.93A       The Police reported to the Officer
                                  Working Party that apparently the
                                  subject of police and first-aid
                                  facilities had been discussed at a
                                  recent board meeting. Apparently
                                  some progress had therefore been
                                  made.

          7.10.81                Letter from the County Council to
                                 Sheffield Wednesday expressing
                                 concern about the lack of police
                                 and first-aid facilities at the
                                 ground.

           20.1.82   2.109       A further reminder letter from the
                                  Chief Executive in which the
                                  current position with regard to
                                  police and first-aid facilities
                                  at the stadium is requested.

           4.2.82    2.117       Officer Working Party was told that
                                  it was likely that following
                                  consultations with the police the
                                  Club would shortly be in a position
                                  to formally discuss police and
                                  first-aid facilities.

           5.4.82    2.124       A letter from Sheffield Wednesday
                                 together with plans showing
                                 proposed building of police and
                                 first-aid facilities.




HB3AAM/PGT/2
          DATE       REFERENCE   SUMMARY

          7.4.82     2.128       A letter from the County Council to
                                 the specialist in community medicine
                                 (Area Health Authority) about the
                                 proposed new first-aid facilities.

          15.4.82    2.130       The Officer Working Party considered
                                 the Club's proposals for police and
                                 first-aid facilities. The proposals
                                 were accepted in principle but 11
                                 points were made concerning them.

          20.4.82    2.132       Letter from the County Council
                                 listing the Working Party's views
                                 on the proposed new first-aid and'*
                                 police facilities.

          5.8.82     2.146       Letter from Sheffield Wednesday
                                 indicating that the police and
                                 first-aid facilities are
                                 progressing well.

          24.8.82    2.147       Officer Working Party noted that
                                 the police and first-aid facilities
                                 under the north stand were well
                                 under the way towards completion
                                 and will be utilised at the
                                 opening match on 28th August.

          21.2.83    3.11        Officer Working Party noted that the
                                 new police and first-aid facilities
                                 were in use.

          9.8.82     3.112       Letter from South Yorkshire County
                                 Council to Sheffield Wednesday
                                 pointing out that the interim
                                 report of Mr. Justice Popplewell had
                                 now been received and making
                                 reference to the need for adequate
                                 first-aid and first-aid room
                                 facilities.

          4.12.87    4.54        List of comments to Sheffield
                                 Wednesday to the effect that the
                                 main first-aid room requires to be
                                 supplied with adequate first-aid
                                 equipment and the provision of
                                 qualified first-aid is currently
                                 being reviewed and that the Club's
                                 views on that point are sought.

           15.1.88   4.60        Letter from Eastwoods to the Council
                                 indicating that the comments in
                                 relation to be equipped of first-aid
                                 equipment are noted and that the
                                 Club regularly liaise with St.
                                 John's about the number of first-
                                 aiders provided in line with
                                 football league recommendations.




HB3AAM/PGT/3
           DATE           REFERENCE   SUMMARY

           10 . 2 . 8 8   4.67        Memorandum from the Health and
                                      Consumer Services Department
                                      indicating that further enquiries
                                      with the Football League are being
                                      made to determine first-aider
                                      standards.

           STEWARDING:

           16.5.79        1.149       Letter from the County Fire
                                      Service of the County Council
                                      setting out coments in relation
                                      to Hillsborough. One of the
                                      comments relates to the training
                                      of staff so as to ensure they are
                                      conversant with the safety
                                      precautions they will be expected
                                      to administer.  The Fire Service
                                      offered their facilities to aid in
                                      training.

           12.11.79       1.196       Meeting of the Officer Working

                                      Party indicated that the training
                                      of stewards and staff would be
                                      done shortly in consultation with
                                      the Fire Service.

           26.3.80        2.16        A memorandum from the Chief
                                      Executive to the Chief Fire Officer
                                       indicated that the training of
                                       safety stewards had not yet taken
                                       place.

           31.3.80        2.17        A letter from the County Council to
                                       the Club indicating that fire
                                       service assisted training had not
                                      yet taken place.

           10.4.80        2.25        Officer Working Party inspection of
                                      Hillsborough - the notes indicate
                                       that the Club felt there was little
                                       point in pursuing the training of
                                       stewards until the fire warning
                                       system had completely been
                                       installed. However, some stewards
                                       had been instructed by the Fire
                                       Service yesterday.

           Approx.        2.60        The emergency evacuation procedure
           April 1981                  for Hillsborough Stadium notes for
                                       stewards.




HB3AAM/PGT/4
          DATE        REFERENCE   SUMMARY

          27.9.82     2.152       Letter from the County Council to
                                  the Football Club outlining
                                  difficulties which had been
                                  experienced in a test of
                                  emergency evacuation procedures
                                  particularly in relation to the
                                  steward's lack of knowledge.

          27.10.83    3.33        Letter from the Fire Service to the
                                  Club which indicated that during a
                                   test of the evacuation procedure
                                   the public addess system was not
                                   audible in certain areas of the
                                   Stadium.

          8.5.85      3.87        Letter from Eastwoods concerning the
                                   Leppings Lane development and that
                                   if two gates were required in the
                                   proposed radial fences there would
                                   need to be stewarded an expense
                                   which would hardly be justified.

          29.7.85     3.103       The Officer Working Party indicated
                                   that all new gates at the Leppings
                                   Lane end must be fully supervised
                                   by stewards who must be fit, able
                                   and proper trained.

          30.7.85     3.104       Letter from the County Council to
                                   Eastwoods indicating that stewarding
                                   on new gates would be required.

          1.8.85      3.109       Letter from Eastwoods
                                   indicating that stewarding will no
                                   doubt be taken care of by the Club
                                   Secretary.

          9.8.85      3.112       Letter from the County Council to
                                   the Football Club reminding the Club
                                   about the interim report of Mr.
                                   Justice Popplewell and listing the
                                   guidelines as to stewarding.

           13.11.85   3.128       The Officer Working Party agreed
                                   that the draft of the booklet
                                   prepared by the South Yorkshire
                                   Police outlining stewards'
                                   duties was acceptable should be
                                   distributed to designated grounds
                                   for the information on ???      of
                                   stewards.

           2 . 2.88   4.63        Memorandum from the Building
                                   Surveyor to the Head of
                                   Administration and Legal Department
                                   about stewarding on the radial
                                   gangways on the spiotv kop.




HB3AAM/PGT/5
          DATE           REFERENCE        SUMMARY

          23.3.88        5.12.            The Safety of Sports Grounds
                                          Advisory Group consider the
                                          Building Surveyor's memorandum
                                          and a Police response to it.

          EMERGENCY PROCEDURES/SYSTEMS:

           2.4.79         1.139           The Officer Working Party agreed
                                          that consideration should be given
                                          to the installation of an improved
                                          public address system with the
                                          police having access to its control
                                          from their control room.

           18.4.79       1.141            The Officer Working Party heard
                                          that the Club were thinking in terms
                                          of upgrading the existing public
                                          address system.

           16.5.79        1.149           Letter from the County Fire
                                          Service detailing various
                                          requirements. In particular there
                                          is a requirement that emergency
                                          procedure notices should be placed
                                          at strategic points throughout the
                                          ground.

           23.5.79        1.150           A letter from the South Yorkshire
                                          Police indicating that the Police
                                          should have the facility to
                                          override the public address system.

           12.11.79       1.196           It was agreed by the Officer Working
                                          Party that the Fire Service would
                                          supply the Club with details of the
                                          necessary working.

           9.4.80         2.22 & 2.23     "Fire Instruction and Drills"
                                          prepared by the County Fire
                                          Service.

           9.4.80         2.24            "Action to be taken in the event
                                          of a Fire" prepared by the County
                                          Fire Service.

           30.1.81        2.51A           Letter from Eastwoods to Sheffield
                                          Wednesday indicating that the Fire
                                          Alarm installation and the
                                          modification of the public address
                                          system were completed and checked
                                          and found to be in order.

           7.4.81         2.59            The Officer Working Party noted that
                                          consultations had taken place
                                          between the Fire Service and the
                                          Police which had resulted in the
                                          production of an emergency
                                          evacuation procedure. Copies of
                                          which will be circulated to stewards


HB3AAM/PGT/6
          DATE        REFERENCE   SUMMARY

          7.4.81      2.60        The emergency evacuation
                                  procuredure itself.

          23.4.81     2.63        Letter from Eastwoods confirming
                                  that various measures have been
                                  taken in respect of the P.A. system.

          16.9.82     2.151       A memorandum from the Chief Fire
                                  Officer to the Chief Executive
                                  indicating problems with the
                                  fire routine and emergency
                                  evacuation procedure at Sheffield
                                  Wednesday.

          27.9.82     2.152       Letter from the Council to the Club
                                  outlining the Chief Fire Officer's
                                  concerns.

          7.12.82     2.154       Letter from the County County
                                  Council to the Police expressing
                                  about the change in the emergency
                                  procedures which had not been
                                  notified to the Chief Fire Officer.

           17.12.82   2.160       The Police reply to the County
                                  Council's letter about the
                                  evacuation procedure.

          21.1.83     3.2         Letter from the County Council
                                  explaining the revised emergency
                                  evaucation procedure.

          7.10.83     3.33        A letter from the County Fire
                                  Service to the Football Club
                                  following a test and appraisal
                                  of the emergency procedure at
                                  Sheffield Wednesday. A number
                                  of concerns are listed.

           13.10.83   3.34        Letter from the Football Club to
                                  the Chief Fire Officer indicating
                                  that as far as he is aware the
                                  P.A. system is satisfactory.

           3.11.83    3.36        Memorandum from the Chief Executive
                                  to the Chief Fire Officer asking
                                  whether or not the public address
                                  system was now acceptable.

           10.11.83   3.37        Memorandum   form the Chief Fire
                                  Officer to   the Chief Executive
                                  indicating   that the public address
                                  system was   now satisfactory.

           14.8.85    3.116       Letter from Sheffield Wednesday to
                                  the County Council concerning staff
                                  briefings, etc.




HB3AAM/PGT/7
          DATE             REFERENCE              SUMMARY

           2.12.87         4.52                   Letter from South Yorkshire Police
                                                  indicating problems with the
                                                  public address sytem at Sheffield
                                                  Wednesday.

           INSPECTIONS/TESTS OF CRUCH BARRIERS:

           1.5.79          1.148                  Letter from the Building Surveyor
                                                  indicating that all crush barriers,
                                                  balustrade walls, fences and
                                                  railings to be tested and replaced,
                                                  or strengthened where necessary.

           8.6.79          1.152                  A list of matters requiring
                                                  attention at Sheffield Wednesday
                                                  Football Ground - the arrangements
                                                  for crush barriers as produced by
                                                  the consultant was not fully
                                                  complied with the guide
                                                  recommendations is considered
                                                  adequate if the other requirements
                                                  are fulfilled.

           21.6.79         1.160                  Letter from Eastwoods indicating
                                                  that the installation of new crush
                                                  barriers has progressed in the last
                                                  few weeks.

           10.8.79         1.168                  Letter from Eastwoods confirming
                                                  that representative sections of the
                                                  pitch perimeter fence have been
                                                  tested at the spion kop end.

           20.9.79         1.174                  Letter from Eastwoods discussing the
                                                  north stand barriers.

           4.10.79         1.82                   Letter from the Building Surveyor to
                                                  the County Council indicating that
                                                  the proposed control barriers in the
                                                  north stand have been approved.

           19.12.79        1.208                  Letter from Eastwoods indicating
                                                  that all crush barriers have now
                                                  been tested and are up to standard.

           15.7.80         2.26                   Letter from Eastwoods about the
                                                  County Council desire to have one
                                                  fifth of crush barriers tested each
                                                  year so that they will all be tested
                                                  during each five years. The
                                                  engineers proposed to test one block
                                                  of 37 barriers rather than testing
                                                  every 5th barriers throughout the
                                                  ground because the testing equipment
                                                  is very heavy and requires
                                                  considerable amount of man handling.




HB3AAM/PGT/8
          DATE        REFERENCE   SUMMARY

          11.9.80     2.30        A report from Eastwoods abou the
                                  annual inspection of the
                                  Hillsborough Stadium approximately
                                  one fifth of the crush barriers
                                  have been tested.

          9.9.81      2.86        Letter from Eastwoods stating
                                  one fifth of the crush barriers
                                  had been tested in July. One or
                                  two barriers had shown signs of
                                  distress and had been replaced.

          1.10.81     2.96        Report by Eastwood and Partners
                                  indicating that one fifth of the
                                  crush barriers had been tested,
                                  this time on the spion kop.

           13.10.81   2.98        Letter from Eastwoods referring to
                                  crush barrier tests.

          24.8.82     2.147       The Officer's Working Party noted
                                  that the remaining third of the
                                  crush barriers on the kop had now
                                  been tested and problems discovered
                                  remedied.

          6.9.82      2.149       Letter from Eastwoods enclosing a
                                  testing certificate of crush
                                  barriers.

          8.9.82      2.150       A letter from Eastwoods in
                                  connection with the crush
                                  barriers at the spion kop and
                                  indicating the tests of them.

           29.8.83    3.29        Letter from Eastwoods indicating
                                  that the Leppings Lane crush
                                  barriers were tested in June, 1983.

           7.6.84     3.52        Letter from Eastwoods confirming
                                  that the testing of barriers in the
                                  north west corner of the ground
                                  would take place in June that year.

           25.7.84    3.54        Letter from Eastwoods confirming the
                                  testing of barriers on the north
                                  west corner terrace.

           9.8.84     3.59        The Officer Working Party pointed
                                  out that the tests of barriers
                                  carried out in June had completed
                                  the first five year cycle of tests.

           30.9.86    3.186       Letter from Eastwoods confirming
                                  barrier testing on the kop.

           18.8.87    4.46        Letter from Eastwoods confirming
                                  spion kop barrier testing.



HB3AAM/PGT/9
          DATE       REFERENCE   SUMMARY

          2 . 8.88   4.74        Letter confirming the testing of
                                  the barriers at the Leppings Lane
                                  end in July, 1988.




HB3AAM/PGT/10
                                                                                    Page 1
          SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL


          SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C. - SUMMARY OF CORRESPONDENCE

          LEPPINGS LANE


DATE        REFERENCE     SUMMARY


January     1.113a        Report on ground capacity by Eastwoods which " . . . deals in broad
1979                      terms with the necessary strengthening and supplementation of the
                          crush barriers on the terraces, and calculations are made of the
                          theoretical exit times . . ." It deals in detail with all stands/
                          terraces and on page 4 the consideration of the west terracea is
                          started. Comments are made about spectator circulation and packing.
                          There is also a reference on page 5 to the north west corner,
                          reinforced concrete terrace. Page 9 of the document refers to the
                          proposed standing capacity at the Leppings Lane end (including the
                          north west corner) 10,100.

12.2.79     1.124         On page 4 of the notes of the Officers of the Working Party there is
                          reference to the west terrace and the north west corner reinforced
                          concrete terrace. Comments are made about the lack of depth of the
                          terrace and the Club's offer to reduce spectator limit to 7,200.
                          There was felt to be no real problem with the north west corner
                          reinforced concrete terrace.

30.3.79     1.238         On page 2 of the notes of the meeting reference is made to the crush
                          barriers on the west terrace, the cross-fall on the steps on the north
                          west corner exit and the height of the crush barriers. It was agreed
                          that all those points must be drawn to the Club's attention. As far as
                          the north west corner terrace was concerned, the Building Authority
                          indicated that it would require attention.

2.4.79      1.139         At a meeting of the Officer Working Party the Club's proposals for the
                          installation of additional barriers and a reduction in capacity were
                          agreed. Further comments were also made as to the height of the
                          existing crush barriers, corrosion, etc. There was also mention of the
                          north west corner terrace at the same meeting.

18.4.79     1.141         The Officer Working Party noted that the Club had accepted that in
                          view of the cross-fall on the north west corner exit the steps should
                          be rebuilt. There were also comments on crush barriers. There were
                          also comments about the north west corner terrace.

1.5.79      1.148         Letter from the Building Surveyor indicating that on the west terrace
                          the downward slope of the exit steps is to be corrected and the
                          capacity to be agreed. Also in the same document there is reference
                          to the north west terrace, and the replacement of the corrugated
                          sheeting at the rear of it and the removal of under strength barriers
                          and their replacement.

16.5.79     1.149         Letter from the County Fire Service indicates that the exit- routes
                          from the west and north west terraces are satisfactory. There is also
                          note of the capcities of the west terrace and north west terrace.

a.6.79      1.152         This is a list of matters requiring attention at Sheffield
                          Wednesday and there is a note that the replacement of the
                          corrugated sheeting at the rear of the north west terrace is required
          SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL                                                      Page 2


          SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C. - SUMMARY OF CORRESPONDENCE

          LEPPINGS LANE


DATE      j    REFERENCE   SUMMARY
          1
          1
          1                and that the removal and replacement of under strength barriers should
          1                also be carried out. Under the reference to the west terrace the
          1                downward slope of the exit steps needs to be corrected and the capacity
                           limited to 7,200.
          j1
15.8.79   1 1.170          There is a note about corrugated sheeting on the north west terrace and
          1                that nothing has been done about it.
          |
1? 9.79   1 1.173          Letter from Eastwoods indicating the emergency lighting installation
          1                at the Leppings Lane terraces.
          |
4.10.79   I 1.182          There is further mention in a letter from the Building Surveyor about
          1                the replacement of the corrugated sheeting at the rear of the north
          1                west terrace.
          |
16.10.79 I     1.188       Letter from Eastwoods indicating that they believe the corrugated
         1                 sheeting is satisfactory and suggesting further discussions.
         |
31.10.79 1     1.194       Letter from the Building Surveyor indicating that the corrugated
         1                 sheeting at the rear of the north west terrace was agreed to be
         1                 adequate, perhaps with the additional of a horizontal timber member.
         1
         1
2.11.79 I      1.195       Confirmation letter to Eastwoods about the corrugated sheeting.
         |
12.11.79 1     1.196       Meeting of the Officer Working Party indicating that the work on the
                           west terrace had been carried out and that the north west terrace
          1                sheeting should have a horizontal timber member fixed to the front of
                           it.

11.9.80   I 2.29           Report from Eastwoods indicating that some minor problems ha-ve been
          1                discovered on the "north west corner".
          1
          1
10.2.81   I 2.52a          An Officer Working Party visit to Hillsborough, in which it was noted
          1                that the cracking of the concrete of the terracing at the north west
          1                corner terrace had been the subject of quotations. The Club also
          1                outlined the consideration being given to the site of caravans outside
          1                the Penistone Road and Leppings Lane ends of the ground to sell
          1                tickets.  It was hoped that if this took place increased entry flow
          1                of spectators to the ground would result by reducing delays at the
          1                turnstiles.
          |
7.4.81    I 2.59           Mention is made that the cracking of the concrete at the north west
          1                terrace had been attended to.
          |
15.4.81   I 2.61           Letter from Sheffield Wednesday outlining the injuries to spectators,
          1                which took place at the Leppings Lane end on 11th April, 1981. Other
          1                matters are also referred to in the matter.
 j        |
          1
22.4.81   1 2.62           Letter from South Yorkshire County Council to Chief Constable
          1                requesting details of the incident.
           SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL                                                    Page 3


           SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C. - SUMMARY OF CORRESPONDENCE




DATE         REFERENCE    SUMMARY


3.6.81       2.68         Letter from the Chief Constable about the incident on 11th April,
                          1981.

8.6.81       2.69         Meeting of the Officer Working Party once again noting some small areas
                          of water seepage on the north west terrace.

2.9.81       2.80         Letter from Eastwoods indicating that ".  . . w e have been instructed
                          by the Club to organise the installation of two radial fences on
                          terrace at the Leppings Lane end of the ground".

9.9.81       2.85         Letter from Eastwoods indicating that tenders have been returned and
                          that work is likely to begin on the barriers early in October.

11.9.81      2.87         Officer Working Party meeting discussing the proposed radial barriers
                          on the west terrace. There was general agreement about the proposed
                          radial barriers, subject to certain conditions.

14.9.81      2.83         Letter from the County Council informing Eastwoods about the Working
                          Party views.

14.12.81     2.100        Letter from Eastwoods indicating that the work on the radial fences is
                          now substantially complete.

18.1.82      2.107        Letter from South Yorkshire Police indicating that the fences are
                          working satisfactorily, but there may be problems with fans being able
                          to climb over the radial fences using the crush barriers which run
                          through them.

2L .1.82     2.108        Letter from South Yorkshire County Council to Eastwoods indicating that
                          the radial fences appear to be working satisfactorily, but outlining
                          the Police view on the possibility of fans climbing over them.

26.1.82      2.110        Letter from Eastwoods commenting on the Police views on the climbing
                          problem at the radial barriers. The overall view appears to be that
                          the existing arrangement should be retained.

4.2.82       2.117        Officer Working Party meeting. There is a comment about the west
                          terrace and the Police reiterated their view. The Working Party
                          however agreed that it was preferable from a safety point of view not
                          to adjust the crush barriers.

24.8.82      2.147        Meeting of the Officer Working Party mentions cracks in the concrete
                          underneath the north west terrace and the apparently satisfactory
                          repairs of them.

27.8.82      2.148        Letter from Eastwoods indicating that as the repairs to the concrete
                          under the north west terrace will be quite expensive and possibly
 1
                          difficult to effect, the Club did not propose to carry out works at
                          this stage, as there is apparently no risk to spectator safety.
          SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL                                                     Page 4


          SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C. - SUMMARY OF CORRESPONDENCE

          LEPPINGS LANE


DATE        REFERENCE     SUMMARY


8.9.82      2.150         The annual inspection of the Hillsborough Stadium - it is noted that
                          two radial fences have been installed on the Leppings Lane terrace.

21.2.83     3.11          Officer Working Party notes that water seepage under the north west
                          terrace continues to occur and that the Club should be recommended to
                          replace fibreboard as a matter of maintenance to overcome the seepage
                          problem.

]1 8.83     3.25          Officer Working Party meeting noted that the crush barriers on the
                          terrace had been tested, thus completing the first cycle of crush
                          barrier testing at the stadium. There is also reference to the north
                          west terrace water seepage.

29.8.83     3.29          Letter from Eastwood and Partners setting out the crush barrier testing
                          at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

29.2.84     3.41          Officer Working Party noted that the former A.R.P. building adjacent to
                          the boundary wall was in the process of demolition. Water seepage was
                          again mentioned at the north west terrace.

7.6.84      3.52          The testing of crush barriers at the north west corner was proposed to
                          be carried out during June.

20.7.84     3.54          Barrier testing at the north west corner was carried out and reports
                          submitted by Eastwoods.

9.8.84      3.59          Officer Working Party inspection of Hillsborough. It was noted that
                          there was damaged angled support brackets to the pitch perimeter fence
                          which should be repaired or replaced.

23.1.85     3.77          Officer Working Party meeting. There is some discussion of the Police
                          practice of segregating supporters, at the Leppings Lane.

9.4.85      3.79          Letter from Eastwoods indicating that "the Club is anxious to segregate
                          the visiting team's supporters as they enter the ground and also to
                          enable the Police to control their exit at the end of the game. The
                          letter and attached plans detail the proposed scheme for this.

18.4.85     3.83          Meeting of the Officer Working Party to consider the Leppings Lane
                          proposals.

30.4.85     3.84          Letter from the Fire Service indicating their agreement to the proposed
                          scheme, subject to certain widths of gates, and stewarding
                          arrangements.

2.5.85      3.85          Letter from the County Council to Eastwoods indicating the basis on
                          which the revised Leppings Lane end scheme would be acceptable.

8.5.85      3.87          Letter from Eastwoods to the County Council in response to the County's
                          views on the proposed scheme at Leppings Lane.
          SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL                                                     Page 5


          SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C. - SUMMARY OF CORRESPONDENCE

          LEPPINGS LANE


DATE         REFERENCE    SUMMARY


10.5.85      3.88         A letter from the County Council to Eastwoods indicating that the
                          Council's request for two gates per radial fence had been dropped.




HB3AAK/JJJ
DATE                 REFERENCE   SUMMARY

25th July 1985       3.102       Letter from Eastwood enclosing 14
                                 drawings showing the proposed
                                 segregation of visiting supporters
                                 at Leppings Lane end of the ground
                                 the proposals include revising the
                                 layout of the entrance itself.

29th July 1985       3.103       Officer Working Party minute
                                 Meeting to consider Eastwood's
                                 letter of 25th July.

1st August 1985      3.109       Letter from Eastwoods commenting
                                 on the Working Party note of 29th
                                 July. There is a suggestion that
                                 at the forthcoming inspection (on
                                 7th August) these matters can be
                                 discussed further.

7th August 1985      3.111       A stadium inspection by the Officer
                                 Working Party with particular
                                 reference to the works on the west
                                 terrace and stand.

13th November 1985   3.128       Officer Working Party noted a
                                 report from the Police on the
                                 continuing problems caused by
                                 the merging of spectators from
                                 all parts of the stadium at the
                                 Leppings Lane end. No solution
                                 to this problem could be seen at
                                 the time.

14th November 1985   3.129       Letter to Eastwoods from the
                                 South Yorkshire County Council
                                 noting the crowd flow problems
                                 at Leppings Lane.

29th November 1985   3.130       Letter from Eastwoods indicating
                                 that it would be difficult to
                                 envisage anything more which could
                                 be done about the problems at
                                 Leppings Lane.

22nd January 1986    3.141       Officer Working Party meeting noted
                                 that the Police confirmed that the
                                 revised segregation arrangements to
                                 the rear of the stand worked well
                                 on by far the majority of occasions
                                 A comment was made on the north
                                 west terrace that the advertisement
                                 hoardings should be securely fixed.

2nd August 1988      4.74        Letter from Eastwoods indicating
                                 barrier testing of the Leppings
                                 Lane crush barriers. There are
                                 also copies of the test reports.
                                 Eastwoods also indicate in the
                                 letter that they have arranged for
                                 the defects discovered on the test
                                 to be remedied.

3MS/JS
        REPORT OF ACTING HEAD OF ADMINISTRATION & LEGAL DEPARTMENT CONCERNING
        SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS TO SPECIAL MEETING OF THE MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE
      ' AND GENERAL SERVICES COMMITTEE (POLICY)

1.      Purpose of Report

        To update members upon the action taken as a result of the Inquiry of Lord
        Justice Taylor into the Hillsborough Disaster and to enable members to
        give consideration to further action which is required. This report
        contains a summary of the action which has been taken so far and
        enumerates a number of issues which require views from members.

2.      Summary of Action Taken

2.1     Following the publication of Lord Justice Taylor’s Interim Report on the
         4th August, 1989, copies of the Report were made available in the Members
         Library.

2.2     A copy of the Interim recommendations contained in the Report is attached
         at Appendix A. The items marked with an asterisk required implementation
         prior to commencement of the football season.

2.3     Immediately after publication of the Report, the Acting Head of the
        Administration & Legal Department wrote to Sheffield Wednesday Football
        Club, Sheffield United Football Club and Sheffield Sports Stadium asking
        for confirmation of the action they had taken to activate those
        recommendations.

2.4     The Acting Head of the Administration & Legal Department also wrote to the
        Police, the Fire Service, the Building Surveyor and the Director of Health
        & Consumer Services for their views upon the interim recommendations and
        the action which needed to be taken as a matter of urgency.

2.5     On the 9tia August, it became known that a pre-season match was taking
         place at Sheffield United Club. To regulate the position, the Chief
         Executive, in the absence of the Acting Head of the Administration and
         Legal Department, issued an interim Safety Certificate to the Club. This
         contained basic safety provisions and also made specific reference to the
         interim recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor, which required
         implementation forthwith.

2.6     The Chief Executive also issued a Notice of Amendment in respect of the
         certificate issued to Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to reflect the
         items which needed immediate implementation pursuant to Lord Justice
         Taylor's interim recommendations.

2.7     The action of tiie Chief Executive was approved by the General Purposes
        Panel on the 17th August. The General Purposes Panel also approved
        further amendments relating to the use of the North Stand at Sheffield
        Wednesday Football Club and the use of the North West Terrace at Sheffield
        Wednesday Football Club. A copy of the resolution of the General Purposes
        Panel is attached at Appendix

2.8     Most of the interim recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor have been
         implemented. The following paragraph provides more detail about this.

3.      Implementation of Recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor

         Revised capacities have been calculated and the appropriate
         reduction made. Arrangements have been made to count the number of
         spectators entering each self-contained area. Written agreements have
       been entered into with both the Football Clubs and the Police setting out
        responsibilities for crowd safety and control and the filling of terraces.
       Stewarding arrangements have been improved in accordance with Lord Justice
        Taylor's interim recommendations. Gates in radial or perimeter fences
       have been painted in a distinctive colour. The Football Clubs have
        confirmed that gates to the pitch will be kept open during specified
       activities. Police Officers have been allocated in 'respect of each
        perimeter fence. Cutting equipment has been made available. Inspections
        of crush barriers have taken place and arrangements are in hand for
        replacement of those affected by corrosion. The question of layout of
        barriers has also been addressed. The Clubs have also inspected
      • turnstiles. Signposting has been reviewed and also the information
        printed on tickets. Police planning has also been revised and the
        co-ordination of emergency facilities. The first aid and medical
        facilities as required in recoaaaendations 39 to 42 of Lord Justice Taylor
        have also been effected. Members should, however, note that a
        satisfactory response has not been received from Sheffield Sports Stadium
        concerning these general safety issues.

3-1    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
       (a)    Revised capacities for calculation have been made in accordance
              with Chapter 16 of the Green Guide and a deduction of 15$ made to
              improve the safety margin. The revised capacity is reflected in
              the notice of amendment of the Safety Certificate. Thus,
              recommendations 1 and 2 of Lord Justice Taylor have been
              implemented.

       (b)    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club have indicated that they propose
              to limit the number of spectators entering each self contained pen
              or area using a computer system. The detail of this is provided in
               the agreement they have entered into with the Police in accordance
              with recommendation 4 of Lord Justice Taylor. It is not clear from
               this how they propose to achieve a closing of access to the pen or
              area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached. The Acting
              Head of Administration and Legal Department wrote to the Club on
               the 16th August for clarification of this matter. Response has not
               yet been received.

       (c)    A copy of the agreement between the Club and the Police   as required
               by recommendation 4 is attached.

       (d)    In accordance with recommendation 5, the Club have agreed to
               appoint stewards on the perimeter track for the purpose of checking
               crowd conditions for possible overcrowding or distress. There will
               be a need to revise the Safety Certificate to reflect the nev
               levels of stewarding.

        (e)   Discussions between the Football Club and Police are taking place
               and training sessions to ensure that officers and stewards are
               fully briefed and trained with regard to the recognition of crowd
               densities, signs of distress and crowd dynamics. There  is a need
               for enquiry to be made as to the full details of this.

        (f)   In accordance with recommendation 7, the gates and perimeter fences
               have been painted in a different colour from the rest of the fence
               and marked "emergency exit".

        (g)   In accordance with recommendation 8, the requirement for perimeter
               fence gates to remain open during specified activities has been
               made a condition of the Safety Certificate. Sheffield Wednesday
               Football Club have also confirmed that this will be done.
In accordance with recommendation 9, the   Club have confirmed that a
Police Officer will be stationed at each   gate in the sense and will
be easily identifiable by the stewards.    He will be able to make
contact with the Police Control Room and   will be in control of that
gate.                                          ~

In accordance with recommendation 10, this has been made a
condition of the Safety Certificate. The Club have also indicated
that they have provided four sets of bolt cutters. Two sets will
be dispersed at each fence area, stored in boxes, clearly marked
"emergency equipment". The stewards Tor each area will be trained
in the use of this equipment and it will te the policy of the Club
to ensure each steward is regularly deployed in the same area with
the same responsibilities.

In accordance with recommendation 11, the Club have confirmed that
crush barriers have been inspected aad ttefe those showing corrosion
will be repaired or replaced. The Acting Bead of Administration
and Legal Department has written to the Club asking for the details
of inspections and details of which barriers have been repaired or
replaced. Sites meetings have been arranged with the Building
Surveyors, the Fire Service and Enviransseastal Health Officers in
order that further progress can be laa&e in this area.

In accordance with recommendation 12, site meetings have been
arranged with all interested parties to discuss this complex


   accordance with recommendation 18, the turnstiles have been
inspected. The Club has provided a report of the examination.
This is attached. The Club have also provided statistics assessed
by the Health and Safety Executive which assess the potential rate
of flow. It must be appreciated that this is purely speculative
and further steps will have to be taken to undertake further tests.
This will be essential to ensure compliance with recommendation 19.
The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department wrote to the
Club on the 17th August asking for this information for the third
time. It has not yet been supplied.

No action has been taken, as far the Acting Head of Administration
and Legal Department is aware to install closeaicircuit television.

In accordance with recommendation 22, the signposting has been
reviewed. An inspection has been undertaken by the Chief Licensing
Officer who confirmed that it complied with recommendation 22.

In accordance with recommendation 23, the Club have confirmed that
the printing of tickets has been reviewed and styled in accordance
with the recommendation. A copy has not jet been supplied.

 In accordance with recommendation 24, the Club have confirmed that
 tickets will be printed with the request that spectators should be
 in position not later than 45 minutes before comaeneesent of the
 game.

 Recommendation 25 has not yet been addressed from the point of view
 of the Local Authority.

 In accordance with recommendation 26, Mr. P. Hayes, Deputy Chief
 Constable has been designated as the Senior Officer.
(s)    With reference to recommendation 35, the Police and Ambulance
       Services have nominated senior officers. Enquiries will need to be
       made to establish the proposed liaison. Essentially, the
       co-ordination of emergency services is a matter for those
       Authorities.

(t)    The requirements of recommendation 39 have been incorporated in the
       amended Safety Certificate. The requirement to employ a medical
        practitioner in accordance with recommendation 41 has also been
       made a condition. The Club have confirmed that both these
        recommendations will be implemented. Similarly, it has been made a
        condition of the revised Safety Certificate that one fully equipped
       ambulance where a crowd of 5,000 or more is anticipated shall be in
        attendance. Again, this has been confirmed by the Club. It vill
        be necessary for the Local Authority to take the advice of the
        Ambulance and Emergency Services to ensure that compliance with
        recommendations 40 and 43 is achieved.

Sheffield United Football Club

(a)    A revised calculation of the capacity in accordance with
        recommendations 1 and 2 have been made by the Building Surveyor and
        incorporated in the interim Safety Certificate issued to the CLub.

(b)    The Club proposes to use the computerised counting system to limit
        the number of spectators entering each terraced area to comply with
        recommendation 3. When the number of spectators admitted to any of
        the terraced area reaches within 10Jt of the capacity figure, the H
        computer monitor operator will inform Police Control who will take
        the appropriate action to close down the necessary turnstiles. The
        Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department has written,, to
        the Club seeking exact details of the procedures to be followed.
        They responded on the 21st August indicating that the computer
        monitor operator will inform Police Control by telephone and Police
        Officers will then be given instructions to instruct the turnstile
        operator to close down the necessary turnstiles. Consideration
        will need to be given as to whether or not this is the best
        practical means of ensuring that the terrace is closed off before
        its maximum capacity is reached.

(c)    In accordance with recommendation 4, the Club has supplied a copy
        of the written agreement with the Police setting out
        responsibilities for crowd safety and control.

(d)    In accordance with recommendation 5, the Club have indicated that
        tbey propose to deploy six crowd safety stewards on the perimeter
        track to monitor specific areas for possible overcrowding and
        distress. It will be necessary to revise the stewarding figures in
        the Safety Certificate to reflect this fact.

 (e)   With reference to recommendation 6 that Police Officers and
        stewards are briefed and trained with regard to recognition of
        crowd densities and signs of distress, I have not had any
        information to the effect that action has been taken to implement
        this recommendation.

 (f)   With reference to recommendation 7, the perimeter fence gates have
        been removed at Sheffield United Football Club. The Club have
        painted the frame of the gate in a different colour and erected
        emergency exit signs above each gate. The Chief Licensing Officer
        has inspected this.
To comply with recommendation 9, the Club have confirmed that
Police Officers will be provided as required and their identity
known to stewards and other officers in the vicinity. The Police
Officers will have radios to make contact with the Control Room.
It should be noted that the agreement entered into with the Police
also deals with stewarding aspects.

To comply with recommendation 10, the Club have confirmed that they
will provide four bolt croppers. These will be used by stewards of
the Club. The Club have asked the Fire Service to provide
instructions for stewards in their use.

In accordance with recommendations 11 and 12, the Club have
supplied a letter from their Consultant Engineer, Messrs. Eastwood
and Partners who have confirmed that a visual inspection has been
carried out. The letter confirms that some rusting has occurred
but that none of the barriers is sufficiently infected by rust for
it to be necessary to carry out emergency strengthening or
replacement before commencement of the football season. They also
confirmed that a review of barriers has revealed that in some
places they do not comply fully with the criteria in the Green
Guide and that drawings are being prepared showing the extra
barriers which will be required so that tenders can be invited.
This matter will need to be given full consideration by the
Building Surveyor and Fire Service and a further report supplied to
members in due course.

With reference to recommendation 18, the Club have instructed an
independent turnstile servicing company to carry out an inspection.
A copy of their report has not been supplied.

In considering recommendation 19, the Club have responded as
follows: "I can confirm that the correlation between the viewing
areas of the Spion Kop (southern end), New South Stand, John Street
Stand and Terraces and the turnstiles serving those areas is such
that all spectators intended to be admitted to those areas can pass
through within one hour. In the Bramall Lane End Stand and Terrace
areas on the Spion Kop (main area) servicing is necessary to some
turnstiles before this criteria can be met. We hope to complete
the work prior to the start of the season on the 22nd August but if
this is not possible, will reduce the capacity in those areas
accordingly and inform you prior to the game taking place. This
matter has been referred to the Building Surveyor and the Fire
Service for their comment for independent checks to be made/1

I have no information that closeJcircuit television has been
installed.

The Club have confirmed that the signposting has been reviewed in
accordance with recommendation 22. The Chief Licensing Officer has
also inspected the ground and confirmed that this is the case.

The Club has supplied a copy of their current tickets which seem to
conform with recommendation 23.

The Club do not request supporters to be in their places by a
specified time.

The comments made in relation to Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
are equally pertinent to Sheffield United. This is also the case
concerning the recommendations pertinent to co-ordination of
               emergency services.

      (q)      To comply with recommendation 39, the Club have confirmed that they
               have made arrangements with the St. John Ambulance Brigade to
               ensure at least one trained First Aider for 1,000 spectators is in
               attendance. This has been made a condition of the interim safety
               certificate.

      (r)      Consultation with need to take place with the Ambulance Service and
               other appropriate professionals to discuss this recommendation. ..

      (s)      The Club have confirmed that they will employ a medical
               practitioner in accordance with the provisions of his
               recommendation. This is also a condition of the Safety
               Certificate. The Club have not confirmed that he is trained and
               competent in advanced First Aid. Again, this is a matter which
               needs to be taken up with the appropriate professionals.

      (t)      With reference to recommendation 42, the Club have confirmed that
               they have made arrangements with the Ambulance Authority for the
               necessary ambulance cover. Again, this is a provision in the
               interim Safety Certificate.
                                                        /


      (u)      With reference to recommendation 43, this is a matter which will
               require consultation by the Local Authority with the appropriate
               professional bodies.                    ,

3.3   Sheffield Sports Stadium                                ,                      |

      The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department wrote to Sheffield >
      Sports Stadium asking for the proposals on the implementation of the
      interim recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor. The Club have not
      provided the necessary details. The Building Surveyor, the Fire Service
      and Environmental Health Officers are to visit the Sports Stadium to           j
      undertake a detailed inspection of the Ground with a view to establishing
      whether or not it is safe for the admission of spectators. The Acting
      Head of Administration and Legal Department has written to the Sports
      Stadium indicating that unless a satisfactory response is received to our
      letter seeking their proposals for implementation of the interim
      recommendations, then the Council have no choice but to consider issuing a     ;
      prohibition notice relating to the premises. It is anticipated that a
      full report will be made to the General Purposes Panel at the end of
      September once the members of the Advisory Group have reported back            "
      following their inspections.

4.    Matters for Consideration

4.1   Visits

      At its meetings on the 17th August, the General Purposes Panel stated an
      intention to visit all sports grounds with the City. All three Clubs have
      been notified of this request and a suitable date for a visit will
      arranged.

4.2   The function of members in the future.

      It is clearly essential that there is a tightening up of existing
      procedures and a clarification of the terms of reference for dealing with
      the issue of Safety of Sports Grounds. At present, the General Purposes        '
      Panel has delegated authority to deal with Safety of Sports Grounds            i
      issues. In the past, matters have been referred to the General Purposes
Panel for decisions as and when they were necessary. Members have
indicated an intention to participate more fully in this area; indeed,
this is required by the interim recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor.
The function of the Advisory Group must be to advise members and assist
them in providing enough information for members to make an informed and
rational decision as and when required. The Advisory Group is made up of
the Police, the Fire Service, the Building Surveyor, a representative from
the Department of Health and Consumer Services and the Ambulance Service
since the interim recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor were published.
Prior to Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry, the meetings of the Advisory Group
were not as tightly controlled as they should have "been. This has now
been improved. Arrangements have already been made for the Acting Head of
Administration and Legal Department to nominate a senior officer to Chair
the meetings of the Advisory Group and for full detailed minutes to be
taken. When/jthe' approved departmental structure has been completed, one
of the new Aatlm g HeadJ of Administration and Legal Department (Legal) M i ll
undertake the function. It is suggested that one way of members becoming
more involved in this issue would be for them to be supplied with agendas
of the meetings prior to the meeting taking place and minutes of meetings
which have taken place. It is recommended that this is implemented.

Inspections

There is a statutory duty upon the local authority to inspect designated
sports grounds at least on an annual basis. In his interim
recommendations, Lord Justice Taylor has said that he feels more frequent
inspections would be of benefit. It is suggested that it may be
appropriate to undertake quarterly inspections, once during the close
season, once at the commencement of the season, once in the middle of the
season and once at the end. This would obviously require a substantial
devotion of resources. It is recommended that this is implemented. :

Emergency Procedures

In the normal course of events, matters will obviously be referred to a
Sub-Committee of the Council for consideration. The delegated authority
in respect of these functions is vested the General Purposes Panel.
Recent events have highlighted the need for a proper emergency system to
be set up. In view of the fact that the Licensing Department is part of
the Administration & Legal Department, it would seem logical for thi3
emergency delegation to be granted to the Acting Head of Administration &
Legal Department in consultation with the chair of the General Purposes
Panel. Members are asked to comment upon this.

Resources

The existing structure of the Licensing Section is shown in the attached
diagram. It consists of a Chief Licensing Officer, a Principal Licensing
Officer, three Licensing Officers and gin Administrative Assistant. The
Section was originally comprised of five staff which were increased to six
by the addition of the Administrative Assistant's post in 1986 upon the
abolition of South Yorkshire County Council. The increase was to take
account of the additional responsibilities taken on by the Section upon
abolition of South Yorkshire County Council.

The Section is responsible for the processing, issuing, monitoring and
enforcing of numerous licences and consents; for example hackney carriage
licences and private hire licences, public entertainment licences, cinema
licences, theatre licences, street collection permits, sex shop permits,
mini bus licences and the licensing of sports grounds. The work requires
a comprehensive knowledge of the relevant legislation and much of the work
                                  A C T I N G H E A D OF A D M I N I S T R A T I O N A N D   LEGAL'^DEPARTMENT

PRESENT


P02i                                                   PRINCIPAL      SOLICITOR

                                                                  I
POlf                                                   ASSISTANT      SOLICITOR


POT d                                             CHIEF         LICENSING OFFICER




S c .6.                   PRINCIPAL         LICENSING
                          OFFICER


                  I                                I                               I
S c .4/5        LICENSING                     LICENSING                    LICENSING
                OFFICER                       OFFICER                      OFFICER



S c . 1/3                                                                                               ADMIN.
                                                                                                        ASST.

                                  his.T
                                  A e t f N G H E A D OF A D M I N I S T R A T I O N A N D   LEGAL DEPARTMENT



PROPOSED


                                                                                                                                   ”V>-' '.V
P02i                                                    PRINCIPAL SOLICITOR
                                                                  I
POl f                                                  ASSISTANT SOLICITOR


                                      I                                                                  ,   I '
POI d                        CHIEF LICENSING                                                   CHIEF LICENSING
                             OFFICER         (GENERAL)                                        O F F I C E R ( S P O R T S GROUN DS )




Sc .   6.                    PRINCIPAL          LICENSING
                             Of f i c e r    (g e n e r a l )
                                      i
                                                       I                          I
S c . 4/ 5   LICENSING                        LICENSING                  LICENSING                  LICENSING
             OFFICER                          OFFICER                    OFFICER                    OFFICER




Sc.     1.2/3
                                                                                       CLERICAL
                                                                                       OFFICER
is carried out under delegated powers.

The Effect of the Hillsborough Disaster

This has had repercussions throughout the Section since the Chief
Licensing Officer has been engaged full time since April in dealing with
the Inquiry and subsequently the interim recommendations of Lord Justice
Taylor.

One of the recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor i s .that "each Local
Authority should review its arrangements for issuing, monitoring,
enforcing, reviewing, amending and renewing safety,certificates." It is
clear that at present, this requires a substantial devotion of officer
time and that this is likely to continue indefinitely. Whilst the Chief
Licensing Officer is engaged full time on this task, other important
duties are neglected.

It is clear that further resources need to be devoted to the issue of
safety of sports grounds. (JEt is anticipated that it will require between
75$ and 100$ of one persons time to deal with safety of sports grounds
issues in the short term. This will entail dealing with the existing
designated sports grounds in the City, namely Sheffield Wednesday Football
Club, Sheffield United Football Club and Sheffield Sports Stadium. 3t is
hoped that by next Spring, a workable and well understood administrative
system will be in effect which should mean that there will be no need to
repeat much of the work which has been done to improve the administrative
systems. However, the World Student Games Facilities are currently under
construction and will have a significant impact in respect of the work on
safety of sports grounds.

It is anticipated that additional staff will be required to '.fulfill these
functions. A proposed new structure is shown in diagram form and attached
to this report. The proposal is that an additional post of Chief
Licensing Officer with specific responsibility for sports grounds is
created. There is also a need for an additional Licensing Officer who
will have direct responsibility to the Chief Licensing Officer for sports
grounds. Also attached to this report are draft job descriptions. In
addition to their specific duties relating to sports grounds, it is
anticipated that these two officers will as and when necessary provide
support to the existing structure which will continue to deal with the
general licensing functions.

The benefits of the changes

The increase in staff should ensure that the Licensing Section can
continue to function efficiently and provide a reasonable level of
service. It should enable the Licensing Section to improve its service
delivery and enable a review of licensing systems to be undertaken, and
proper enforcement of legislation to take place. During the last two
years, it has become clear that the quantity of work carried out within
the Licensing Section has increased. There has been an increase in the
number of private hire vehicle licences issued in particular as well as a
general increase in most areas. The World Student Games Facilities will
also in all probability require public entertainments licences requiring
additional devotion of time from the Licensing Section. In the light of
the Hillsborough Disaster, it is important that a proper allocation of
resources is made and consideration needs to be given to the allocation of
resources and priorities in other areas.
The cost of the proposals

Taking account of the recent pay offer, the cost of implementing the
proposals in a full year will total £26,460, taking account of salaries
and additional costs. Clearly, some of this will be recoverable by way of
licensing fees which can be charged for the issue and amendment of safety
certificates for sports grounds. There is statutory authority to enable    '
the Council to charge fees for the issue, amendment and transfer of Safety
Certificates. The fee charged must be c©amieaeaajfit&|the work actually
and reasonably done. No charge has yet been made for J;he issue and
amendment of certificate since the first amendment and certificate which ,
were issued with those issued recently. The original certificate issued
to Sheffield Wednesday Football Club was that which had been issued by the
former County Council. The Acting Head of Administration and Legal ;
Department has sought the views of the various bodies which have an ifjput
into Safety of Sports Grounds issues to enable a full discussion to take
place about the levels of charges which should be levied. A full report
will be made to members once further information is available in this
respect- For the future, however, it is anticipated that in accordance i :
with Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations, certificates will be issued on
an annual basis and thus a charge will be made annually. This charge will
reflect the inspections which take place and the administrative
procedures. There may be a need for additional devotion of resources to
cover the necessary expenditure.

R e c o m m e n d a tio n s

Members are asked:-                                                         «*

1.          to note the contents of this report and to authorise the creation ’
             of two additional posts of Chief Licensing Officer and Licensing
             Officer to deal with Safety of Sports Grounds issues.          '"Tf'S

2.          the proposals being discussed and agreed with the appropriate Trade
            Unions in line with the Council's (Responding to Change) agreement.


Since the 15th April, the Chief Licensing Officer has been engaged full
time upon Safety of Sports Grounds issues. Members will appreciate that
this mfiflna that other work has;been neglected and there have been
repercussions upon the Licensing Section generally. It is clear that
proper resources must be devoted to this issue. It is also fairly clear
that there is a need for an additional senior member of staff to undertake
the function. A draft committee report is attached at Appendix 3 which
sets out the proposals for the restructuring of the Licensing Section.
This report is based on the assumption that this function will remain -
within the licensing Department at least for the time being. It is
considered that there is a need for at least one full time post to deal
with the issues arising out of Lord Justice Taylor's report. It should
also be noted that there will be additional duties in respect of the
Sports Ground which will need certification as a result of the World
Student Games operations. Members will note from the draft report that it
is proposed that an additional post of Chief Licensing Officer is created
with specific responsibility for Safety of Sports Grounds issues. In
addition, it is considered there is a need for an additional Licensing
Officer to provide a support function. It is calculated that the cost of
this will be approximately £26,500. This cannot be financed from the
existing budget allocated to the Licensing Section. There is statutory
authority to enable the Council to charge fees for the issue, amendment
and transfer of Safety Certificates. The fee charged must be commensurate
with the the work actually and reasonably done. Thus at least some of the
cost is recoverable from the exercise. There is a need for a costing
exercise to be undertaken. At this stage, members views upon the
principle are required.


                                                                       |l
                                                                       ■i




1RPADW/JS
                                      JOB DESCRIPTION
    DEPARTMENT
                           Administration         and     Legal



DIVISION/SECTION
                           Licensing



      POST TITLE
                           Chief    Licensing       Officer       (General)




         GRADE
                           PO l d




 RESPONSIBLE TO
                           Assistant      Solicitor

                   '   '


RESPONSIBLE FOR
                           Principal Licensing Officers
                           Licensing Officers
                           A dmin. As si s t a n t




   v HOLIDAY AND
 SICKNESS RELIEF

                           To be c o v e r e d by C h i e f L i c e n s i n g O f f i c e r {5pc r t s G r oun d s )
                           and Assistant Solicitor
                           To p r o v i d e c o v e r for C h i e f L i c e n s i n g O f f i c e r ( S p o r t s
                           Grounds)      and P r i n ci pa l    Licensing Officer




 PURPOSE OF JOB



                           To e n s u r e that t h e s t a t u t o r y l i c e n s i n g   functions    of   the
                           Council are m a i n t a i n e d and enforced.




                                      Workina for
                                                        ■■■■
SPECIFIC DUTIES
           AND
ESP0NS1BILITIES

      These duties must at ail tines be carried out in compliance with the
      C o u n c i l ' s E q u a l O p p o r t u n i t i e s Policy. '

       1.   To e n s u r e that the l i c e n s i n g f u n c t i o n s of the C i t y p o u n c i 1 f r o m tim e
             to t i m e a l l o c a t e d to the A d m i n i s t r a t i o n a n d L e g a l D e p a r t m e n t a r e
            p r o p e r l y c a r r i e d out in a c c o r d a n c e w i t h s t a t u t o r y r e q u i r e m e n t s a n d
            *;tbe C o u n c i l ' s    policies.                                                       '

       2.   To a s s i s t the A s s i s t a n t          S o l i c i t o r in e n s u r i n g the p r o p e r s u p e r v i s i o n ,
             training and discipline                      of all e m p l o y e e s in the L i c e n s i n g Sec t i o n .


       3.   To    prepare       reports        on    licensing         matters       for    the A s s i s t a n t    Solicitor
             a n d a p p r o p r i a t e C o m m i t t e e s ; a n d to ins t i t u t e , m a i n t a i n and o p e r a t e
             p r o p e r p r o c e d u r e s to e n s u r e t h a t all r e l e v a n t m a t t e r s a r e b r o u g h t
             to t h e a t t e n t i o n of a n y C o m m i t t e e or O f f i c e r of the C o u n c i l r e q u i r e d
             to m a k e a d e c i s i o n on a n y of t h e l i c e n s i n g m a t t e r s r e f e r r e d to in (1)
             above.                                                                                            *

       4.    To l i a i s e w i t h M e m b e r s , o t h e r d e p a r t m e n t s of the C o u n c i l            and o utside
             b o d i e s o n all m a t t e r s a f f e c t i n g t h e L i c e n s i n g S e c t i o n .

       5.    To m a i n t a i n a s e r v i c e to t h e g e n e r a l          p u b l i c on l i c e n s i n g m a t t e r s ,
             including dealing with enqui r i e s and                           correspondence. ■

       6.    S o f a r a s r e s o u r c e s p e r m i t , to e n s u r e that t h e r e q u i r e m e n t s i m p o s e d
             u p o n l i c e n s e e s by l a w a n d b y l i c e n c e c o n d i t i o n s a r e c o m p l i e d w i t h
             a n d in -this c o n n e c t i o n to c o p o r d i n a t e the a c t i v i t i e s o f the C o u n c i l
             Officers and             the p o l i c e ,     fire    and    other      relevant authorities.
                                                                                                        •
       7     To be r e s p o n s i b l e fo r all m o n i e s r e c e i v e d b y t h e L i c e n s i n g S e c t i o n                  ’
             a n d to «naintain p r o p e r r e c o r d s to t h e s a t i s f a c t i o n of the C i t y
             Treasurer.

       8.    To t a k e    statements          and    to p r e p a r e      reports on        any m a t t e r s w h e r e     legal
             p r o c e e d i n g s m a y be c o n t e m p l a t e d a n d to a p p e a r in a n y           Court     proceedings
             w h i c h i n v o l v e the C o u n c i l ' s l i c e n s i n g f u n c t i o n .

       9     To a s s i m i l a t e a n d i m p l e m e n t t h e i n c r e a s i n g i t e m s of n e w l e g i s l a t i o n
             r e l e v a n t t o the C o u n c i l ' s l i c e n s i n g f u n c t i o n s , w h i c h is b o t h v a r i e d
             and complex.

      10     A s s i s t a n c e in r e s e a r c h of n e w l e g i s l a t i o n a n d        the r e l e v a n t c a s e
             l aw a f f e c t i n g t h e l i c e n s i n g f u n c t i o n .




       iny other duties and responsibilities as may be determined after negotiation
       between management. the post holder, and the appropriate Trade Unions.




     ISSUE DATE
                                     JOB DESCRIPTION!
    DEPARTMENT
                       Administration and Legal



DIVISION/SECTION
                       Licensing




                       Licensing Officer




           GRADE
                       Sc. 4/5



 RESPONSIBLE TO
                       Chief Licensing Officer


RESPONSIBLE FOR                                                       ‘            , : vci'"’ - -
                                                                          ••       ,




    HOLIDAY AND
 SICKNESS RELIEF       To be c o v e r e d   by e t h e r   L i c e n s i n g Officers.

                       To pr o vi d e   cover    for o t h e r L i c e n s i n g Officers.




 F -n ? C 3 E OF JC3

                        To e nsure that tr.e s t a t u t o r y l i ce n s i ng         f un c t i o n s   cf the
                        Council a r e m a i n t a i n e d and enforced.




                                     Working for Sheffield
;                     ^ N O ^ H             *‘f c S P ^ I
RESPONSIBILITIES
1.        To provide, maintain and enforce the relevant statutory licensing function^ of
          Council, including:-                               ^                                                                  v
          (a>‘receiving, checking and processing applications, references etc. which include
              (i) dealing with the general -public;
             (ii) handling      cash - including receipting and paying in to City Treasurer;
            (iii) liaising     with otherofficers, departments and authorities;
         . : (iv) issuing'licences; permits, etc. where-.apprepriate^nr^-^--:nr
              (v) administration of testing arrangements for vehicles";'and ;driy.ers^“
                  (e.g. medicals);                                                      '’
             fvi) the proper exercise of a personal statutory responsibility in- connection
                  with the suspension of vehicle licences;
            (vii) to properly exercise their statutory powers "under the relevant legislation
                  e.g. requirement to produce documentation;
           (viii) maintaining accurate records.
          (b) enforcement duties which includes
              (i) ensuring licencees comply with statutory standards;
             (ii) enforcement duties from interviewing individual involved and including
                  all steps up to presentation of evidence in court;
            (iii) giving statements (e.g. to the police)
     -       (iv) preparing prosecution files;
              (v) giving evidence in court.
          (c) dealing with general queries and complaints From tiie public and other
              departments.                 .

          (d) assisting the Principal Licensing Officer and Chief Licensing 'Officer tin;
             •.'the execution "of the overall functions of tise section.




    Ar.y ctr.er r u b i e s ar.c r esprr.sibilizies vr.icr. rr r.rt r z E 'sr s rr.e ~ ~ b.ts .z z z t ar.t r u r p s s e
    c ‘ tr.r prst as r.=y db i e t e r r i n e c a f t e r r.egttiiticr. rtE^wesr. Z3r.=re--=r.t, tr.e zest
    r.rlcsr,   =r.z   tr.e E p p r r p r x a t e    “ r- a e   *jr.i:r.s.

    Z:       iuties             at    =11     tires      be    cerrie;      cut   ir. crrrliar.re witr.   tr.e   Zz-r.zL'- 's
    E;-al    jpr=rtunities           r c l i cy .                                                     '               ... ; .




                                                         Working for Sheffield
                                              CHAPTER 24 - THE R ECO M M END ATIO N S

      315.       The recom m endations which follow are the minim um necessary to ensure that existing football
    grounds can for the present be safely used, based upon the evidence which 1 have heard at Sheffield and other
    inform ation I have received. They complement the recom m endations which Mr Justice Popplew dl set out
    after h is inquiry at Bradford.

            316.       Those which are asterisked should be carried out before the 1989/90 season starts. T he rest should be
    s              t       a      n       e       d       P?ssflrie' , - , w
    Maximum Capacities for Terraces                                                                    ^      '         >
    ★           1. Where a viewing terrace is divided into pens or areas which are self-contained, the Safety Certificate
             should specify the maximum number of spectators to be admitted to each such pen or area.

             A pen or area is to be deemed “self-contained” notwithstanding that it has a gate or gates affording access to
             another pen or area and whether such gate or gates be open or shut.

    ★            2 . Each figure for maximum capacity should be assessed in accordance with Chapter 16 o f the Green
              G uide (“th e Green G uide figure”) subject to the following qualiflcadons:-

              (a ) in arriving at “the Green Guide figure”, proper and realistic allowance must be made for a ll factors
                   which should reduce the permissible density in accordance with the range of m axim am iigares specified
                   in paragraphs 221 and 222 of the Green Guide;

              (b ) after assessing “th e Green Guide figure”, a deduction of 15% should be made to improve th e safety
              . . . . margin. <       :■ ■

    ★            ■ 3 . Arrangementtshoutdbemade:-                                                                   ^

              (a ) to lim it the number of spectators entering each self-contained pen or area to th e maximum capacity
                   figure assessed in accordance with Recommendation 2 above either electronically, mechanically, by a
                   ticketing arrangement, by counting or otherwise, and                                   -u,i-


              (b ) to close offfurther access to such pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.


        F illin g and M onitoring Terraces
        *        4 . There should be a written agreement between the club and the police setting out their respective
            - responsibilities for crowd safety and control and in particular for the filling of each self-contained pen or
              e th er terraced area and the monitoring of spectators in each such pen or area to avoid overcnwdiHg. Any
              variation o f the agreem ent in respect of an individual match should be agreed in writing in advance.

!       *    ‘       5 . At each match, there should be on the perimeter track, for each self-contained pen or <Hher3etaced
                 area, a steward (if the club is monitoring that area) or a police officer (if the police are monitoring it)w hose
                 s o le duty is to check crowd conditions in that area for possible overcrowding or distress ihrooghaai the
                 period the area is occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed should be in addition t o aHy'StfaeTS&’swmi
                 or police presence. H e should have ready access to the police officer authorised under RecomaneBfisxian 9
;                below, and by radio to the control room.


        F en ces and G ates
;                   6 . All police officers and stewards with duties in relation to the terraced areas and especially those with
!                d u ties under Recommendation 5 above, should be fully briefed and trained with regard to the recognition of
j                crowd densities, to the recognition o f signs of distress and to crowd dynamics. Training shneMi®chsde
                 dem onstrations at the ground and photographs, designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise
                 different crowd densities.

        ★           7 . All gates in radial or perimeter fences of pens or other self-contained areas should be painted in a
                 different colour from the rest of the fence and marked “ Emergency Exit” .



                                                                      57
★        8 . Where there are perimeter fences, all gates to the pitch should be kept fully open during the period
    ★   when spectators are on the terrace.

★         9 . There should be In respect of         gate in a perimeter fence (or group of gates if they are close together)
        a police officer authorised to decide whether or not to allow spectators through a gate to relieve overcrow ding.
        The officer so authorised in respect o f each gate should be identified for each match and known to be so by all
        stewards and police officers in that vicinity. H e should be able to make radio contact with the control room
        either him self or via an officer close at hand.

★          1(L Suitable and sufficient cutting equipment should be provided by the club at each ground where there
        are perimeter fences to permit the immediate removal o f enough fencing to release liombers of spectators if
        necessary. Agreement should be reached as to whether the equipment should be used by police, the fire
        brigade or stewards. Whoever is to use it should be trained to do so. Whether to use it should be a decision o f a
        nominated senior police officer at the ground.


Crush Barriers
★          11. All crush barriers should be visually inspected immediately for signs of corrosion. Any barrier found
        to be affected by a significant degree of corrosion should be repaired or replaced.

★          12. The layout of barriers in each pen or terraced area should be reviewed immediately to ensure that it
        complies with the criteria contained in Chapter 9 o f the Green Guide. If it does n o t the assessm ent of the
        maximum capacity figure for that pen or terraced area, in accordance with Recommendation 2 above, should
        reflect the fact.


    Safety Certificates '
          13. There should be an immediate review of each Safety Certificate by the responsible local authority,
        which should consult the ciub in respect of which the Certificate is issued, the police, the fire service, the
        ambulance service and the building authority. Such a reviewshouid include an inspection of the stadium. Its
        object should be to ensure that the operativeconditions of the Certificate are complied with and to add or
        substitute any condition shown to be necessary as a matter of urgency following the findings and
        recommendations in this report

          14. Any local authority within whose area there ex ists a sports stadium designated under the 1975 Act for
        which no Safety Certificate has yet been issued should proceed forthwith to remedy the situation.

          15. Every Safety Certificate should be reviewed by the local authority at least once annually and each
        Certificate should require to be renewed annually.


            16. Each local authority should review its arrangements for issuing, monitoring, enforcing, reviewing,
         amending and renewing Safety- Certificates. Such review should require that there exists or is provided an
         accountable administrative structure whereby the functions of the local authority are regularly and
         effectively supervised by senior officers and elected members and decisions are properly taken in accordance
         w ith the local authority's rules.

             17. To assist the local authority in exercising its functions, it should set up an Advisory Group consisting
         o f appropriate members of its own staff, represegtativesof the police, of-the fire and ambulance services, of
         the building authority, of the ciub and of a recognised supporters' ciub. The Advisory Group's terms of
         reference should encompass all matters concerned with crowd safety and should require regular visits to the
         ground and attendance at matches. The Advisory Group shouid have a chairman from the iocai authorin',
         and an effective procedure. Its resolutions shouid be recorded and it should be required to produce regular
         written reports for consideration by the local authority.


    D u ties of each Football Club
    ★       18. Each turnstile shouid be inspected and its potential rate of flow measured. Thereafter, regular
         inspections shouid be made to ensure that each turnstile remains capable of admitting spectators at the rate
         anticipated.
                                                                                                     ■ '    ■"V" .   ” -   ■        '* ’
*       .19. The correlation between each viewing area in the stadium and the turnstiles serving it should be such
      as to ensure that all the spectators intended to be admitted to that viewing area can pass through the
      turnstiles w ithin one hour. If that cannot be done.'the capacity of that viewing area should be rednrrd
      accordingly.                                                                       . .,5i
                                                                                                 ‘"v* r ;       ^
*       20. Turnstiles should be closed when the permitted capacity of the area served h y them is about to be
      reached and arrangements should be made to ensure quick and effective communication with turnstile
      operators for th is purpose.
                                                                    .......          .-»?.«   V,***%«.,W «*»■iff'VX Cg’~
        21*. C losed circuit television should be so installed as to enable crowd densities ootside the ground, within
      concourse areas and in pens and other standing areas, to be monitored before and throughout a

*      22. A ll signposting for spectators both outside and inside the ground should be comprehensively
      reviewed. It should, in relation to the arrangements for each match, be unambiguous, eye-catching, simple
      and clear and should be designed to ensure the rapid movement of spectators to their appropriate viewing
      area.

*      23. Information on tickets should be unambiguous, sim ple and clear and should correlate absolutely wi th
      the information provided in respect of each match both outside and inside the ground. Retained ticket stubs
      should contain information necessary to guide spectators once inside the ground.

*      24. Information on tickets requesting spectators to be in position by a particular time should be reviewed
      by clubs in conjunction with the police to ensure that it corresponds with the planned arrangements for
      admitting spectators to the ground.

        25. Each club should consult with a recognised supporters’ club as to the provision of pre-match
      entertainm ent aimed at attracting spectators to the ground in good time.
           .■                                                                                                          ^ r __
Police P lanning         * '’'u        •                           4          *   •* r £ * <>                           » ,u    >
*       26. The C h ie f Constable o f each police force in whose area there is one designated stadium or more
      should nom inate a chief officer to liaise with the management of each football club and local authorin'
      concerned in respect ofth e safety and control of crowds.

*       27. T he Operational Order for each match at a designated stadium and the pre-match briefing of all
      officers on duty there should alert such officers to the importance of preventing any overcrowding and, if asv
      is detected, o f taking appropriate steps to remedy i t                           f;,T:

*       28. T he Operational Order for each match at a designated stadium should enable the police to cope with
       any foreseeable pattern in the arrival o f spectators at a match and in their departure. It should provide for
       sufficient reserves to enable rapid deployment of officers to be made at any point inside or outside the ground.

*       29. T he option to postpone kick-off should be in the discretion of the officer in command at the ground.
       Crowd safety should be the paramount consideration in deciding whether to exercise i t

          30. There should be available in the police control room the results of all closed circuit television
       monitoring outside and inside the ground and the record of any electronic or mechanical counting of numbers
       at turnstiles or of numbers admitted to any area of the ground. Officers in the control room shouid be skilled
       in the interpretation and use of these data.


    Com m unications
         31. There should be sufficient operators in the police control room to enable all radio transmissions to be
       received, evaluated and answered. The radio system should be such as to give operators in the control room
       priority over, and the capacity to override, others using the same channel. Additional channels should be
       used, where necessary, to prevent overcrowding of the airwaves. Consideration should be given to
       sound-proofing the control room against excessive crowd noise.
                                                                                                v;




                                                             59
      32. To complement radio communications, there should be a completely separate system of land lines
    with telephone links between the control room and key points at the ground. '

      33. Within the control room, there should be a public address system to communicate with individual
    areas outside and inside the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole ground. Important
    announcements should be preceded by a loud signal to catch the attention o f the crowd despite a high level of
    noise in the ground. This arrangement should be prominently advertised on every programme sold for every
    match.                                                                            *

      34. U se should be made where possible o f illuminated advertising boards to address the crowd. ~
    Consideration should also be given to the use by police officers of a sim ple code o f band signals to indicate to
    the control room the existence of certain emergencies or requirements.             tB I r


Co-ordination of Emergency Services
★     35. The police, fire and ambulance services should maintain through senior nominated officers regular
    liaison concerning crowd safety at each stadium.

★     36. Before each match at a designated stadium, the police should ensure that the fire service and
    ambulance service are given full details about the event, including its venue, its timing, the number of
    spectators expected, their likely routes of entry and exit, and any anticipated or potential difficulties
    concerning the control or movement of the crowd. Such details should be readily available in the control
    rooms of each of the emergency services.                                    , ;

★     37. Contingency plans for the arrival at each designated stadium of emergency vehicles from all three
    services should be reviewed. They should include routes of access, rendezvous points, and accessibility
    within the ground itself.

★     38. Police officers posted at the entrances to the ground should be briefed as to th e contingency plans for
    the arrival of emergency services and should be informed when such services are called as to where and why
    they are required.


      Aid, M edical Facilities and Ambulances                                           ;*
★      39. There should be at each stadium at each match at least one trained first aider per 1,000 spectators. The
    club should have the responsibility for securing such attendance.

      40. There should be at each stadium one or more first aid rooms. The number o f such rooms and the
    equipment to be maintained-within them should be specified by the local authority after taking professional
    medical advice and should be made a requirement of any Safety Certificate.

      41. The club should employ a medical practitioner to be present at each match and available to deal with
    any medical exigency at the ground. H e should be trained and competent in advanced first aid. H e should be
    present at the ground at least an hour before kick-off and should remain until half an hour after the end of the
    m atch. H is whereabouts should be known to those in the police control room and he should be immediately
    contactabie.                                                                       ...          .

      42. At least one fully equipped ambulance from the appropriate ambulance authority should be in
    attendance at all matches with an expected crowd of5,000 or more.                             ;

      43. The number of ambulances to be in attendance for matches where larger crowds are expected should
    be specified by the local authority after consultation with the ambulance service and should be made a
    requirement of the Safety Certificate.

                                                                                 ■• ;        :'v:"   ..'   :
                                                                                                           'v-

                                                                                    ■                 ;:'ai "




                                                         60
           S H E F F I E L D   C I T Y   C O U N C I L

          MEETING OF THE GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL
  (MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME)

                      held 17th August, 1989
 ■■■- ..                                 ■ --e,; ■ . --                 ,“.a            '
                                                                                        'I'?, i1"'
                                                                               '   '   V'
                                                          -a 4j»   *?
PRESENT:      Councillors Butler (Chair), Hussain, Lamb, Moscrop, Mrs.
              Mulhearn, Mrs. Nelson, Mrs. E. Smith, Mr s., Walton and
              White.



S A F E S OF SPORTS GROUNDS
             The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
submitted a report on the issue and amendment of General Safety
Certificates under the provisions of the Safety ofoSports Grounds
Act 1975.
             Chief Inspector Beale of the South Yorkshire Police
attended the meeting to give the Police observations on the
proposals contained in the report and Mr. K. T. Addy, a Director
of the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and Dr. Eastwood,
Consultant Engineer, attended the meeting to give the observations
of the Football Club.                  .                    ,   -
             The Chair asked for a letter dated 16th August, 1989, from
the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club requesting a written ruling
prior to the coming Saturday's match on the question of access to
and capacity in the North Stand at the Hillsborough Football Ground,
which letter had not been circulated to members of the Panel before
the day of the meeting, to be considered as an urgent item.
RESOLVED: That (a) in accordance with the provisions of Section
100B{4)(b) of the Local Government Act 1972, as amended by the LocaL
Government (Access to Information) Act 1985, the request in the
letter now submitted from Sheffield Wednesday Football Club be
considered as a matter of urgency in view of the impending
commencement of the Football Season;
              (b) confirmation be given to the action taken by the Chief
Executive in (i) issuing to the Sheffield United Football Club an
 interim Safety Certificate under the provisions of the Safety of
 Sports Grounds Act 1975 and (ii) amending the current Safety
 Certificate issued to the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, all in
 accordance with the details contained in the report and copy
 documents tiow submitted;
              (c) the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
 be authorised to issue a further Notice of Amendment in respect of
 the Certificate issued to the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club (as
 amended) as follows:-
              (i) Schedule 3 of the amended Certificate shall be further
 amended to state that (A) the maximum capacity for the upper area of
 the North West Terrace at the Hillsborough Football Ground shall be               ,
 2,300 and (B) the maximum total capacity permitted in the North            CT ( L .
 Stand shall be reduced to 9,700 and the maximum total capacity       .
 permitted in the Hillsborough Football Ground shall be 43,¥44lf"and
             (ii)           for the sake of clarity, additional Condition 10 of
  the amended Certificate shall be amended to reflect the fact that
 only the upper part of the terracing of the North West Terrace shall
  be used;
 Meeting of the General Purposes Panel '      ■'           ■--■»' Page 2
 (Municipal Enterprise and General Services Programme) 17.8.89



             (d) approval be given to the proposed arrangements now
  reported for the upper part of the North West Terrace at the
  Hillsborough Football Ground to be used on a contingency basis as
  and when requested by the Police.
             (e) having heard the representations of Chief Inspector
  Beale on behalf of South Yorkshire Police and the representations of     ' ’ 4'
••Mr. Addy and Dr. Eastwood on behalf of the Sheffield Wednesday           •»
  Football Club concerning the use of the North Stand {i) in view of
  the need for segregation/football supporters and taking account of
  the operational plans of the Police, the North Stancl shall be filled
  only through turnstiles located in Penistone Road; and (ii)faking             £
  account of the undertaking by the Sheffield Wednes/day Football CluF
  to provide two additional turnstiles (currently serving the Spion
  Kop Terrace) £o serve the North Stand, the capacity for the North
  Terrace shall be reduced to 9,700;
             (f)            the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Dep^r.tment
  and representatives of the South Yorkshire Police and the Sheffield
  Wednesday Football Club be requested to monitor the operation of the
  Hillsborough Football Ground particularly with regard to the
  functioning of the North Terrace until the end of September, 1989,
  and report back to this Panel on the outcome of such monitoring;
  and
            4(g) the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
  be requested to make arrangments for this Panel to visit and inspect
   the Hillsborough and Bramall Lane Football Grounds and the Owlerton
  Sports Stadium in the near future.                                            I
                                                                   ■
                                              ■■■■■■            s;:   ■■
                                                          -U'                    j     ..
                                                                           ■ y       -■■■■
                                                                                         '
Rcl>0c (sjcxSldL                  cl      }c   ka J   ^^L .   y S lL


                   VC. ^ £   4,    gs%J
                                                       1a     April

                                                             3 -10   p « w




M A ftJ C


 C
 ikiL Press Qffvot: l\as ccmiacied
                                          ^     (j^Qywv^cL               Kjl^v      .

4Kcx1                   LoUll>xCLCur            Q     j* L     C0v\SicliLru^^

cl          p ro g rc u v v r^ u u        cw          S ck ^ q JL )      cs^
Spofhs                   Q roLuxds              -                       p ro g s ^ s s


h o ^                 feMiv     m o j ^

3       k   <l        f e s s   Office          q j   ^       ^goLyvg: t o ;

p id r                C o J e jv d iX r       '^ K r o a g k          t o -. ^ o k r v

fot             a ^ g e a e m )        ■ . c J K ^ / . :. . : : b j ^ ; ^ i ^

K jO a /^               v v x e y x B o m ri        tk o j'          s m ^ c n L .
                      U X Lnf     to      do        Ol a .      L A fc"\/aiJL O 0 v \

~ T \I.           ■                                   Ka^.soc

 L ltl-,                h-udt: U^-r H ^ u g h i                       -fKrx±
 Joil miy . uoouAjr to do 'd~

    ^       i
                                                                                                                                             l > + -L+. -«»(+.
                                                                                                                                                 O                 __



             H
                      —


    <3                                                    -0 k * * * * .             _ ...5 S r 3 S L ^



.     9 ..
    (\~s                        'Zo        "b o          A(AJ          t M "TCvto i <$W>

                 "T& V ^S v \t£ £ tC /-            OO                                                           <f-'^U -                     («4-i^ - ’-oWJ-r SJi-—v.    orA"
                                                                                                                                    ...................... .........^      f -... -   -
                            W ~ \ •




             *™3-^vi^/v)rL>--ut--- 4       <fe :
                                                                                                                                                                                          1

         1
                            l^ocXA^         <M;                                         L-e^t iJl
                  J
                                                                           '                c      r ........         ~ " .~ .^          ....                           .■


                 by        L /GtA*c4          «*w£> /X> O 1®- —                   '           <?tLt>-                        A    *-'"— /VTJ O <2->----- CZv~Vs          -&^X-    .
                           1                     r              -              ■ ~t • ■ ....... .............
                                                                                                                .. ^ r c v                           ............. .....
                            S ^ v -o e _           T ^ - a U /-                {Osz&aJc,

                                                                                                                                                                                          i


                                                                                                                      eJ^C w t        -^ -W ^           <v-      TL^sJLa^
                                                                                                                                                                             u
                                                                                                                  .

                                                                f '■ ^■^ i                      " ■ <?            ___      T^A<-<5'-fcv--t
                                                                                                                                      o > -




                                                   <w-      c ^ f ie s .                    >11                              (<n»<^ r ^ o _____ l/ia
                                              ts




                                                                                     r^ k r-
                                                                     U'H
1
        Telephone:


         Facsimile:
                        (0742) 7 2 6 4 4 4


                        (0742) 7 3 5 0 0 3
                                                                                                                                                                             o
Telecom Gold 79:        LLA 3 0 2 0


             Telex:     265871 MONREF G (quote ref LLA 3020)                                                         C O U N C I L


    Your reference:


     Our reference:             MW/PSW
                                                                                                                     Administration & Legal
                                                                                                                     Department
              Date:             14th June 1993
                                                                                                                     Head of Department
                                                                                                                     M a r k W e b s t e r , city solicitor


                                Dr S L Popper                                                                        Town Hall
                                                                                                                     Sheffield
                                                                                                                     S1 2HH

                                NOTTINGHAM




0                               Dear Dr Popper

                                HILLSBOROUGH JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                You will no doubt recall my letter to you of 12th May 1993 concerning
                                the above.

                                It is imperative that we have a discussion regarding the preparation of
                                an affidavit and I would be grateful if you would contact my office on
                                0742 734018 as a matter of urgency to arrange a mutually convenient
                                time.

                                Yours sincerely




                                City Solicitor and Head of Administration




                                                                                          fy</




                                                                          ___________ \jS i        **> *




         Keith Trelfa                                                                                                                                         Elizabeth Bashforth
        Senior Assistant Head                                                                                                                                 Assistant Head (Legal)
        (Administration)

                                                                                                                     P   e x g     A

                                                       For telephone enquiries on
                                                           this matter please ring:   U G JS .   ..(STD Code 0742)
Mrs Bashforth
Assistant Head (Legal)
Administration & Legal Dept                                    Our Ref :       BF/MS
Sheffield City Council                                         Your Ref:       -
Town Hall                                                      Ext     :       127
SHEFFIELD                                                      Date    :       7th September, 1992
SI 2HH




Dear Mrs Bashforth,

Hillsborough Inquest

I refer to your letter of the 24th August, 1992 and the enclosed copy
documentation relating to the applications for Judicial Review etc,
following the Hillsborough Inquest.

I can confirm that any additional costs incurred in carrying out a
Judicial Review would not be covered by any of the Council's Liability
Policies with us in force at the time of the Hillsborough Disaster.
The reasons for this are as follows

1.    The relationship of the Council to its appointed Coroners is not
      the normal relationship of Employer and Employee. It is most
      easily considered as a "statutory office" to which the Council
      appoints and meets the salary and other expenses. Except in this
      narrow sense, the Council is not responsible for the conduct of
      the Coroner, who occupies an independent Judicial .'cffiGL

       Our Liability Policies operate in respect of claims against the
       Council and its Employees only.

2.    The Coroner enjoys the same qualified privilege as Judges                                          and
      Magistrates and, therefore, cannot be sued in negligence.

       Our Liability Policies operate only in respect of claims brought
       in negligence.




                                                                                Continued.


 M unicipal Mutual Insurance Limited, Park'House, 57-59 Well Street, Bradford BD1 5SN
                  Telephone: (0274) 729446 • Fax No: (0274) 306478
                                       Regional M anager: R. E. Laughton, FCII
 R egistered office: 22 Old Q ueen Street, W estminster, L ondon SW1H 9HW Registered nu m b er 76678 England
            An ap p o in ted represen tative o f The P ro sp erity G roup (M em ber o f IMRO and LA.UTRO)


                                                      ABI
3.    Judicial Reviews are not actions for compensation.

      Our Liability Policies provide Defence Costs cover provided there
      is at the same time a claim under the Policy for compensation
      following negligence.


For r 3 above reasons, therefore, I am afraid we cannot be       of any
help t o the Council in this matter.




Yours faithfully




BARBARA FAAL
Deputy Regional Manager




c.c   John Tomlin - Insurance Officer
                                               CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM

From            C i t y S o l i c i t o r and                        To     City    Treasurer
                  H e a d of A d m i n i s t r a t i o n


Date            1 1 th M a r c h   199 2
Ref             MW/PSW
Tel E x t       4013                                                 Ref AB/INS/SHU




RE;      HILLSBOROUGH CLAIM

W i t h r e f e r e n c e to y o u r c o m m u n i c a t i o n of 3 r d M a r c h c o n c e r n i n g the a b o v e topic
w h i c h I r e c e i v e d on the 6th, I w o u l d i n f o r m y o u that n e i t h e r I n o r m y
A s s i s t a n t H e a d o f D e p a r t m e n t , w h o m y o u a r e a w a r e d e a l t e x t e n s i v e l y w i t h this
m a t t e r o n b e h a l f of the A u t h o r i t y a n d m y D e p a r t m e n t , w e r e a w a r e of the m a t t e r s
c o n t a i n e d in y o u r c o m m u n i c a t i o n .

Indeed, h a v i n g d i s c u s s e d this w i t h M r s B a s h f o r t h , she p o i n t e d out to me that
as far as she w a s c o n c e r n e d , n e i t h e r w e r e K e e b l e Hawson s , the S o l i c i t o r s
i n s t r u c t e d on b e h a l f of M u n i c i p a l M u t u a l , a w a r e of this m a t t e r a l t h o u g h
s p e c u l a t i o n d i d take p l a c e b e t w e e n t h o se S o l i c i t o r s a n d o u r s e l v e s as to w h y
t h e C i t y C o u n c i l h a d n o t b e e n j o i n e d as a p a r t y a n d the c o n c l u s i o n w a s r e a c h e d
t h a t t he I n s u r e r s m a y h a v e left us o u t s i m p l y b e c a u s e it i n c r e a s e d the c o sts
a n d t h e r e the m a t t e r w a s left on the b a s i s tha t w e w o u l d n o t ra ise the issue
u n l e s s it w a s r a i s e d w i t h us.

M y f i na l c o m m e n t on this is that w h i l s t t h e r e h a v e b e e n some d i s c u s s i o n s a nd
w h i l s t w e w e r e p a r t y to the same, th e y w e r e n o t in r e l a t i o n to the t h i r d p a r t y
act i on .

A c c o r d i n g l y , I t h e r e f o r e c o m p l e t e l y r e f u t e the s t a t e m e n t s by B a r b a r a Faa l at
M u n i c i p a l M u t u a l to the e f f e c t that the C o u n c i l w o u l d p a y a n o t i o n a l
c o n t r i b u t i o n of E l m tow a r ds the fint-l c o s t of the a c t i o n a n d th at m y
D e p a r t m e n t w e r e a w a r e of the p r i n c i p a l o f thi s p a y m e n t a n d I w o u l d be g r a t e f u l
if y o u w o u l d b r i n ^ m y c o m m e n t s to h e r a t t e n t i o n a n d ask f o r f u r t h e r
i n f o r m a t i o n as to p r e c i s e l y w h e n w e w e r e m a d s a w a r e of "this p r i n c i p l e " .
                                                                                                                                                                                       1




                                                  CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM

               From    City Treasurer                                   |            To            Head of Admin and Legal


               Data    3 March 1 9 9 2                                  |
               Ref     AB/INS/SHU                                       I
               Tel     4397                                                 j        Ref           M Webster




               I refer to discussions regarding the amount settled by                                                              Municipal                  Mutual       on
               behalf of the Council.

               The    figure   shown         in   the     Council           Public                  Liability claims experience was


               The figure appeared to be excessive and in due course I have spoken to
               Barbara Faal at Municipal Mutual.     I have been informed that approximately
                         relates to legal costs, opinion       and   Representation   costs.
               Apparently a meeting between Municipal Mutual and Sun Alliance, Insurers of
               Eastwood and Partners and Sheffield    Wednesday was held to discuss the
               claim.

               It    was    agreed that the Council would pay a notional contribution of
                           towards the final costs of the action.

               Admin and Legal were aware of the principle
               Municipal Mutual.
                                                                                                 of         this              payment               according              to   7

                                                                                hi   s
                                                                                         |    UOCiJv                tA„ejV
                                                                                                                                                    X)
               City Treasurer                                                                                                 f©                        t),     I G
          ft                                                                    -                                                                  L o n t,J_C


                                                                                                                        ,          I < ~ -e ku L cA

                                                                                                                                       cvx        ' • ' S ' SCC



                                                                                     i                                  a     C e^^xjcU ^^oA iD j& l              -/fce.
•••
k:        ■                                                                     -J                 ;                    ■■-                 b & 'r fL        : U ^ i-   '(&
      .
IU -                                                      ,                          :                              -                            ^ *0
                                                                                                                                                   J ‘

                                                                                                                    —         le
vM                                                        ......                         "Ji'v           :"T\   ,
          ' . ■• : sh/burkinshaw/m/hills.3.3                                                                                                                                        '.7v.
I                          kij ’
                               jWi*
                                                                                             (fo s k f      Yt'             uofiuS '                                     U A ’Hr;
.§                                       c   wxSVa-v'- <***- usA.f'C.
  :                                                                                          Ca S.
b                                                                                                                                            .      .    .
                                                                                      INQUESTS
                                                                                                                                     *        'f                                ’

                                                                                                                                             if c
                                                                                                                                  Of all th e criticisms m a d e o t t h e
                                                                                                                             in q u e st procedure, however, n o n e hiiS
                                                                                                                             been m ore distressing than th e persis­
                                                                                                                             te n t response of bereaved families tha t
              La te r this m o n th the inquests in to the deaths o f 95 Liverpool fo o tb a ll sup­
                                                                                                                             th e ir interests, th eir needs a n d their
              porters vAll be resumed. B ut w ill the bereaved fa m ilie s fin a lly learn w h a t                           assum ed right to a full an d th o rou g h
              really h a p pened a t H illsb o ro u g h ? S h e ila C o l e m a n a n d P h i l S c r a t o n o f the        hearin g have b een marginalised and
              H ills b o ro u g h Project, Edge H il l College o f H ig h e r E ducation, explain w h a t                    su b o rdin a te d to professional interest
              has h a p pened since the disaster a n d question the adequacy o f the inquest                                 a n d legal in te rp reta tio n . Moreover, the
              system to fu lfil the needs o f bereaved fa m ilie s where controversial deaths are                            denial of legal aid a t in quests inevitably
              concerned.                                                                                                     m e a n s th a t, in controversial cases, cor­
                                                                                                                             porate interested parties arc significantly
                                                                                                                             ad v an tag ed over the bereaved, with the
              O n Saturday IS April 1989, at a ro u n d               focused o n th e fans' b ehaviour.1 The ta k ­         latter often n o t represented at all.5
              3pm , 95 Liverpool soccer fans died on                  ing o f b lo o d alcohol levels o n all the
              th e terraces of Hillsborough sta d iu m in             dead,        inc lu d in g   ch ild ren   -    an
              Sheffield. A further 730 people were
                                                                                                                             Unprecedented step
                                                                      u n p re ce de nted response to a disaster -
              injured, over 400 receiving hospital                    c o m p o u n d e d fears th a t th ere was an         Clearly, w ith general an d specific
              tre a tm e n t, a n d m a n y th o u s an d s of        official ass u m p tio n th a t th e victim s had      questions to be answered, th e logistics
              o th e rs have been deeply affected, if n o t           co n trib u ted to their ow n deaths a n d to          a n d com plexities o f ho ld in g inquests
              traum atized,        by      th e    experience.        th e d e ath of others.                                in to th e m u ltip le deaths of a disaster
              'H illsborough', as it is now kn o w n , was                Against this background, bereaved                  present coroners, their officers a n d legal .
              th e w orst disaster at an y British sporting           families are still w aiting for the in fo rm a­        representatives w ith m ajor difficulties.
              o r organised leisure event.                            tio n - a b o u t b o th specific details of each      Families are con c ern ed to establish
                    W ith in days, th e th e n chief constable        d eath an d the b ro ad e r factors c o n trib u t­    broadly w h a t h a p p e n e d , b u t also w ant
              o f S o uth Yorkshire, Peter Wright, invited            ing to th e disaster - w h ic h m a y help             to raise q uestions specific to e a c h death.
              t h e West M idlands chief constable to                 th e m to s u r m o u n t their grief.                      In order to m e e t th e needs of the
              investigate th e disaster a n d it was                                                                         bereaved w h o so u g h t legal representa­
              decidcd th a t his team, h eaded by assis­                                                                     tion, th e H illsborough steering c o m m it­
              t a n t chief constable M ervyn Jones,
                                                                      Serious Inadequacies
                                                                                                                             tee was fo rm ed in Liverpool with a
              sh o u ld also provide evidence to th e                 Since Lord Justice Taylor reported in                  m e m b ersh ip of SO iaw practices repre­
              H o m e Office Inq u iry u n d e r Lord Justice         August 1989 t h a t th e m a in cause of the           sen tin g 92 families. T h e com m ittee,
              Taylor.                                                 disaster was 'overcrow ding' a n d the                 w h ich im m ed iately c o n c ern ed itself
                                                                      m a in reason was 'th e failure of police              with r a i s i n g fu n d s for the cost of repre­
              Questions to answer                                     co n tro l’,2 there h as been an assu m p tio n        sen tatio n, has h a n d le d ail legal matters
                                                                      a m o n g th e survivors a n d th e b e re a v e d .   relating t o . Hillsborough,' - inc lu din g -
             Bereaved families' and' survivors "were                  th a t liability, in som e form, w o u ld be           negotiating w ith the families a n d the
             u n it e d in d e m a n d in g answers to a series       established. As is often th e case with                Sheffield coroner, Dr Stefan Popper, over
             o f central questions. How could such a                  inquests in to controversial d eaths,3 there           th e inquests.
             disaster occur u n d e r th e stewardship of             is an excessive w eight of expectation                      Initially, it considered t h a t the
             a professional, corporate institu tio n and              placed o n th e H illsborough proceedings.             inquests w ould be in tw o distinct sec­
             u n d e r th e m a n a g e m e n t of th e police?            T h e recent failure of co m p en sa tio n        tions: a generic overview of th e circum­
             W h y was th e re n o regulation of over­                claims for pre-death tr a u m a together               stances of th e disaster similar to th e
             cro w d in g o n th e terraces? W h a t were             w ith th e Director of Public Prosecution's            Taylor inquiry, followed b y short
             t h e effect o f changes in th e p e n n i n g sys­      decision th a t there are insufficient                 accounts of th e specifics relating to each
             tem , the relevance of a b roken barrier                 g ro u n ds for criminal prosecution have,             of th e 95 deaths, w h a te v e r th e format,
             a n d th e significance of perim eter fenc­              yet again, inflicted u p o n a coroner's               it was assum ed b y all concern ed th a t the
             ing? W h e n was the safety certificate                  c o urt th e b u rd e n o f indicating liability.      a d jo u rn e d in q u e st      would     not     be
             issued a n d was it u p to date a n d ad e­              But a coroner's in qu e st has th e limited            resum ed u n til after the DPP h a d ruled
             q u a te ? W h a t were th e responsibilities of         fu n c tio n of reaching a verdict in keep­            o n prosecution. This was n ot th e case.
             t h e police, th e club, th e local authority,           in g w ith th e m edical cause of death: it is              In February, s o o n after Lord Justice
             th e       safety     advisers,     the    Football      n o t there to establish guilt. As recent              Taylor p resented his final report, South
             A ssociation a n d th e em ergency services?             cases have show n, even if th e non-                   Yorkshire chief constable Peter Wright                 ,
                   Besides th e broader questions of                  adversarial proceedings p o in t towards               retired. In his p artin g press statem en t,           1
             responsibility lay concerns a n d issues                 liability, th e o n ly available v e r d i c t , is    spoke of a 'very stro n g feeling o f resen t­
             specific to each of th e victims: h o w and              th a t of unla w fu l killing.                         m e n t a n d injustice' in police ranks, an d
             w h e r e th e y died, w h e th e r th e y suffered,          T h ro u g h o u t th e 1980s, a series of        expressed co n c ern th a t th e issue of th e
             w h a t a tte m p ts were m a de to rescue or            controversial deaths, particularly cus­                'influence of d rink' h a d b e e n passed
             resuscitate th e dying. These deeply per­                to d y deaths, revealed serious in a d e q u a ­       over in the Taylor report. His conclusion
             s o n a l worries were sh arp e n ed by th e             cies in th e in q u est procedure a n d an             th a t a 'lo t of additional evidence' would
             v iv id portrayal of th e disaster o n televi­           u n e asy relation sh ip b e tw een th e court          be revealed at th e inquest 'w h ic h m ay
             s i o n a n d in th e press.                             of in q u iry a n d t h e courts of liability. The     p u t a different c o m p lex io n o n th e en d
                   Over tim e, o th e r m a jor problem s             absolute discretion of th e coroner                    p ro d u ct' angered m a n y of the bereaved.
             e m e rg e d in th e m in d s of th e bereaved.          c o n ce rn in g procedure, calling witnesses,              T h en , w ith in weeks, th e coroner
             G iv e n th a t it was clear from police m o n ­         disclosure, su m m in g -u p , choice of ver­          a n n o u n c e d t h a t h e was going to resum e
             itors a n d TV coverage th a t fans h a d                dicts and, w h ere appropriate, direction              th e inquests o n a limited basis - an
             w a lk e d o n to th e terraces in a n orderly           o f th e jury, to g eth er w ith th e rulings of       u n p re c e d e n te d step. At a m e e tin g o n 6
             fa s h io n , w h y was th e m y th t h a t ‘t h o u ­   essential evidence as 'privileged', have               M arch in Sheffield, Dr P opper o u tlin e d
Legal Action
             s a n d s ' of d ru n k en , ram paging fans h ad        led m a n y bereaved families a n d their              his in te n tio n s for th e o p e n in g of p relim ­
 November s t a m p e d e d in to th e back of th e crowd             lawyers to express serious d o u b ts about             inary proceedings, n o w k n o w n as th e
   1990      a llo w ed to be m a in ta in e d ?                      th e role a n d effectiveness of inquests.4             'm in i-inq u ests'.        The   m e etin g    was
                   From d a y one, n o t o n ly the bereaved          Further, reservations have b e e n voiced              a tte n d e d by solicitors rep rese n tin g ail
     8       b u t th e people of Liverpool in general                a b o u t th e experience of coroners in                interested parties, m e m bers o f th e
             h a v e faced a m e dia-h y ped barrage of               h a n d lin g inque sts w hich, by circum­              Hillsborough steering c o m m itte e a n d
             sp e cu latio n , in n u e n d o , accusation an d       stance a n d b y legal representation, were             representatives of th e bereaved families
             c ou n te r-ac cu sa tion , m u c h of w h ic h has       in h e re n tly adversarial.                           su p p o rt group. T h e coroner in fo rm e d

                                                               -I
                                                                          INQUESTS

 th e m th at, follow ing c o n su ltatio n s w ith          W hile th e solicitor for the families -                     Typical of th e co n fu sio n is the
 a steering co m m ittee representative, cer­            m o s t of w h o m h a d received p o st­                   significant issue of tire status a n d use of
 ta in advantages co u ld b e gain ed from               m o r te m reports a n d brief sum m aries of               th e extensive evidence given to the
 iris decision, m a in ly t h a t 'n o n -c o n tro -    th e evidence prior to th e in q u e st - could             Taylor Inquiry. It is difficult to im agine a
 versial’ b u t im p o rta n t in f o rm a tio n could   ask for clarification, h e was un a b le to                 m o re th o r o u g h an d detailed account,
 be given to th e families.                              raise q u estio n s of substance or c o n se­               co m p le te w ith exacting cross-exam ina­
      Dr Popper h a d also co n su lted w ith            quence. After t h e hearing, th e families                  tion, of the disaster. Yet there is n o guar­
 th e DPP and, o n th is basis, d ecided to              were sh o w n to a 'q u ie t ro o m ' where                 a ntee t h a t m u c h o f this evidence will be
 deal w ith medical evidence an d b loo d                th e y could ta lk w ith the pathologists                   placed before th e jury by th e coroner.
 alcohol levels, evidence o f th e m o v e ­             an d 'g a th er th eir th o u g h ts'.                           In a letter to th e families D r Popper
 m e nts a n d final location" of th e                       T he speed a n d m a n n e r of th e proceed­           stated: 'I an ticip ate t h a t th e evidence
 deceased. The 'm in i-in q u ests' w o uld              ings, led to serious difficulties a n d left                will in th e m a in be applicable to the
 ascertain 'w h o ' th e deceased were, a n d            m a n y families c o n cerned a n d frustrated              deceased generally a n d will be exploring
 'w h e n ' a n d 'w h ere' th e y h a d died. Each      over the h a n d lin g of th e mini-inquests.               th e q u e stio n of h o w th e deceased came
 of. the 95 inquests w o u ld again be                                                                               b y th e ir de aths.' If th e co ro n e r does n ot
 ad jo u rn ed u n til after th e DPP's ruling o n                                                                   r e tu rn to th e specifics o f each case, it
                                                         The final hesrinfj
 prosecution. 'H o w ' th e deceased died                                                                            will leave th e u n c h a lle n g e d sum m aries
 a n d all related qu e stio n s w o u ld b e left to    M a n y families assum ed th a t at th e final              as fact in the ju d g m e n t o f the c o u rt and
 a later, final stage. H e w arned t h a t th e          h earin g - th e d a te o f w h ic h families a n d         the m in d of th e jury, f o r m a n y families,
 DPP w ould n o t agree to t h e prelim inary            th e ir lawyers first h e a rd o f from news                key q ue stio n s co n c c rn in g th e d ea th s o f
 hearings if a n y controversial m a tte r               broadcasts follow ing a press release by                    th e ir loved on es will never be. asked, let
 relating to the 'crim in al' investigation              assistant chief constable M ervyn Jon es -                  alo n e answered.
/     e raised.                                          m atte rs c o n c e rn in g 'h o w ' people died                 Of further c o n ce rn is th e issue of
1       oistant chief c o nstab le M ervyn               w o u ld b e fully explored, w ith an o p p o r­            finance.       The      families- h a v e       been
jo.        acted as coroner's officer at the             tu n ity for th o r o u g h cross-exam ination.             inform ed t h a t th e y m u s t find the fad
 m e e tin g a n d it was a n n o u n c e d t h a t he   T he steering c o m m itte e representative                 legal costs for th e final p h ase of dm
 a n d his colleagues w ould fuliil this fu n c ­        considered th a t it w o u ld com prise a                   h ea rin g a n d th a t 'Rolls Royce' rep rese n ­
 tio n th r o u g h o u t th e inquests. T he West       generic overview of th e disaster followed                  ta tio n could cost th e m a n estim ated
 M idlands te am , th e n , h a d b e e n th e           by several test cases. O n ly six weeks                     £150,000 collectively. T he d ilem m a is
 investigators for I.ord Justice Taylor, for             before th e hearing, lawyers still h a d n o                clear. Families seeking representation,
 th e South Yorkshire police/DPP a n d for               in fo rm a tio n o n th e pro p o sed format.               m a n y of w h o m have q u ite limited
 th e coroner.                                                                                                       resources, are expected to find su b stan ­
                                                                                                                     tial sum s of m o n e y to pursue inq u e sts at
                                                                                                                     w h ic h tlieir p ersonal co n cern s, worries
- The rrtini-Sriqu&sis                                                                                               an d q uestio ns will n o t ev en be raised.
 •The m ini-in q uests -o p e n e d • a t th e city -                                                                     At th e general level, th e bereaved
  hail, Sheffield, o n 18 April, just o n e year                                                                     families are well «a ware th a t th e iack of
  after th e disaster. It was m a d e clear to                                                                       p rosecutions p uts a n u n te n a b le pressure
  tile families' solicitors - th e steering                                                                          o n th e in q u e st as a kind of 'h e a tin g of
  com m ittee, 'after great difficulty', h ad                                                                        last resort’. As th e y press to sort o u t th e
  persuaded           the    M u tu al   M unicipal                                                                  co m p lex issue of liability, b o t h personal
  Insurers (for S outh Yorkshire police) to                                                                          an d corporate, th e co ro n er will rem in d
  fu n d the cost of 'block re p rese n ta tio n ' of                                                          3     th e c ou rt t h a t liability is n o t o n his
  th e bereaved - th a t e ach o f th e sch ed ­                                                               o       agenda.
  uled inque sts w ould be solely an 'infor-                                                                   »          Yet, to th e bereaved families, liability
       tio n d is sem in atio n exercise', w ith                                                               §•'   is a key issue'." O n the o n e h a n d , there is
!         -e x am in atio n n o t allowed.                                                                     J     a c o m m it m e n t to estab lish ing publicly
       rtfter th e jury was sw orn in, th e coro­        A fte r the disaster: the Lappings Lane s ta n d            th a t negligence occurred, t h a t blame
  n er listed th e n am e s o f th e deceased an d                                                                   sh o u ld be a p p o rtio n e d a n d t h a t redress
  th e n o u tlin e d his role a n d fu n c tio n and        At a m e e tin g w ith th e ir lawyers in               sh o u ld be w o n . O n th e o th e r h an d ,
  em phasised th e lim ited scope of th e p ro ­         early October, th e families w ere told                      there is th e real personal n e e d for qu es­
  ceedings. H e t h e n called generic evi­              th a t th ere w o u ld b e a pre-inquest review             tions related to th e circum stances
  dence c o n c e rn in g b lo o d alcohol levels,       to consult over th e form at. The                           specific to each d ea th to b e answered
  th e p a th o lo g y of th e types of injuries         significance of su ch a review - p re s e n t­              w ith precision a n d com p assio n , n
  sustained a n d th e hospital's em ergency             ing th e families' representatives w ith the
  response. W h a t followed was a con-                  o p p o rtu n ity to n ego tiate th e 'g ro u n d
  veyor-belt style of individual inquests                rules' w ith the c o ro n e r - was im pressed              1 S Coleman, A jemphrey, P Scraton and P
  m a n a g e d by the West M idlands officers.          u p o n th e m . Two weeks later, however,                    Skidmore Hillsborough and after: the
       T h e m ini-inquests, w h ic h were held          assistant chief co n sta b le Jo n e s cast                   Vverpool experience. First report April 1990.
  a t th e rate of eight per day, followed a             doubts o n th e s itu a tio n w h e n h e stated            2 Inquiry by the Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
  set p a tte rn . Bereaved families, m a n y            th a t th e re was n o g u aran tee th a t th e                 The Hillsborough Stadium disaster: IS April
                                                                                                                         1939. Interim report Home Office, Cm 765,
  a c c o m p a n ie d b y social workers, were          review w o u ld take place, b u t t h a t th e
                                                                                                                       I-IMSO, 1989, paras 311 and 278.
  m e t by th e ir allocated s u m m a r y officer,      c oroner m ig h t h e a r subm issions from                 3 See M Benn and K Worpole Death in the
  g iven a brief acc o u n t o f proceedings,            counsel - o n 16 N ovember, th e last                         city Canary Press, 1935; P Scraton and K
  a n d t h e n tak en in to co u rt to h ear the        w o rking day before t h e res u m p tio n of                 Chadwick In the arms o f the law: coroners'
  evidence. T h e p a th o lo gist gave a brief          th e inque sts - w h ic h m i g h t o r m ig h t              inquests and deaths in custody Pluto Press,
  a c c o u n t of his findings a n d a n o p in io n    n o t be in o p e n court.                                    198/; T Ward Death and disorder Inquest,
                                                                                                                       1936.
  o n th e cause of death . This was followed                 A few days later, a decision was e v en ­              4 See P Scraton and K Chadwick, 'Speaking
  by a West M id lan d s police officer read­            tually reached th a t th e re a pre-inquest                   ill of tiie dead: institutionalised responses Legal Action
  ing a s u m m a r y of th e m o v e m e n ts of the    review w o u ld be h e ld o n 30 October,                     to deaths in custody' jo u rn a l o f Law and November
  deceased p rio r to d e ath a n d of th e state­       This u ncertain ty , so close to the resu m p ­               Society, spring 1986.                            1990
  m e n ts m a d e b y w itnesses. A nother              tio n date, led to c onfusion, frustration                  5 For a thorough overview of tire legal pro­
   police officer t h e n indicated, o n a plan          a n d a n g er a m o n g th e b ereav ed fa m i­              cedure see Tony Ward’s excellent series or         9
                                                                                                                       articles in Legal Action December 1983,
  of H illsborough, 'sightings' a n d tim ings           lie s, so m e o f w h o m stated th e ir                      February, April and August 1984; aiso G
    •f th e deceased taken fro m p h o to g ra p h s     co ntinuing dism ay at th e iack of consulta­                 Kavanagh Coroners' rules and statutes Sweet
     ■Me’e v i n o n coverage.                           tion.                                                         and Maxwell, 198.5.
                                       CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM

From            City    Solicitor       & Head      of A d m i n|     To      Chief Executive



Date           8th M a r c h    1991
Ref            MW/PSW                                                Ca .
T e l Ext .    401 8                                                  Ref.



 STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL
RE;      HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - FINAL REPORT

F u r t h e r to the m e m o r a n d u m f r o m the L e a d e r to y o u of 4 t h M a r c h 199 1 on this
m a t t e r , a n d to o u r d i s c u s s i o n the o t h e r eveni n g, I c a n c o n f i r m th a t this
r e p o r t is in its f i n a l s t a g e s of p r e p a r a t i o n a n d if n e c e s s a r y , c o u l d be
p r o d u c e d w i t h i n a s h o r t s p a c e of time.

I m ust, h o w e v e r , r e i t e r a t e m y c o m m e n t s m a d e e a r l i e r r e g a r d i n g the t i m i n g of
s u c h r e p o r t a n d m y r e s e r v a t i o n th a t p u b l i c a t i o n s h o u l d be p o s t p o n e d u n t i l
a f t e r the c o n c l u s i o n of the H i l l s b o r o u g h I n q u e s t a n d p a r t i c u l a r l y in l i g h t o f
the p o l i c e e v i d e n c e n o w b e i n g h e a r d at the Inqu e s t.
                                                                                                                  Sch 9160
   R 3 7 1 9
                                  C IT Y OF SHEFFIELD — M E M O R A N D U M

From           Councillor Clive Betts                   To      Chief Executive


Date           4 M a r c h 1991
Ref.           CJCB/KES/3
Tel. Ext.      470 1                                    Ref.

                                                                                              0 6 MAR 1991
               I refer to the fact that we have had no formal report to Committee
               following the Council’s response to the Hillsborough disaster. Please
               could this be actioned as a matter of urgency.

               I shall table an item myself at the April Policy Committee if no report                                   is
               forthcoming from the officers.




               C J C Betts


                                                                   fCi>.U.            CH&f-    £    „   ..v
                                                                     ■                                        a
                                                                     M.T.

                                                                     Rc3             - 5 MAR 1991
                                                                    CT   "   T
                                                                                                IP "    “;
                                                                     U.p H




                                                                                          L   f *   iL.


                                                                             ! ,
                                                                             f/~.



                                                                                                                       *s

                                                                             \      ..c




                                                                                          7
                                                                                                             h
    Telephone: (0742) 734000


           Fax: (0 7 4 2 )7 3 5 0 0 3


Your reference:


Our reference:    AH/EB/GJ
                                                                                  c         I   T        Y
                                                                                 C O U N C I L
         °ate     21 January 1991



                  Mr A Butler                                                    Chief Executive
                  Principal District Surveyor
                                                                                 Pamela J. Gordon   ma
                  Building Surveyor’s Division
                                                                                 Town Hall
                  Department of Land and Planning
                                                                                Sheffield
                  Town Hall                                                     S1 2HH
                  SHEFFIELD



                  Dear Hr Butler

                                            Hillsborough Disaster, 15th April, 1989 -
                                                Possible Disciplinary Proceedings

                  I write to clarify the position regarding the possibility of disciplinary
                  proceedings against you in connection with your Safety of Sports Ground
                  duties and the Hillsborough Disaster on 15th April, 1989.

                  I have decided that, on the basis of the information available to me at
                  this point in time and having regard to the following matters

                                1.       the decision by the DPP not to institute criminal proceedings
                                        against the Council or any individual officer

                                2.      the fact that Sheffield City Council has not been ordered by
                                        the Court to contribute to the compensation payments made
                                        through civil proceedings

                                 3.     the advice of Counsel acting on behalf of Sheffield City
                                        Council’s insurers

                   that there are no grounds for taking disciplinary action against you.

                  I know that you remain under considerable pressure regarding this issue,
                  in particular because of the continuing requirements to give evidence to
                  the Inquest, but I trust that this decision will go some way in helping
                  you to cope with that pressure.

                  Yours sincerely




                   Chief Executive
                                                                                                                        C C- t ~ l V J
    Telephone: (0 7 4 2 )7 3 4 0 0 0


            Fax: (0 7 4 2 )7 3 5 0 0 3


Your reference:


Our reference:     AH/EB/GJ                                                       C        I       T        Y
                                                                                  C   P        U   Iy   c       I   L
         Date:      21 January 1991



                   Hr D H Bownes                                                  Chief Executive
                   Chief Licensing Officer                                        Pamela J. Gordon      ma
                   Licensing Section
                                                                                 Town Hall
                   Administration and Legal Department
                                                                                 Sheffield
                   Town Hall                                                     S 12H H
                   SHEFFIELD



                    Dear Hr Bownes

                                             Hillsborough Disaster, 15th April, 1989 -
                                                 Possible Disciplinary Proceedings

                    I write to clarify the position regarding the possibility of disciplinary
                    proceedings against you in connection with your Safety of Sports Ground
                    duties and the Hillsborough Disaster on 15th April, 1989.

                    I have decided that, on the basis of the information available to me at
                    this point in time and having regard to the following matters

                                  1.      the decision by the DPP not to institute criminal proceedings
                                         against the Council or any individual officer

                                  2.      the fact that Sheffield City Council has not been ordered by
                                         the Court to contribute to the compensation payments made
                                         through civil proceedings

                                  3.      the advice of Counsel acting on behalf of Sheffield City
                                         Council’s insurers

                    that there are no grounds for taking disciplinary action against you.

                    I know that you remain under considerable pressure regarding this issue,
                    in particular because of the continuing requirements to give evidence to
                    the Inquest, but I trust that this decision will go some way in helping
                    you to cope with that pressure.

                    Yours sincerely




                    Chief Executive
                        CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM

Fron»     City Solicitor and Head of     | To         The Chief Executive
   f--   Administration                  j        .
                                                  ■
                                         "I                                  ■■■■£
Date     17th January, 1991               |
Ref      AH/EB/JM                         j , a   ^                     ^
Tel Ext. 4019 - E. Bashforth                  Ref,,



                                                                                     ■9
                  Hillsborough Disaster - 15th April. 1989 -
                      Possible Disciplinary ^^ceedings

You will be aware that after the Hillsborough Disaster there have been a
number of investigations into "what went wrong" and "who was to blame". In
particular Lord Justice Taylor’s Inquiry, the DPP investigation, the civil
proceedings for compensation and finally the piquest which is still ongoing.         A




The DPP have decided not to take criminal proceedings against the local
authority or any individual officer.   The local authority has not been
pursued through the Courts by the police or any other party for a contribution ;
to the damages paid to the injured or bereaved.  (The Council may have to
contributed        to the insurers legal fees under the insurance policy.)

Lord Justice Taylor’s Report contained criticisms   of the    local authority,some
of which were accepted, some of which would still   be questioned, but all the
recommendations in the Report have been followed as advised by the Home
Office.

Counsel’s view is that it is extremely unlikely that        any   individual couldbe
found culpable in any criminal proceedings.

In August, 1989 it was considered appropriate to ask              to carry out
an internal investigation into the Disaster to .determine whether any officer
should be the subject of disciplinary proceedings.    Discussions took place as
to the remit of such an inquiry etc.   However, by January 1990 the position
of the local authority regarding the Disaster was much clearer and you decided
that there was no need for the internal investigation to go ahead.   In
addition, given the time that has elapsed there would have to be exceptional
circumstances to commence any disciplinary inquiry at this stage.

In the circumstances, it would be helpful for the individuals concerned -
David Bownes, Chief Licensing Officer and Arthur Butleir, Building Surveyor -
to clarify their position regarding possible disciplinary action.

I have therefore drafted a letter to the individuals concerned for your
consideration.

I have consulted with             Ken Blount and                who agree with
the proposed action arid given that both David and Arthur are due to give
evidence to the Inquest on 23rd January, 1991, it would be desirable for them
to have the letter prior to that date.

Leading Counsel, who has been involved throughout, has also advised that such
a letter is appropriate, justifiable and in his view necessary prior to such
individuals being put through the process of giving evidence to the Inquest on
the 23rd.                                                          — — -------
Dear

                  Hillsborough Disaster, 15th April, 1989 -
                      Possible Disciplinary Proceedings

I write to clarify the position regarding the possibility of disciplinary
proceedings against you in connection with your Safety of Sports Ground.duties
and the Hillsborough Disaster on 15th April, 1989.

I have decided that, on the basis of the information available to me at this
point in time and having regard to the following matters

       1.    the decision by the DPP not to institute criminal proceedings
            against the Council or any individual officer

       2.    the fact that Sheffield City Council has not been ordered by the
            Court to contribute to the compensation payments made through
            civil proceedings

       3.    the advice of Counsel acting on behalf of Sheffield City Council’s
            insurers

that there are no grounds for taking disciplinary action against you.

I know that you remain under considerable pressure regarding this issue, in
particular because of the continuing requirements to give evidence to the
Inquest, but I trust that this decision will go some way in helping you to
cope with that pressure.

Yours sincerely
                         CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM
                                                                                  M
From       City Solicitor & Head of Admin|    To     Liz Bashforth, Assist Head of
                                                     A &
                                                         L                        1
Date       14th January 1991              j
Ref        MW/PSW                         |
Tel Ext.   4018                           |   Ref.




RE:    HILLSBOROUGH FINAL REPORT BACK

Notwithstanding that   tactically it is felt appropriate, by all of us that the
final report back on   the City Council’s response to the Hillsborough Disaster
should await the end   of the Inquest I nevertheless think that it would be
appropriate to start   some work on this matter now.

In particular, to start to draw together all the practical and other issues
that have been examined in the light of what happened on Saturday, 15th April
1989 and to produce a comprehensive report drawing together in a simple,
factual fashion what lessons the Council had learnt in terms of the operation
of its various areas and how these have led to amendments in its procedures
while at the same time distinguishing between a disaster plan and a peacetime
emergency plan given that whilst the two are not totally separate, the scale
and nature of the incident will determine which one will be put into operation
notwithstanding that the initial stages of both have some degree of
similarity.
       R3719                                                                                                                        Sch 9160
                                              CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM
                   M r. J . R . W, S e w e l l , P r i n c i p a l                      M r. H . M. W e b s te r ,
   From                                                                        To
                   S o l i c i t o r , G rou p B                                        C it y S o l i c i t o r

                   1 0 th D ecem b er, 1990
   Date
                   JEWS
   Ref.            4016
   Tel. Ext.                                                                   Ref.      t*.




                                                                                                                         r n «
                                                                                                                         £.l<
           H ills b o r o u g h D i s a s t e r F u n d            i-ieQaA.

           I t h a n k y o u f o r y o u r m em orandum o f t h e 4 t h D ecem b er g i v i n g m e a n u p d a t e o n
           r e c e n t d e v e lo p m e n ts i n r e l a t i o n t o p r o p o s a ls f o r d i s t r i b u t i n g t h e r e s i d u a l
           m o n ie s h e l d i n t h e c h a r i t a b l e t r u s t . A s r e q u e s t e d I h a v e m ade som a
           p r e lim in a r y in f o r m a l e n q u i r i e s a t o f f i c e r l e v e l i n r e l a t i o n t o t h e
           H ills b o r o u g h C cn rn u n ity T r u s t a lt h o u g h f r a n t h e l i m i t e d f e e d b a c k a b o u t t h e
           o r g a n i s a t i o n I d o n o t f e e l i n a p o s i t i o n t o o f f e r m uch r e a s s u r a n c e t o a s s i s t
           t h e t r u s t e e s o f t h e H ills b o r o u g h D i s a s t e r F u n d .

           A lth o u g h a s s u g g e s t e d I b e g a n irty e n q u i r i e s th r o u g h t h e E m p loym en t D e p a r tm e n t
           t h e m a in l i n e s o f e n q u ir y h a v e b e e n th r o u g h c o l l e a g u e s i n F a m ily a n d C cn m u n ity
           S e r v i c e s D e p a r tm e n t a n d H o u s in g D e p a r tm e n t. T h e c o n t a c t s i n F a m ily a n d
           C d r m m ity S e r v i c e s h a v e b e e n L e n a J o n e s , P r i n c i p a l C a m n u n ity W ork er
            ( T e l . 4 8 8 2 V a n d m o re p a r t i c u l a r l y                       a t t h e L a n g s e t t A d v ic e C e n tr e
            ( T e l . ___              T h e a d d i t io n a l e n q u i r i e s o f t h e H o u s in g D e p a r tm e n t h a v e b e e n
           m ad e v i a                             's c o n t a c t s .

           I t i s e v i d e n t t h a t t h e o r g a n i s a t i o n ca m e i n t o e x i s t e n c e i n r e l a t i o n t o t h e
           N e ig h b o u r h o o d R e v i t a l i s a t i o n S ch em e i n t h e a r e a w h ic h w a s s u p p o r t e d b y t h e
           D e p a r tm e n t o f t h e E n v ir o n m e n t a n d h a s now r u n i t s c o u r s e . A c c o r d in g ly t h e
           f o c u s w a s v e r y m uch d i r e c t e d to w a r d s p r o p e r t y a n d e n v ir o n m e n t a l i s s u e s a n d t h e
           im p r o v e m e n t o f h o u s in g . E v id e n t ly a n i n t e r e s t w a s t a k e n i n v a r i o u s p a r t i c u l a r
           l o c a l s c h e m e s e . g . R e g e n ts C o u r t F l a t s , a n d m uch o f t h e w o r k a p p e a r s t o b e
           d i r e c t e d to w a r d s a c q u ir in g p r o p e r t i e s a n d im p r o v in g th e m .      I h a v e d e lib e r a t e ly
           n o t h a d a n y d i r e c t c o n t a c t w it h t h e o r g a n i s a t i o n i t s e l f f o r p r e s e n t p u r p o s e s
           b u t am a w a r e o f a p p r o p r ia t e c o n t a c t p o i n t s a n d n o t e t h a t i t i s b a s e d i n
           p r e m is e s l e t a t a p e p p e r c o r n fr c m t h e SYPTE b a s e d a t 1 - 1 3 H olm e L a n e . T h e
           o r g a n i s a t i o n e v i d e n t l y a l s o i n v o l v e s i t s e l f i n a d v ic e w o r k a n d in d e e d h a d tw o
           v o l u n t e e r s w o r k in g a t t h e L a n g s e t t A d v ic e C e n t r e . On a w id e r c c n m u n ity b r i e f
(.")       I u n d e r s t a n d t h a t i t a l s o c la im e d c r e d i t i n t h e c a m p a ig n o p p o s in g t h e s i t i n g
           o f t h e t e n n i s c o u r t s f o r t h e W o rld S t u d e n t G aines i n H ills b o r o u g h P a r k . A t
           m em ber l e v e l I u n d e r s ta n d t h a t C o u n c illo r s M r s. J a c k s o n a n d M eade h a v e t a k e n a
           d i r e c t i n t e r e s t i n se m e o f t h e a c t i v i t i e s o f t h e T r u s t a n d y o u m ay w is h t o
           f i n d a n o p p o r tu n e m om ent a t a m e e t in g o f t h e P o l i c y C c n m itte e o r C i t y C o u n c il
           t o a s c e r t a i n w h e th e r M r s. J a c k s o n h a s a n y c l e a r v ie w s a b o u t t h e m e r i t s a n d
           a c t i v i t i e s o f t h e o r g a n is a t io n .

           I w a s a l i t t l e s u r p r is e d t o h e a r t h a t t h e H ills b o r o u g h C c n m u n ity D e v e lo p m e n t
           T r u s t h a d a lr e a d y s u b m it t e d a fo r m a l a p p l i c a t i o n w it h s u p p o r t in g p r o s p e c t u s t o
           t h e H ills b o r o u g h D i s a s t e r F u n d t r u s t e e s a n d t o t h a t e x t e n t t h e t r u s t e e s m ay
           a l r e a d y b e p o s s e s s e d o f m o re in f o r m a t io n t h a t o u r s e l v e s ,                 s e n q u ir ie s
           i n d i c a t e d t h a t t h e y a p p e a r t o b e a p r e s s u r e g r o u p f o r h o u s in g im p r o v e m e n ts a n d
           a s y e t i t i s n o t c l e a r w h e th e r t h e y a r e w h o lly c o n s t i t u t e d i n t h e i r p r e s e n t
           fo r m a s n e i t h e r o f f i c e r s i n F a m ily a n d C c n m u n ity S e r v i c e s D e p a r tm e n t o r
           H o u s in g D e p a r tm e n t h a v e b e e n a b l e t o f u r n i s h m e w it h a c o p y o f t h e b o d y 's
           f o r m a l c o n s t i t u t i o n . N e it h e r o f t h e s e r v i c e d e p a r tm e n ts a p p r o a c h e d p r o v id e
           a n y g r a n t a i d t o t h e H ills b o r o u g h T r u s t a n d w h i l s t t h e r e w a s n o o b j e c t i o n a s
           s u c h e x p r e s s e d i n r e la t io n t o t h e a c t i v i t i e s b o th               an d I g a in e d a s t r o n g
i m p r e s s i o n t h a t n o g r e a t s u p p o r t i v e e n t h u s ia s m w a s b e i n g v o i c e d .    On t h e
F a m ily a n d C a tm u n ity S e r v i c e s s i d e t h e r e a p p e a r e d t o b e so m e c o n c e r n t h a t t h e
e m p h a s is o n in c c m e g e n e r a t i n g a c t i v i t i e s m ay p o t e n t i a l l y c r e a t e a c o n f l i c t
w i t h t h e i n t e r e s t s o f t h e w id e r c c m n u n it y .         I n c o n c lu s io n i t seem s t o me t h a t
o n e d i f f i c u l t y i s t h a t w e a r e d e a l i n g w i t h a n ew u n t e s t e d o r g a n i s a t i o n a n d
t h e r e f o r e d o n o t know v e r y m uch a b o u t i t .              S e c o n d ly I d o w o n d e r t o w h a t e x t e n t
t h e n a t u r e o f t h e a c t i v i t i e s a s i n d i c a t e d i s c o m f o r t a b ly r e c o n c i l e d w i t h t h e
t y p e s o f p u r p o s e f o r w h ic h t h e t r u s t e e s o f t h e H ills b o r o u g h D i s a s t e r R in d a r e
l o o k i n g t o s u p p o r t . W ith o u t s e e k i n g t o b e c r i t i c a l I s im p ly c o n t r a s t t h e
n a tu r e o f t h e a c t i v i t i e s w it h t h o s e o f t h e h o s p it a ls and o t h e r S h e f f i e l d b a se d
p r o j e c t s s u g g e s t e d f o r c o n s i d e r a t i o n a n d w o n d e r t o w h a t e x t e n t t h e y w o u ld
a p p e a l t o t h e s e n s i t i v i t i e s o f t h e b e r e a v e d f a m i l i e s and t h o s e p r o v id in g
d o n a tio n s .

I am s o r r y t h a t w it h o u t c o n t a c t i n g t h e r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s o f t h e H il l s b o r o u g h
C cn r n u n ity D e v e lo p m e n t T r u s t t h e m s e l v e s i t i s d i f f i c u l t t o g i v e s u f f i c i e n t
d e t a i l t o t h e i r a c t i v i t i e s o r d o t h e i r c l a i m s j u s t i c e a n d I w o u ld r e i t e r a t e my
s u g g e s t i o n t h a t y o u p e r h a p s t a k e t h e o p p o r t u n it y t o t a k e f u r t h e r s o u n d in g s a t
m em ber l e v e l b y m e n t io n in g t h e o r g a n i s a t i o n t o C o u n c i l l o r M r s. J a c k s o n . We d o
n e e d t o t r e a d c a r e f u l l y a s t h e r e w o u ld a p p e a r t o b e q u i t e a s t r o n g h o p e i f n o t
e x p e c t a t i o n o n t h e p a r t o f t h e l o c a l t r u s t t h a t t h e y w i l l b e r e c e i v i n g se m e
s u p p o r t f r c m t h e H ills b o r o u g h D i s a s t e r F u n d .
      Telephone:        (0742) 726444


        Facsimile:      (0742) 735003


Telecom Gold 79:        LLA 3020


            Telex:      265871 MONREF G (quote ref LLA 3020)                                                          c        1   T   Y
                                                                                                                      c   o    U N C 1 L

  Your reference:        JMJ/FR

   Our reference:        MW / PSW

                                                                                                                      Administration & Legal
                Date:    1 4 t h D e c e m b e r 1990                                                                 Department
                                                                                                                      Head of Department
                                                                                                                      Mark W ebster, city solicitor
                         M r J M J on es MSc
                         Deputy Chief Constable                                                                       Town Hall
                                                                                                                      Sheffield
                         C o r o n e r ’s O f f i c e r
                                                                                                                      SI 2HH
                         Furnival House
                         Furnival Gate
                         Ey r e S t r e e t
                         SHEFFIELD
                         SI 4QN




                         D e a r M r J o n es

                         RE:         H I L L S B O R O U G H I N Q U E S T S - U S E O F C O U N C I L C H A M B E R 9TH J A N U A R Y 1 9 9 1

                         T h a n k y o u f or y o u r le t t e r of 1 2 t h D e c e m b e r 1990 i n f o r m i n g us of y o u r
                         d e c i s i o n to r e l i n q u i s h use of the M a n d e l a R o o m u n l e s s r e q u i r e d at the e nd
                         of the I n q u e s t s .

                         C o n c e r n i n g the s e c o n d p o i n t in y o u r l e t t e r r e g a r d i n g the use of the
                         C o u n c i l C h a m b e r on 9th J a n u a r y 1991.       I can c o n f i r m the C h a m b e r w i l l be
                         a v a i l a b l e fo r the I n q u e s t s as the C o u n c i l m e e t i n g w i l l n o w take p l ace in
                         the M a n d e l a R o o m on that                date.

                         Yours        sincerely




                            C i t y S o l i c i t o r & H e a d of A d m i n i s t r a t i o n




     Keith Trelfa
    Senior Assistant Head                                                                                                                         Elizabeth Bashforth
    (Administration)                                                                                                                              Assistant Head (Legal)




                                                          For telephone enquiries on
    R2220/X14                                                inis matter pleese ring:             .(STD Code 07*2 }
     J MERVYN JONES MSc                                                 HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY TEAM
     DEPUTY CHIEF CONSTABLE
     CORONER'S OFFICER                                                 NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
     Furnival House                                                    Fowler Street
     Furnival Gate                                                     Birmingham B7 5DA
     Eyre Street
     Sheffield S1 4QN
     Telephone: 0 7 4 2 -7 3 1 5 4 6
     Fax        : 0 7 4 2 -7 3 1 4 8 3
     CHESHIRE CONSTABULARY                                             Your Ref:
     Police Headquarters
     Chester CH1 2PP                                                   Our Ref:
     Telephone: 0 2 4 4 -3 5 0 0 0 0 Ext 2091                                      JMJ/FR
     Fax       : 0244
                                                                       Date:
                                                                                   12th December, 1990




.)   Hr M WEBSTER,
     City Solicitor,
     Head of Legal Services,
     Town Hall,
                                                                -= 7                                *
     Sheffield.

                                                                                                t b c o«




                                                (


     HILLSBOROUGH INQUESTS - SHEFFIELD TOWJ         H fA T.T.




     I have been asked by the Coroner to say how much he appreciates the continuing
     use of the Town Hall Council Chamber for the Inquests. I join him in making
     those appreciative remarks and particularly the helpfulness of your staff.

     We have been monitoring the use of the         Mandela Room and the Coroner has decided
     to cease to make use of it forthwith.          However, he would like to leave the wiring
     discreetly in place so that if towards         or at the end there is a flurry of
     activity, we could make application to         you to re-open the room for what hopefully
     will be not many days.

     We are now planning our return on 7th January 1991, and it would be helpful if
     you could confirm whether your early indication to use the Council Chamber on the
     9th January 1991 will in fact be realised, or whether it will be available for
     the Coroners use. An early response would be appreciated as the Coroner would
     like to announce such an adjournment for that day before he rises for Christmas
     and New Year on Wednesday 19tn December, 1990.




         PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT
■'■TOwkSF
                        CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM

From      Head of Department               To    J R W Sewell
                                                 Principal Solicitor            0

Date      4 December 1990                        cc   Chief Executive
Ref       MW/GJ
Tel Ext   4018 - Hr Webster                Ref




PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL


HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER FUND

I return herewith your file, for which loan many thanks, together with a note
of the meeting which took place in the Chief Executive’s office on Monday
3 December, a copy of the typed list which, as you will notice, is headed
"Strictly Confidential", setting out possible areas of residual gifts over,
together with comments on such list.

Hy purpose in writing is threefold; firstly, as indicated, to return the file,
secondly to update you on the position and thirdly to ask if you could make
some discrete enquiries, possibly of colleagues outposted to Employment with
regard to what we know of the Hillsborough Community Trust and in particular
whether there are any areas with regard to its proposed activities which could
or should be avoided and in particular whether and to what extent the Council
would be able to reassure the Hillsborough Trustees that we can keep a
watching brief on the Hillsborough Community Trust’s future activities.
NOTE OF A MEETING TO DISCUSS DISTRIBUTION OF RESIDUAL FUNDS -
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER APPEAL


Those presents-   Norman Adsetts, Sheffield Trustee
                  Michael Reddington, Treasurer of the Fund
                  Councillor C J C Betts, Leader of the Council
                  Pamela Gordon, Chief Executive
                  Mark Webster, City Solicitor
                  John Pilling, Assistant Director F & CS

Michael Reddington opened the conversation by saying that the point had been
reached where the   Trustees wished to wind up the Discretionary Fund, in
connection with which they had set a deadline of the end of June 1990 for
claims and so far some 900 people had claimed. He anticipated there would be
about £1 million left for distribution which the Trustees felt should be paid
out directly for beneficiaries, there is then the question of interest (see
below).

Therefore any other payments, ie residual payments should be paid out of the
Charitable Fund which has currently got a balance of £800,000 approximately,
with an anticipated payment coming from the Scottish FA. Due to recent
relaxation of the rules it is possible now for the Trustees to transfer the
residue of the interest out of the Discretionary Fund to the Charitable Fund
and therefore get the tax back on that matter, so it is anticipated that there
may be something in the regionof £1 million for distribution.

He went on to indicate that when they had consulted earlier for ideas on the
distribution of the residue, the three authorities at that stage had indicated
that it was far too early to think about, but now that time had obviously
arrived, he talked in terms of the distribution of the £1 million which would
be in the Charitable Fund, and that although some would probably be reserved
for future hardship for the primary beneficiaries the balance would then go to
Sheffield, Merseyside and Nottinghamshire for specific projects as a memorial
to the disaster and/or an acknowledgement of contributions.  There would of
course be given for quasi charitable purposes.

He added that such monies should not be used to relieve the Clubs or statutory
bodies of their legal responsibilities but he felt they could be used to
reflect public sympathy for the activities of such bodies, in particular to
assist them in areas where they wouldn’t otherwise be able to make progress
and here reference should be made to the typed list which was circulated.   In
particular, non-statutory areas which could contribute to the safety of the
grounds might be an appropriate niche for contributions such as the St John’s
Ambulance.  The Bereavement Forum was discussed and universally accepted as an
appropriate body to receive funds, particularly the counselling aspect of It,
as this could then assist individual police officers.  In addition, another
aspect that was suggested was the Hillsborough Community Trust subject to
feedback from Council Officers and Members as to the soundness of that body
and, in particular, whether the Authority could or would be prepared to grve
any help and assistance with regard thereto in the future.

As to the future process, there would be a Trust Meeting later this week which
would agree the amount of money available and approve a similar list to that
circulated with the scales and money attached thereto, they would then go back
to the bodies
on the list and precisely determine the terms and the objects for which money
should be made available and at that stage they would come back and discuss
local proposals with the City Council prior to actually notifying such bodies
of the sums they are to receive.
                                      CohrfiQ£sjT/fia_




                    H IL L SB O R O U G H D I S A S T E R A P P E A L D R A FT MEMORANDUM

               ON S U P P O R T TO O R G A N IS A T IO N S FROM C H A R IT A B L E                  FUND




                                      S H E F F IE L D -B A S E D    P R O JE C T S




                       1)       H o s p ita ls

                                           R o y a l H a lla m s h ir e -
                                           N o r th e r n G e n e r a l ~       I/M-                  Qj<e
<^x 6 4 4 U1                               K e ig h le y


                                H ills b o r o u g h        C o m m u n ity ^               ^           <o *          (L ~ ^



                                S h e f f ie ld E m ergen cy S e r v ic e s ^                   ^                        FW^yy.7
                                         S t J o h n ' s A m b u la n c e


                                C hurches



                       5)       S h e f f ie ld U n iv e r s ity /P o ly te c h n ic
                                         M e m o r ia l S c h o l a r s h i p s



                       6)       Y o u th    T r a in in g      P r o je c ts
                                                                                \




                                                                                        6 *>           n J U L _ l_
           i -^ e ^ p rrd   _                       ( c J l'




                i




 W N A /C M R /M L C /3 . 1 2 • 9 0

                                               £    < 6 0                              <c
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER APPEAL - COMMENTS ON THE LIST

With regard to:-

1    Hospitals

      It was felt here that the sort of issues that might be appropriate for a
      grant would be waiting and sleeping facilities near to the Intensive
      Care facilities for relatives of those injured, plus similar
      improvements to Casualty and perhaps small items of equipment which
      wouldn’t otherwise be purchased such as the "Disaster" trolley.

2     With regard to the community, the Hillsborough Community Trust was seen
      as being possibly an appropriate body as were the Owlerton Church and
      the Local Boys’ Club whose buildings were used during the emergency.

3    Emergency Services

      This is intended to cover Social Services, the Bereavement Forum, the
      Police and the St John’s Ambulance, but in the event it was felt that of
      such bodies those that might be more appropriate were the St John’s
      Ambulance and the Bereavement Forum (see main text).

4    The churches were mentioned. At thispoint the Chief    Executive
      indicated that the Officers felt that the combination of parts of 2, 3
      and 4 were felt to be appropriate.

With regard to 5 and 6, these were seen to be some kind of "In Memorial”
contributions and the Youth Training Projects could possibly be those
identified with the Football Clubs.   It was pointed out that similar lists
were available for Liverpool but were probably more community-related and did
not include the hospitals, but Nottingham had difficulty in putting forward
any specific proposals.   It was re-emphasised that there were three
geographical strands to the distribution of residual funds, plus the need to
achieve a particular purpose.
      Your Ref

     MW/PD

      30 November 1990



Mr J Mervyn Jones MSc
Deputy Chief Constable
Coroner’s Office Officer
Furnival House
Furnival Gate
Eyre Street
SHEFFIELD SI 4QN


Dear Mr Jones

Hillsborough Disaster Inquest Transcript of Proceedings

Thank you for your letter dated 23 November and I apologise for the delay in
replying to you.

As you say, the cost of the transcript service amounts to about £900 per day,
excluding photocopying costs and all these costs are borne by Sheffield City
Council.

At present, three firms of solicitors have requested transcript copies which
are available on the following day, at a charge of 80 pence per sheet. As I
understand The Coroner’s Records (Fees for Copies) Rules 1982 as amended by
The Coroner’s Records (Fees for Copies)(Amendment) Rules 1990, provide that
the fee payable to the Coroner or other persons for furnishing a photocopy
shall be 80 pence for each photographic sheet. The Coroner has agreed that
the charges can be collected and retained by Sheffield City Council and
although, as you say, a not insignificant amount is likely to be collected
during these lengthy proceedings, those charges will be set off against the
cost of the transcript service.

The Council too have been approached by individuals requesting a copy of the
transcript and I presume the Coroner has been approached by the same people.

I have given some thought to this matter and would put forward the following
proposal for the Coroner’s consideration, if he is minded to accede to the
request for further copies to be reproduced from one or more of the copies
supplied by Sheffield City Council.

1.    That the fee for a photocopy of a transcript on a ’next day basis’
      remains at 80p per sheet.




                                  Mr Webster   734018
/

    2.         That a second service is offered, in addition.

               A copy of the full transcript for the week, obtained on a ’next week
               basis’ at a charge of £50 (£10 for each day).  Such a charge would be
               comparable with general photocopying charges.

    Obviously, in putting forward this.proposal T am trying to balance the need to
    mitigate the overall costs of the Inquest itself with the desire of a number
    of people to have a transcript of their own.

    I am also mindful of the limitation on who is able to receive a copy.

    If I can be of further assistance or should you wish to discuss .the matter,
    please do not hesitate to contact me.

    Yours sincerely




    City Solicitor and
    Head of Administration




    cc*.   Dr Popper, HM Coroner


           k    • /5 -
J MERVYN JONES MSc                                       HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY TEAM
DEPUTY CHIEF CONSTABLE
CORONER'S OFFICER                                       NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
Furnival House                                          Fowler Street
Furnival Gate                                           Birmingham B7 5DA
Eyre Street
Sheffield S1 4QN
Telephone: 0 7 4 2 -7 3 1 5 4 6                                             23        1990
Fax        : 0 7 4 2 -7 3 1 4 8 3
                                                        Your Ref:
CHESHIRE CONSTABULARY
Police Headquarters
Chester CH1 2PP                                         Our Ref:
                                                                    JMJ/AES
Telephone: 0 2 4 4 -3 5 0 0 0 0 Ext 2091
Fax       : 0244                                        Date:
                                                                    23rd November 1990




                                                           o o        te      a * ,
Mr M Webster
City Solicitor
Administration & Legal Department
Town Hall
Sheffield
SI 2HH




Dear Sir,

HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER INQUESTS
TRANSCRIPTS OF PROCEEDINGS

You are aware that, with your approval, the Coroner has employed J L Harpham
Limited to supply transcripts of the daily Inquests proceedings at the Town
Hall.  The cost of this transcript service amounts to about £900 per day,
excluding photocopy costs and is borne by Sheffield City Council.

Each day photocopies are produced by Mr             for distribution as follows;-

Her Majesty’s Coroner                        2   copies
West Midlands Police                         4   copies
Shorthand Writer                             1   copy
Davies Arnold Cooper                         1   copy (at a charge)
oilvezineiii « bxvermore                     i   copy (ac a charge)
Hammond Suddard                              1   copy (at a charge)

TOTAL                                       10 COPIES

Where requests are made by solicitors for transcript copies, a charge of 80 pence
per photocopied sheet is made. In accordance with the Coroner’s Rules the
Coroner is entitled, if he wishes, to keep the proceeds from the sale and supply
of such transcript copies. However, as you know, in this instance, the Coroner
has decided that the charges levied for the supply of copies can be collected and
retained by Sheffield City Council. Given that transcripts are amounting to
something in the order of 100 pages per day, you will have realised that a not
insignificant amount is likely to be collected during these lengthy proceedings.

At present, as indicated earlier, only three firms of solicitors are purchasing
transcript copies. However, I am aware that a number of persons have requested
copies but had not realised that they would be costing something in the order of
£80 per day.


    PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE A T
                                                   Sheffield
                                               - 2 -

        As a consequence of the requests and the costs involved, an approach has been
        made to the Coroner for his permission for further photocopies to be reproduced
        from one or more of the copies supplied at a cost through the good offices of
        Sheffield City Council.

        You will appreciate if the Coroner accedes to the request to further photocopy
        supplied transcripts no further revenue will fall to the City Council and indeed
        it is possible that the existing proceeds could reduce.

        Before the Coroner makes his decision on this matter it would be helpful if you
        could give me your view. Given the immediacy of the problem I would appreciate a
        written response as soon as possible.



        Yours faithfully,




        J M JONES
        Deputy Chief Constable




(   \
I   )
     te le p h o n e :   (0742) 72 6444


        Facsimile:       (0 7 4 2 )7 3 5 0 0 3


Telecom Gold 79:         LLA 3020


              Telex:     265871 MONREF G (quote ref LLA 3020)                                                                    C O U N C I L


  v our reference:             JMJ/FR

   Our reference:             MW/PSW
                                                                                                                                 Administration & Legal
               Date:           23rd November 1990                                                                                Department
                                                                                                                                 Head of Department
                                                                                                                                 M a r k W e b s te r , city solicitor
                              Mr M Jones MSc
                                                                                                                                 Town Hall
                              Deputy Chief Constable                                                                             Sheffield
                              Cheshire Constabulary                                                                              S1 2HH
                              Police Headquarters
                              CHESTER
                              CHI 2PP




                               Dear Mr Jones

                               RE;               HILLSBOROUGH INQUESTS

                               Thank you for your communication of 21st November 1990 concerning the
                               availability of the Council Chamber for the Inquests on the days when the
                               Council is due to meet.

                               During my conversation with your Administrative Assistant,              on
                               Monday, 19th November, I stated that the Chamber will be available to the
                               Coroner and that arrangements would be made for the Council meeting to
                               take place elsewhere. I understand t h a t s u b s e q u e n t l y
                               telephoned my office and asked my Secretary to fax confirmation of such
                               arrangements and this request was complied with the same day.

                               With regard to future Council meetings, the same reasoning^nd,approach
                               is to be adopted namely that the Council will not bfe^me^ting/iF the
                               Coroner wishes to sit on those days; in other words, the Inquests can go
                               ahead and the Council will make alternative arrangements unless we
                               experience particular problems with the 28th November.  If problems do
                               arise which will need consideration before the next Council meeting in
                               January 1991, I am confident they can be resolved by our officers co­
                               operating.

                               A further request from your Administrative Assistant this afternoon is
                               that a response to your letter must be received before arrangements for
                               next Wednesday can be made. I hope my response is sufficient.

                               Yours sincerely




         Keith Trelfa          C
                               City         Solicitor and Head of Administration                                                                                         Elizabeth Bashforth
         Senior Assistant Head                                                                                                                                           Assistant Head (Legal)
         (Administration)



                               CC Dr S L Popper, HM Coroner
                                                             fo r telephone enquiries on     r         i O
                                                                  this matter please ring:       L j. A . .   .(STD Code 0742)
J M ER VYN JONES M Sc                                      H IL L S B O R O U G H IN Q U IR Y T E A M
DEPUTY CHIEF CO NSTABLE
                                                          NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STA TIO N
CORONER'S OFFICER
                                                          Fow ler S treet
CHESHIRE CONSTABULARY                                     Birmingham B7 5D A
Police Headquarters                                       Telephone: 021^aB@5C3aa2c 3 2 2 - 6 0 0 0
Chester CH1 2PP                                           Fax: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 6 7 3 5
Telephone: 0 2 4 4 - 3 5 0 0 0 0 Ext 2 0 9 1
Fax       : 0244                                          Your Ref:


                                                          Our Ref:      JMJ/FR

                                                          Date:         21st November 1990



 Mr M WEBSTER
 Admin and Legal Services
 Sheffield City Council
 Town Hall
 Sheffield



 Dear Hr WEBSTER,


 HILLSBOROUGH INQUESTS


 I am writing on behalf of Her Majesty’s Coroner, Dr S.L. POPPER, who has asked me
 to say how grateful he is for the use of the Council Chamber and how pleased he
 is with the arrangements and with the helpfulness of all Sheffield City Council
 staff.

 We have heard that you are re-thinking the availability of the Council Chamber on
 28th November 1990, as far as the Council Meeting is concerned. I would be
 grateful if you could advise me if there is any truth in the rumour in order that
 we can plan our day.

 The Inquests are likely to run for some time, and will certainly go beyond the
 date of your next Council Meeting on 9th January 1991, and possibly beyond the
 February Meeting. An indication,' therefore, of whether any decision on the
 November Meeting .is likely to be similar for the J a n u a r y and February Meetings
 would be most helpful.

 I look forward to hearing from you in due course.       In the meantime, can I once
 again say thank you.


 Yours sincerely,




                                               Chester
    PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE A T
    R 3 7 1 9                                                                                       S ch 9 1 6 0
                                 CITY OF SHEFFIELD — M EM ORANDUM ^
                                                                                                                   i /
From            The Property Services Manager        To       T h e C i t y S o l i c i t o r and
                Department of Land and Planning               H e a d o f Admi nist rati c


Date            16th November, 1990                  For    the a t t e n t i o n of
Ref.            CS/E.80.C
Tel. Ext.       4557 - Mr.                           Ref.
                                                                        £


                                                                            .   M
                HILLSBOROUGH INQUEST

                I am writing to express the appreciation and thanks of the Coroner,
                Dr. Popper, and myself, to those members of your staff who have
                been involved in preparing the Town Hall and in supplying the necessary
                facilities and services which will enable the Inquest to proceed
                with efficiency and dignity. Without their co-operation and enterprise
                it would not have been possible to meet the necessary deadlines
                and achieve such a satisfactory outcome.




                Property Services Manager.
  with compliments
    Mr. M. Webster                               D epartm ent o f Land & Planning
    City Solicitor
                                                 Director
                                                 R D Jones    mrtpi


                                                 Property Services Division
                                                 Property Services Manager
                                                 Colin D Farmer BA(Hons) BArch(Hons) riba a c ia *


                                                  Town^Hall
                                                ..Sheffield
                                          My>
The officer dealing with this matter is          S1 2HH
                                                                           C         I       T      Y
                                                                           C O U N C I L
erence:   CS/E.80 C

  Date:
          25th October 1990
                                                                         D epartm ent o f Land & Planning
                                                                         Director
          TO THE MEMBERS OF                                              R. D. Jones mrtpi
          THE CITY COUNCIL
                                                                         Directorate

                                                                         Town Hall
                                                                         Sheffield
                                                                         S1 2HH



          Hillsborough Inquest : For Information


          Dear Councillor,

          I am writing to inform you that consequent upon the decision to hold
          the Hillsborough Inquest in the Town Hall the user of the allocated
          rooms has been agreed with the Coroner as follows.

          1.   The Council Chamber is to be used as the CourtRoom with   the
                Gallery being used by the press. The Council Chamber will be
                available for scheduled Council Meetings on 31.10.90, 28.11.90,
                9.1.91.
                                  \
                                N
          2.   The Ante-Room is to be used as the Jury Room.

               In this connection, in view of the necessity to keep the Jury
               isolated, it is proposed that the male Councillor's toilets
               adjoining this room be. made unisex for the duration of the
               Inquest and be available only to the Jury. The toilets at the
               entrance to the Library will continue to be available to
               Councillors and hopefully they will prove to be adequate.
               Alternative means of storage provision for Councillors unable to
               use*their lockers by this proposal is being investigated and I
               hope to be able to come back to those affected Councillors
               shortly with further information.

          3.   Committee Room 4 is to be used by the Coroner as his office,
               retiring room and document storage centre.

           .   The Mandela Room will have facilities provided to enable the
               C o u r t proceedings to be observed and is to be used by those
               m e m b e r s of the general public who are unable to find seats in the
               m a i n Court Room.     The press will operate from a cordoned off area
               of t h i s room.


               [he Reception Room is to be used by the families attending                    the
               Inquest,    partly as a rest area and partly as a place where                 they
                   h o l d discussions with their advisers.        To this end the           room
               ;ill be i n f o r m a l l y and loosely divided by means o f screens          into
               lumber of enclosures to facilitate the above.


                                                                                                 FL10ABE
                      "iment      of   Land     a n d   Planning
                                DIRECTORATE                          ~
6.   A number of other small offices will also be made available for
     stenographers,, ooronfi^ iiiS^’sapport staff and the police.

It has been agreed with the Coroner that the Council Chamber will be
available for the monthly Council meetings during the currency of the
Inquest.

It is anticipated that the Inquest will commence on Friday 16th
November and will continue, with an adjournment over Christinas, into
the New Year. It will of course be necessary for the facilities being
provided to be erected or otherwise put in place and tested prior to
the Court sitting and to this end Council and other business in the
rooms mentioned above will cease with effect from Monday 12th
November.

I shall write to you again should there be any substantial departures
from the above proposals prior to and during the Inquest itself.

Please do not hesitate to contact Mr.         on extension 4557 if
there is any aspect of the above which you reel requires further
clarification.

Yours faithfully,




Director
                          CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM

From       City Solicitor & Head of Admin|    To    Director of Land & Planning     I
                                          1
                                          1
                                          1        FAO Mr C Farmer
Date       10th October 1990              |        Chief Executive
Ref        MW/PSW                         |        Director of Health & Consumer
Tel Ext.   4018                           |   Ref. Services
                                          1
                -                                                 Comm Services


                                                                                    0

RE:    ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUESTS
                                                                      ( *? ■ lO

I write to confirm the telephone conversation of Tuesday, 9th October 1990 in
connection with this matter, namely, that the general view of the Members is
that on balance it would probably be more appropriate for the Inquests into
the deaths arising from the Hillsborough disaster to be held in .the Town Hall
given that the only alternative which is currently acceptable to the Coroner
was the Don Valley Stadium.

Accordingly, a meeting took place with the Coroner on Monday, 8th October, as
a result of which, it was agreed, in principle that the Council Chamber be
made available as the Court subject to it being released in order for the
monthly Council meeting to take place and that in addition, the Coroner have
the Ante-room for his staff and as a retiring room for himself, Committee Room
4 be made available for the Jury, that a room in Land & Planning (which I
believe is available as a meeting room) be made available for the
stenographers and that either one or both parts of the Reception Suite be made
available subject to the ability to divide one of the Reception Suites in two
and thereby make a room in one half for the relatives and the other half for
Solicitors and their clients.

This leaves available for Council business, Committee Rooms 1-3 and the
Conference Room and possibly one part of the Reception Suite and as in the
past, it will be necessary for there to be co-ordination of the letting of
other meeting rooms in other departments as other uses of such rooms would
need to be sub-ordinated to the committee process (ie in other words,
committees would have priority over other meetings for those rooms which -would
require liaison between yourself and John Poulter).

One of the issues discussed with the Coroner was the fact that should there be
a fall-off in attendance at the Hearings, ie should there be consistently less
than 100 people in the actual Council Chamber on three or more consecutive
days, then, active consideration would take place as to whether or not the
Inquests could then be moved back to the Medico-Legal Centre.  I should add,
in addition to the rooms specifically mentioned above, it is also intended
that the Public Gallery in the Council Chamber be made available exclusively
for press use.

As indicated in the telephone conversation, I would be grateful if you would
liaise with Sue Harper, the Principal Administrative Officer for West Midlands
Police, and also the Coroner and if, before you agree any matter which
required expenditure which would ultimately be charged back to the Council,
you would liaise with myself andl             I

I trust the issue is clear but if you require any further information then
please do not hesitate to contact me.____________________________




 NB    Consideration nfeeds to be given to catering arrangements for all involved
       and also security of ■the-toutMing.- Please liaise with             |and
                       respectively.
    e




                                                        r.n . £

                                        > cMr^- -   a


          f'fdve' o - A   .




r y X ^   tfdr   <

   4 :

     6,                       M   ; ^   ( t4>
                                                                                                                                                  t3        OCT   199tr
      f Aaajje__ 2jbudi~ <x 0-op^ op h$si oMacU U 4> Pdi^Q-lci
 *                             -&r                                       “TXxl                                 ti
  VK_5 ct^j2 'b&yv. \j (\J M Im ^ J X cL l U>w                                                                      ^©

  S<xtCA^)                                                      6^       -^ J O C S > ^ J ^ S         \&            0 - i\
                                                                                                                                 C  I   T  Y
                                                                                                                                 C O U N C I L
              with compliments
                                                                                                                                 Health and Consumer Services
                     o Jb ^j^JL ^                                                                 iJ L j: th u
                                                                                                                                 Director
u^ujajl         OL^LfijQLM                      £b         t^4.          he-l/-                            .                     D W Purchon mieh AMinstWM

                                                                                                                                 Town Hall Chambers
c &    t w   u ^ r       A      - t                         ^        ^    ' ^ sL j t e * - t ~   O- OJ -        .            V   1 Barkers Pool, Sheffield SI 1EN
                                                                                                                                 Telephone: (0742) 734611
^j*|fc4eJL)             to            w .            KpL^tixr     A w )              j&      ^ L b         ( ~ f* x £ $          Telecom Gold 76: LMX877 (Env. Health)
                                                                                                                                                76: LM X878 (Consumer Serv.)
                                                                                                                                 Fax: (0742) 736464 (Town Hall Chambers)
                                                                                                                                      (0 742)402531 (Trading Standards)
                                                                                                                                      (0742) 734692 (Env. Services)
                 p rin te d on recycled paper                                                                                    Telex: 9312132270 (IF G)
POLICy      PAPER   ~   HILLSBOROUGH INQUESTS


1.0       Background

          The inquests into the ninety-five victims of the Hillsborough Disaster
          were held at the Medico-Legal Centre on April 18th, 1990 and continued
          for three weeks. As the Director of Public Prosecutions had not decided
          whether or not any criminal proceedings were to be taken against any of
          the parties, these limited inquests only examined medical evidence
          concerning the victims.

          A decision has now been taken by the Director of Public Prosecution that
          there is insufficient evidence for criminal proceedings to be taken and
          therefore the inquests can proceed.

2.0       Present Position

          A meeting took place on Monday 24th September at the Medico-Legal Centre
)         and was attended by H.M. Coroner, West Midlands Police and
          representatives of Health and Consumer Services.

          The following information was given by H.M. Coroner:-

    2.1   The inquests will run from the 19th November to 19th December with a
          recess for Christmas, then re-start on the 7th January and possibly run
          for up to a further two months.

    2.2   The Medico-Legal Centre Coroner's Court was considered too small as
          potentially the family of all the victims have the right to be in court
          to police their counsel when cross-examining witnesses. In addition the
          legal representatives, witnesses, representatives of the press and jury
          need to be accommodated. Although portakabins were successfully used
          last April it was felt that the inquest will be a much larger affair
          particularly when some key witnesses are giving evidence.

    2.3   The Coroner has written to the Chief Executive requesting the use of the
V         Town Hall but this has been refused due to the large number of rooms
          needed and the disruption it would cause to an already busy schedule.

    2.4   An offer has been made by the Property Services Manager to lease two
          floors of Furnival House but this building would be difficult and
          expensive to convert as it would need completely re-carpetting,
          re-decorating and some partitioning removing (it was commented by Health
          and Consumer Services that access, including disabled persons access and
          parking was very poor and at the entrance an immediate area did not give
          a good image of Sheffield).

    2.5   The Coroner asked for further thought to be given to finding other
          suitable locations.

3.0       Other Locations for the Inquests

          Numerous other locations for the inquests have now been examined and
          found to be unavailable or unsuitable for a number of reasons:-

          City Hall                               Disused schools
          Octagon Centre                          Marks and Spencers building on
          University Premises                                        the Moor
          Health Authority Premises               Queensway building on Charter Row
          Masonic Halls etc.                      Anvil Cinema
          Various Training Centres both           Steel City Piazza
          the City Council and privately owned.
                                               - 2 -



4.0          Don Valley Stadium

            This suggestion was followed up from the meeting on the 24th September
            and a site meeting was held on the 26th September with West Midlands
            Police, Health and Consumer Services and John Field, the Manager of the
            stadium.

            Benefit of this location
    4.1     Modern building with a good image of Sheffield. This is important when
            televised interviews take place either inside or outside the building.

    4.2     Large amounts of car parking space. This is a major benefit as both the
            Town Hall and Furnival House have very limited parking, particularly
            during the Christmas period.

    4.3     Easy Traffic-free access to the Ml and Parkway. Automobile Association
            signs could be used to assist travellers coming into the City Centre
'     )      from other locations.

    4.4     Three entrances to the suite so that the press, witnesses, jury and
            members of the public can be kept separate. This would also reduce the
            hounding of witnesses by television crews.

    4.5     Sole use of this area of the stadium which would aid security.

    4.6     Good disabled persons access.

    4.7      Good sanitary accommodation    including   disabled personstoilets.

    4.8      Rooms already carpetted and    decorated   to a very high standard.

    4.9     Some chairs and tables already available at the stadium for usa during
            the inquests.

4.10        Space in the car park for outside broadcast units and additional porta-
^^           kabins if necessary.

 4.11        Meal preparation and dining    space for   jurors.

 4.12        Established fire evacuation    and first   aid facilities.

 4.13       Easy provision for extra telephone lines.

 4.14       Management of the stadium are keen for the facilities to be
            utilised for this purpose. A figure of a £1,000 per week rental has
            been suggested which is a similar price to the facilities at Furnival
            Ho u se.

      )     The possible disadvantage of this location is that it could be
            considered insensitive to hold an inquest in a sporting location.
            However, there is no direct visual access to the sports facilities from
          ■ the car park or suite and in addition, as the Don Valley Stadium is one
          l of the safest and most up-to-date facilities in Europe it could be seen
          1 as an indication of Sheffield's commitment to the future.
                                         - 3 -


.0     Recommendation

5.1    That subject to H.M. Coroner, West Midlands Police and Sheffield City
       Council’s approval of the venue that the Property Services Manager be
       requested to negotiate a lease for the duration of the inquest.

 5.2   That West Midlands Police, who are co-ordinating the press releases for
       the inquest, be requested to issue a carefully worded statement clearly
       justifying the decision to localE'the inquest at Don Valley Stadium.




       Originating Officer




       MM6AAT
       28/9/90
                              CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM

From      Mr. D.W. Purchon,Director of          iTo Ms. Pamela Gordon,
          Health and Consumer Services          I    Chief Executive.
                                                I
Date      4th October, 1990                     i    c.c Mark Webster
Ref       RM/MRM                                i         Councillor Mrs. P    Mid
Tel Ext   4632 - Mr. Michie                     IRef
                                  _____________ I_________ _
                                                 H ^U $ C —                ^     s-o
          HILLSBOROPGH INQUESTS                  U*                                  ,


          Further to recent correspondence on this matter I understand that you are
          to meet the Coroner, Dr. Popper, on Monday. — S > ' | O " ° t O U l+S-.

          The latest events are as follows, although I realise you may already be
          aware of some of them.

 )        1.    The Labour Group are reconsidering their decision not to
               allow the Council Chamber and various committee rooms to
               be used for the Inquests but a firm decision has not been
               made as yet.

          2.    The best alternative does appear to be various rooms at
               the Don Valley Stadium. The manager is very keen to get the
               booking (possibly up to three months) and all necessary
               facilities are on site except for portable items such as
               video and recording equipment etc.

          3.   Councillor Peter Price has expressed concern that facilities
               for Sheffield Eagles, who will play some matches during the
               duration of the Inquests, could be affected but I am sure the
               stadium manager is aware of this and will arrange       matters
               accordingly.

          4.   Dr. Popper has now visited the site and is satisfied with what
               he has seen. At the time of writing he was wanting to "sleep on
               the decision" but subject to this he was prepared      to holdhiscourt
               at the Stadium.

          5.   Dr. Popper would probably still prefer to use the Town Hall if
               available even though parking and catering would create difficulties,
               not to mention the disruption to members meetings and Town Hall
               business.

          6.   If the Council intend to offer the Town Hall, an early decision is (O')
               essential since a massive adminstrative and organisational task has y '
               to be completed before 19th November when the Inquests open.

          7.   For many reasons, therefore, it is the view of Health and Consumer
               Services managers that the Don Valley Stadium would be the best
               location. It has new, safe facilities; parking, toilet accommodation,
               catering facilities, furniture all on site; access for relatives,
               witnesses, media can be controlled by the police; the stadium is close
               to the motorway and arrangements will be made via the A.A. for
               appropriate signposting of the various main routes.
*



                                         -   2   -




    8.   AC Che end of Che day however, ic is, as you know, Dr. Popper's
         decision as Co where he holds the InquesCs.

         From an organisaCional poinC of view Che Don Valley SCadium would be
         Che besC opCion even Chough Chere are concerns ChaC a Spores SCadium
         is noC an ideal place Co hold an inquest into deaChs which occured ac
         a sporting event.


    I hope the foregoing is of use at your meeting with the Coroner who
    remains adamant that the Medico-Legal Centre will be unable to cope with
    the numbers likely to attend. If he should receive evidence to the
    contrary through enquiries to bereaved relatives, then I am sure he will
    not hesitate to review his view of accommodation needs accordingly.




    D.W. Purchon,
    Director of Health and Consumer Services
                                                                        Ecx   •




                                  _ 3 _           - lo-'no




ROYAL ARMOURIES SHEFFIELD   (Councillor C. Betts)

Councillor Betts had submitted a letter from the Master o f ,the Armouries
(H.M. Tower of London) advising that they were very keen to proceed with
detailed consideration of a proposal to move the Royal Armouries to
Sheffield,   and suggesting that it-would be happy to.arrange a series of
presentations' either in the Tower-of London or Sheffield.

Following discussion it was agreed that the Royal Armouries be requested
to make a presentation to the Labour Group in Sheffield.

Action:   Councillor C.J.C. Betts.:..;

HILLSBOROUGH INQUESTS   (Councillor P,. .Midgley) , .             ,

Councillor   Midgley   reported   on the difficulties „that had been
encountered whilst trying to secure facilities for the.-./holding of the
inquests arising from the Hillsborough disaster. Given.the'sensitivity
of the matters she felt that the.Executive should have an opportunity to
consider the issues and make recommendations.

Despite the inconvenience that might be caused to Members of the Council
and Council operations, there was a:clear feeling.in the Executive that,
if at all possible, the Town Hall should be.used for the inquests-and
this should be pursued by Councillor Midgley and Fiore.as. a matter of
urgency.

If it proved impossible for the Town Hall to be used then the Executive
would wish to give further consideration to this item at its meeting on
9th October. .

Action:   Councillor P. Midgley   a,-;   ;q - ;    : , :i-   ••   :..    ,
                            & < = > 2 4 /°

                   0
                                             C O U N C I L
with compliments            ^V

C cM D ^vf             (&    ■ feX
                                                          2s SEP
                                             Chief Executive         17,0*
ijj^ X h Q                                   Pamela J. Gordon   ma


                                             Town Hall
                                             Sheffield
                                             SI 2HH-
                                             Tel: (0742) 734000
 R360                                        Fax: (0742) 735003
    28/09 '90     13:36           01609                                                  MEDICO LGL CNTER

     *• ”V   V                                OFFICEOFH_M.CORONET!FOfi ■                             MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                                                     WATERY STREET
                                                        SOUTH YORKSHIRE                              SHEFFIELD
                                                             (West District)
                                                                                                     S3 7ET
                 STEFAN L. P O P P E R U -3- B.M£D.Sti.. B.M- B.S., M.H.C.3P.
                                                                         CORONER

                                          Tatepflons: S h £   t   (£LD (0 7 4 0 73S7E1
                                                                                                     28th September-jQ 90

                 SLP/PAD

                 Mrs. P. Gordon,
                 Chief Executiver
                 City of Sheffield Metropolit an District,
                 Town Hall,
                 Sheffield,,
                 SI 2HH.


                 Dear Mrs. Gord.an,
                                                                                                               CT
                 As you will be asare I have decided to resume the inquests into
                 the 95 deaths which occurred at Hillsborough on the 19th November
                 1990. I enclose for your information a copy of a letter which,
                 we have now received from the South' Yorkshire County Fire Service
                 and you will see that although they are prepared to increase the
                 capacity of the court to 90 but they have clearly stated. that
                 that is the absolute maximum.
                 You will be aware that apart from myself, the jury and the
                 various court, ushers and supporting staff there are numerous.,
                 parties who will'have rights of representation and I anticipate
                 that there will be probably a substantial body of legal,
                 representation during the inquests. In addition to that we
                 must have space for the families of the deceased as well as other
                 interested parties, the.press and the general public.

                 Whilst it might be- possible to accomodate some of these groups
<   )            in portocabins and other temporary accomodation distant, from the
                 court X think it must be obvious that the accomodation which is
                 available at the Medico-Legal Centre is just inadequate for an
                 inquest of this nature.
                 It seems to me that the ideal arrangement would be for rae to use
                 the Council Chamber together with the necessary ancillary rooms
                 Which I would need for myself, jury, solicitors etc. Ap^rt from,
                 providing an 'appropriate forum for the inquests it would also
                 I suspect; be a relatively cheap option as at least some of the
                 furnishings and equipment are already in place.

                 I have however been verbally told that the Council are not prepared
                 to make this accomodation available for what might be a. lengthy
                 oeriod.
                 X would, be grateful ±f you could please confirm that t:                                                   _S   LS
                 correctly understood b.y me.
                 I also understand that -there is no other suitable Ccuncil
                 .accomodation available which has the capacity and facilities
                 that I need- No doubt you will be able to confirm this, as well.

    sssw
zo/ua   yu                      'tl'ioua                                    M b lU C U   L ljiL   U N I b K                     l ^ U U ^



                                          OFFICEOFH.M.CORONERFOR                                  MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                                                  WATERY STREET
                                                    SOOTH YORKSHIRE                               SHEFFIELD
                                                         (West District)
                                                                                                  S3 7ET
          g-fiEFAN L POPPER. U.B.. RMED-Sci., S.M..B.S, M.H.C.S.P.
                                                           CORONER

                                                                                                  2 8 1 h...S.ep.t^.niber.ig
                                      Telephone: SherncLD (0742) 738721




         MRS. P.. GORDON (2 )

         I would be grateful if you could please respond to this letter
         immediately so that I can be quite clear about the position
         with regard to Council accomodation for if my understanding is
         correct alternative accomodation -will have -to lae found immediately.

         It is my view, tiiat the cost to the Sheffield City Council of
         suitable, accomodation is likely to "be substantial both on the
         revenue and capital side.




          Y n i T T F i / f l i Ttr;fvrF>.1 - y .




                                DNER




          c.c. Mr. R. Michie.




2 8-09 -1 99 0      13:39                                                  1609                                                P .02
    28/09 '90       13:37         © 1 009                                   MEDICO LGI C\TFR
Q PURCHfiSlNG/flDPUN                   ijtL   no   .uzi -            ^            -          L(,L C^ ER- - .
 60/vv.         IV.4H        'Q'0 /4 2 '/ZQ9V4.                          SOUTH YORKS FIR E                                         @002/002


  SOUTH YORKSHIRE FIRE AND CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY


  South Yorkshire County Fire Service
  H . E. W right. M X Fire E_, R B J.M .                                                                       West Division Kssc&suartftrs
           C h ief R re O fficer                                                                               W siiingian S trasi,
                                                                                                               Sheffield,
                                                                                                               Souft fortSftiffe SI 3rS
                                                                                                               Telephone: S heffield
  D ivisiortaJCofflm ander       K .I^ K e t t e s if       J -£ .       G ra d       I   ‘F i r e   S .

  O ur         V T 4 1 2 5 /J X /F D                  to a rR e f:                                             .Date^S. §8
                                                                                                                            353
  This m atter is being d esit with b y . .                                   ________________                 €xtNa........... .



         Principal                                          Offices
         West i&dlands police
         PO BOs. 52
         Colnore Circus
         Bj-tiatlngham
         B4 6NQ

         D ear Kadam

         Hillsborough. Disaster Bnerj.igv
                 LacaX Centre, watery street, SHEgfTBTvn
         Farther tea a recant meeting, between station. Officer        and
         yourself at the above prssiises* I can confirm that this .authority
         has no objections to the fallowing temporary alterations to the
         COEoners courts-
         1        A witness box containing ten eeats to b e removed,     a
                  further three rows of ten seats per sow provided, to tne front
                  of the current public seating- axea.
         2        Th© three new rows should be provided with a 1 aetr* vide
                  aisle in. the middle and ths seats fastened together in groups
                  of fire.
         2h«se.alterations will effectively inceeas® the capacity of the
         coroners court from 70 to 90 r the assisting exits are adequate tc
         cope with, this increase, The new capacity figure most he
         considered aa absolute maxismm due to the si.se of the rocn,
         If 7 0 a require any further infosoati.cn please do not hesitate to
         contact the officer dealing with this matter.
          Totjtb faithfully



          Divisional Commander
          cc       $he Coroaer ^
                   8c S L popper
                   Medico I«egal Centre
                   Watery Street
                   SHSFFXEIiD
    R3719                                                                       Sch 9160
                             CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM

P»e>m       City Solicitor & Head of Admin
                                                To
                                                       Chief Executive                     f
Date        19th September 1990
Ref.        MW/PSW
Tel. Ext.                                       Ref.
            4018




            RE:   HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - ACCOMMODATION FOR RESUMPTION OF INQUESTS

            It has already been made clear to Dr Popper on several occasions that the
            goodwill exhibited by the Authority in terms of making available virtually
            all its meeting rooms during the holding of the Taylor Inquiry was felt to
            be an appropriate and necessary response only to the issue of the Inquiry
            itself and that it was unlikely in the extreme the Authority would consider
            making such accommodation available for the Inquests.

            This is particularly so since the best course of action would appear to be
            to use the space immediately adjacent to the Medico-Legal Centre for the
            installation of Portakabin units for any "overspill" including a
            specifically dedicated press unit with close circuit television link into
            the actual Hearing which facilities can be made on available on a five days
            a week basis with other Inquests being located elsewhere.  It would
            probably also be the most cost effective way of dealing with the issues.

            I would add that I have received an informal approach from Superintendent
            Don Denton of the South Yorkshire Police following an approach to him by
            the Administrative Officer from West Midlands Police who seem to be the co­
            ordinating force for the Inquests and as a result of this it seems probable
            that such individual will be contacting the Authority direct to discuss
            what they perceive to be the requirements. However, I personally would
            need a great deal of persuasion that the proposals currently put forward by
            Roger Michie in his letter would not be the best way forward in all the
            circumstances although at the end of the day it is a decision for the
            Coroner and it will be necessary to convince him of this fact. It may well
            therefore be appropriate to have a meeting with him, ourselves and David
            Purchon when he returns from leave next week to try and thrash this one out
            once and for all.
14.9.90 9.58am

Mark,

Mr Gregory from Keeble Hawson rang. Thinks that Municipal Mutual would be prepared to
fund the costs of representation at the Inquests (if required). They're nat sure
how much to spend on Counsel though.
                                                                                                                                                    NEWS
Hillsborough victims’ families plan private manslaughter prosecution against city council for alleged negligence



Sheffield faces manslaughter charge
By Julian Rollins                                                                                                                   members who have studied the police
Relatives of the victims of the Hills­                                                                                              evidence believe that safety inspection
borough football stadium disaster are                                                                                               at Hillsborough was poor to the point
considering a private manslaughter                                                                                                  of negligence and are sure that they
prosecution against Sheffield city                                                                                                  have a case against Sheffield.
council for alleged negligence in                                                                                                      Support group chairman Trevor
licensing the ground.                                                                                                               Hicks, whose two daughters died in
     The council is one of four organ­                                                                                              the disaster, told M] : ‘W e are deter­
isations that the Hillsborough Family                                                                                               mined not to let this m atter rest, and
Support Group has in its sights in its                                                                                              we are determined to bring people to
campaign to ‘bring to book’ those the                                                                                               book. Those involved must accept
relatives blame for the deaths of 95                                                                                                their responsibilities.’
Liverpool supporters during the FA                                                                                                     Relatives have yet to decide
Cup semi-final in April 1989.                                                                                                       whether to prosecute organisations or
   , The decision to fight on comes          asltfc-=                                                                               individual officers. Mr Hicks said: ‘If
  .espite the announcement on 30                                                                                                    necessary we will have to make
August that the Director of Public                                                                                                  examples of individuals who were
Prosecutions will not bring criminal                                                                                                involved, including the people from
charges against the council, the South                                                                                              the city council. W e are not prepared
Yorkshire Police, Sheffield Wednes­                                                                                                 to go away. W e have the resources to
day Football Club or ground                                                                                                         fight this, and we will.’
engineers Eastwood and Partners.                                                                                                        Later this month Sheffield MDC
                                             Flashback to the tragedy: but relatives are still angry at the council
     DPP Allan Green, who had stu­                                                                                                  will face a separate court challenge in          tjj
died thousands o f statements and            inquiry.                                     authorities have had to look carefully    the High Court. South Yorkshire
 interviews put together by W est               Sheffield council leader Clive Betts      at any inadequacies in their proce­       Police, who have agreed to pay
Midlands Police during a 16-month            welcomed the DPP’s decision. He              dures in line with the (Tavlor)           compensation to more than 1,000
 inquiry, said there was ‘insufficient       said: ‘W e have always believed that         recommendations.’                         victims but without accepting liabil­
evidence’ to m erit proceedings. Both        the council, as licensing authority,            But relatives of the dead a n d '      ity, are to sue the council, Sheffield
Sheffield     MDC      and    Sheffield      was in no way responsible for the            Merseyside MPs Terry Fields and Eric      Wednesday and its engineers in an
W ednesday had been criticised by            disaster, although we recognise that         HefFer accused investigators of con­      attem pt to recoup some of the money
Lord Justice Taylor, chairman of the         the council along with other local           ducting a ‘whitewash’. Support group      paid in compensation.



strike ballot                                Labour claims 6,500 unfilled teachers' posts
                                             Local education authorities across the          Shadow education secretary Jack        he said.
  Staff at Labour-led Greenwich LBC
  are to be balloted on whether to back      country opened their schools for the         Straw estimates that 130,000 children        Doug McAvoy, general secretary
     nking housing department col-           new term with some 6,500 teacher             started the school year without a         of the National Union of Teachers
. ../agues.                                  vacancies unfilled, according to a           permanent,      properly     qualified    warned that importing teachers from
      The increasingly bitter dispute has    Labour Party survey.                         teacher. He said: ‘No Tory MP or          overseas could result in a poorer
  now moved into its fifth month, with          The survey of 21 of the 112 LEAs          minister would tolerate the situation     service for pupils.
  147 housing and housing subsidiary         in England and Wales showed that             for their own children. Why are they         He said: ‘I do not suggest that
  workers on strike over new gradings        recruiting problems in most areas            so willing to tolerate it for other       European teachers are incompetent.
  for work related to the community          were at least as bad as last year. Four      people’s children?’                       But in some cases I do believe that
  charge.                                    out of 10 LEAs reported worsening               Education secretary John MacGre­       they are not trained for what they are
      The National and Local Govern­         difficulties, while only one in 20 said      gor responded by accusing Labour of       being asked to do.’
  m ent Officers’ Association’s industrial   things had improved.                         ‘scaremongering’. The Government’s           Mr Straw said 57% of authorities
  action committee gave the go-ahead             Most areas were relying on supply        £2.2m recruitment drive for teaching      had experienced an increase in
  for the ballot, with the result            teachers and overseas recruits to            training    had    attracted   20,000     teacher resignations during the last
  expected later this month. But it may      bolster the 400,000 strong teaching          responses, and applications for           year, and 29% a decrease. Across the
  be overtaken by events. At an              force, Labour maintained.                    teacher training were at record levels,   country resignations had gone up 7%.
  emergency meeting on 30 August,
  Greenwich NALGO members backed
  a motion to respond to the sacking of
  individuals facing disciplinary charges
                                             Council plans revocation of DSO contract
                                             A Tory-led district in Suffolk is to         formed its own labour organisation,       the DSO would win the five-year
 with a walkout.                             revoke a contract in a move that will        Babergh Contract Services, in the         refuse contract. But its bid was about
  • A strike has been averted at North       completely do away with its direct           hope of securing a number of the          £70,000 higher than the lowest bid of
 Tyneside MDC after employers and            service organisation.                        district’s contracts.                     about £600,000, Mr Mutum said.
  staff reached agreement on a redun­            Babergh DC has already privatised           The district split its groundwork         ‘It wasn’t worth running the DSO
  dancy scheme to m eet the authority’s      its leisure services, catering and refuse    contract into two parts, based on         if the only work available was the
  chargecapped budget. ‘W e can now          collection. Now it is negotiating            location, and the DSO won the             grounds contract’, he said. ‘W e’re
 go ahead with prioritising of posts.        transfer of its grounds maintenance to       smaller part - roughly a third of the     currently negotiating with the con­
  W e have to save £2 million and that       a private firm.                              work, valued at £60,000 for four          tractor who won the bigger part of
  requires the shedding of some 1,100            Babergh assistant secretary Tim          years.                                    the contract, and it looks as though
  posts,’ a council spokesman said.          Mutum told M] that the council had              The district had also hoped that        he’ll take on the whole thing.’



                                                                                                                                     Municipal Journal 7-13 September 1990 No 36 o
                                           KEEBLE HAWSON
                                                          SOLICITORS                                     *J SEP 1990
                                           Incorporating Branson Bramley & Co.

A. H. GREGORY          N. T. HAWSON
C. J. PRYCE            G. CONNELL                                                         OLD CATHEDRAL VICARAGE,
A. J. COOMBE           C. M. M. AYRE
H. J. MOORFIELD        J. M.KILNER
                                                                                                  ST. JAMES* ROW.

Consultant:                                                                                                 SHEFFIELD.
A. H. CONNELL
                                                                                                                   S1 1XA.

           T h e P e r s o n a l A t t e n t i o n of Mr M W e b s t e r                  TELEPHONE 0742 - 722061

                                                                                          MDX NO. 10527
           Sheffield City Council
                                                                                          FAX NO. 0742 - 700813
           Administration & Legal                   Department
                                                                                          FAX NO. 0742 - 750243
           T o w n H al l
           SHEFFIELD
           S1 2HH                                                                          12th S e p t e m b e r        1990

OUR REF:                                YOUR REF                                         WHEN YOU TELEPHONE OR CALL PLEASE ASK FOR:

           AHG/TPJ/Hillsborough                                                           MR GREGORY



           Dear Mark


           Hillsborough Disaster

            I enclose a copy              fax t h a t     I have       received        f r o m D.r Popper.

           I w o u l d be g r a t e f u l if y o u c o u l d h a v e an e a r l y w o r d w i t h
           m e p l e a s e as he s e e m s to n e e d t o h a v e a r e s p o n s e v e r y q u i c k l y .

           Yours      sincerely




           A      H GREGORY




                           THE FIRM IS REGULATED BY THE LAW SOCIETY IN THE CONDUCT OF INVESTMENT BUSINESS
                                                                                                                   ® 001
                                                                           CORONERS
12/OST, '90   14:21          ®1609
                                           OFRCS CP H.M. COHONSR FOH                  MEDICO-LEGAL.CENTHE,
                                                                                      WATERY STREET
                                                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                                      SHEFFIELD
                                                       (West District)
                                                                                      S3 7ET                       X V
              STEt AN L- POPPER, U -B , S-MEQ-Ssi.. 5.M, BiS, M.R.C.G_P.              Fax Bb. 0742   726247
                                                            CORONER


                                       TeWStlOMKSHS."®!) (Q74S) ?3S721                12th .Septeabgr    ig5Q*..

              O ur H e fi H E E L S /S Q L /? .
              Y o u r R e f t A H G /V S .
              Keeble Hawson,
              St. Janies Bow,
              Sheffield. SI ISA.




              Dear Sirs,
   i
              gm sB O B P o ca; D iS A a iis a i . b b s m p t iq e t


              It is Ely intention to resume the Inquests on Monday the I9th of
              Hbvember 1990 at 10*a.m. into the deaths of the 95 people -who
              died on the 15th of April 1989 at Hillsborough Stadias.

              As I have to take some urgent decisions regarding- venue for the
              resinned Inquest, I w o l d be gratefal if you could please reply
              by retain, and indicate whether you anticipate?

                      i.               Shat you -wish to attend and represent your Client(s)
                                        (if yon have not previously been granted representation
                                       rights I -will assume that an affirmative reply indicates
                                       your intention to apply).

                      ii.              'Whether you expect to appear by Counsel and if so
                                       whether it would be by janior or by silk ?rid junior.

                      iii.             If your response is positive, do you anticipate being
                                       present throughout the Inquest which I expect -will ran
                                       for a period of several weeks.


              Ymn*g ffcf■phrVn 1 -cr
City ofSheffield  Metropolitan District
                                                           l|
                                                      C h ie f E x ec u tive              ^
 HEAD OF A D M IN IS T R A T IO N AND LEGAL                                    . < jv c r \c 3
                                                      Town Hall,
                                                      Sheffield S1 2HH
 COULD I   F’LEASHAVE YOUR O B SE R V A T IO N S      Tl   .
                                                      Telephone 734000



 C. EX/RF-17/ 9 / 9 o                         itf   SEP1990
                                                      with compliments
                              CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM

From      Mr. R. Michie                       1 To        Ms. P. Gordon
          Assistant Director                  1           Chief Executive
          Health and Consumer Services        1
Date      11th September 1990
Ref       RM/PB                               1
Tel Ext   4632 - Mr. Michie                   I Ref
                                              1


                                                     C.p u
                                                               CH'*rr EXtCa^Vt
                                                                                   C-P.o.
                                                               1 4 SEP 1990
                                                                                    R'R
                                                      SiKM i
          HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER                                R.E.U.   P.E.G.U.
          ACCOMMODATION FOR INQUESTS




          You will be aware following the decision of the Director of Public
          Prosecutions that the full inquests on the 95 people who died so
          tragically at Hillsborough, will shortly have to take place in Sheffield.

          Dr. Popper, H. M. Coroner, is of the opinion that, although he would
          prefer to hold these at the Medico-Legal Centre, the accommodation there
          is inadequate in view of the greater significance of and therefore greater
          interest in these inquests. He anticipates much higher attendances from
          media, legal representatives, relatives, etc. and many more witnesses will
          have to be called than was the case in April.
                             t
                             "■H
          On that occasion pottacabins with communications links in the Medico-Legal
          Centre grounds were more than adequate and coped admirably with all
          demands.

          In order to keep costs to the Council as low as possible Dr. Popper feels
          that the most suitable venue would be the Town Hall Reception Rooms plus
          several committee/ante rooms for jury room, coroners staff, refreshments,
          press, legal representatives, etc.   When this was requested in April the
          Council was not prepared to suffer the consequent inconvenience and
          disruption.   These inquests however will be virtually a re-run of the
          Taylor Inquiry and are therefore of greater importance and significance
          than those held in April.

          Enquiries to Sheffield University regarding accommodation have been
          unsuccessful.   The City Memorial Hall is thought by Dr. Popper to be
          unsuitable and would in any case not be available for the possible three
          months duration of the inquests (probably between December and February).
          To hire the conference facilities at a large hotel for 3 months would cost
          a fortune and would probably encounter difficulties created by hotels
          being licensed premises.

          In the circumstances I have suggested to Dr. Popper that he should
          approach you on this matter, explaining his requirements, for how long,
          giving reasons for wanting to use the Town Hall as opposed to the
          Medico-Legal Centre, etc.

          The Coroner, of course, has the power to incur whatever expense is
          necessary and charge the Council but he is genuinely trying to minimise
          costs hence his request.
                                    -   2   -




In considering Dr. Popper's request you may find it useful Co be aware of
Che foregoing informacion and Co know Chat, wich Che advanCage of a
successfully organised evenC in April behind us, managers in Health and
Consumer Services are confident that similar, if enhanced, arrangements
at the Medico-Legal Centre would also be adequate on this occasion.




R. MICHIE
Assistant Director
                                                                                                                                 £**SU#>
    mm liwjzh                                   Association O f                           35 G re a t S m ith S treet             y   *
                                                Metropolitan                                              Westm mster
                                                Authorities                                    London SW1? 3BJ

                                                • Secretary: Rodney Brooke                      T s 1' 071 *7?2' 8 'TXJ
                                                   Deputy Secretary: Joan Jones                 F a x l |) 7 1 ^ 2 2 r t » 7 8


    The Chief Executive              ..   i-
      [All Members]

    ■rhe Clerks to .Joint Police Authorities
    The Clerks to Joint Fire and Civil
                    Defence Authorities      r ref
                                                                   RGP/RG/ART/M14
    The Chief Executive and Chief Fire
        Officers of Fire and Civil — I     yourrf
        Defence Authorities
                                                                    ART Circular 90/8

    ***************************************************************************


    THE TAYLOR REPORT - IMPLEMENTATION

     1.    UDdates ART Circular 90/2
           Requests inforrnst.io n on spec!■?fM issues                            i   ;h i   i d d f i


    3.     O f f e r s advice on Safety 'ertiricatss,


    Originating Officer:                       Ext 245/246

     if**************************************************************************
                                                                         C   c        H         ^
    Dear Sir/Madam

    1. Many member authorities attended a seminar convened by the Association
    which took place at Wembley on 15 May 1990. As a result of debates at that
    seminar, it has been agreed that further joint work should be undertaker, by
    the local authority Associations and the Football Authorities and that the
    proceedings of the seminar should be published.  If your Authority was

o   represented as the seminar and wishes to make further points, by way of
    examples, to be included in the proceedings, please send documents to the
    Association no later than 29 June 1990.

     2. A number of specific issues have been identified on which it will be
     most helpful to receive your Authority's advice:

           (a) Finance: Has your Authority financed joint work with the local
           Football league or Rugby League Clubs? If so, are there particular
           features to be noted and how is the local authority investment secured?
           Has your Authority made payments to the local club simply to pay off
           existing debts, or provided a guarantee for the club? If so, are there
           particular features of the local arrangement to be noted and has it
           been possible to secure the money if it has been loaned rather than
           granted?

           (b) Safety: Does your Authority have a “view on the advisability of
           installing perimeter fencing rather than safety corridors (moats)? Has
           your Authority commenced discussions with the local club(s) concerning
           conversion to all-seat stadia? Has your Authority formed a view or. the
           financial effects of conversion?



                                               1
                                                                                                                                 1




       (c)     Planning:          Has     your      Authority        beer,     approached         with re-development
      or     relocation       plans       which       would      involve       an e l e m e n t   o f "planr.ir.s* g a i n " ?


       (d)     Synthetic        surfaces:             In v i e w    of   the    Football          League's    recent
      rejection        of    synthetic         surfaces          even    at 3rd      and    ^th D i v i s i o n   level,
      does your Authority                 h a v e plan:: f o r j o i n t        d e v e l o p m e n t / c o m m unity use
      w h i c h w e r e oased o n         the use o f s y n t h e t i c         s u r f a c e s a n d w h i c h car. n o t now
      be i m p l e m e n t e d ?      D o e s y o u r A u t h o r i t y i n t e n d to p r o c e e d w i t h o u t
      s y n t h e t i c s u r f a c e s , o r to l o o k fo r d e v e l o p m e n t w i t h a n o t h e r s p o r t     (e.g.
      Hockey)       where     synthetic          surfaces          are   encouraged?


      (e)  T r a i n i n g o f .Stewards: D o e s y o u r A u t h o r i t y h a v e formal
      arrangements f o r the training o f stewards a t l o c a l c l u b s ?               Would
                                             . t ** r»-   .i 1
      national        guidance       be    hoJ  • H -




3.    The     current       failure       of   Government           to b r i n g    the    Football      Licensing
A u t h o r i t y i n t o e x i s t e n c e is c a u s i n g d i f f i c u l t i e s f o r l o c a l a u t h o r i t i e s who
w i s h to i m p l e m e n t a s p e c t s o f the T a y i c r r e p o r t o e f c r e th e c o m m e n c e m e n t o f
the 1990/1991 season.  After d i s c u s s i o n s w i t h the Football League, the
following advice is offered:

      " Y o u r Authority w i l l r.o d o u b t , be g i v i n g consideration to the
      detailed provisions which n e e d to be i n c l u d e d in Safety Certificates
      following o n from Lord J u s t i c e T a y o r ' s r e p o r t into the Hillsborough
      disaster.      The 76 recommendations cover a wide range of topics and some
      of them will need to b e reflected in Safety Certificates as a matter of
      some urgency on grounds of safety.                 It is understood however, that all
      clubs have been encouraged to p r e p a r e a 5-10 year development plan
      which is likely to include either substantial refurbishment of existing
      grounds or proposals for moving to new grounds.                    Clearly safety
      issues would need to be addressed in the short term but it is important
      that the limited resources which will be a v a i l a b l e to clubs should not
      be expended on short term measures which will not play any long term
      role in providing or the greater safety and comfort of spectator than
      is absolutely necessary.

       In particular, your Authority is advised not to seek to anticipate in
       Safety Certificates Lord Justice Taylor's proposals regarding
       all-seater stadia and particularly, the timetable for going towards
       all-seater stadia which he sets out.  It is understood that these
       provisions will be introduced by the Football Licensing Authority when
       it is established and that Safety Certificate Authorities do not have
       the legal power to insert provisions in the Safety Certificates
       regarding all seater stadia, since local authorities operate under the
       provisions of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 whereas the
       Football Licensing Authority will operate under the provisions of the
       Football Spectators Act 1989.  In any event your Authority is strongly
       advised to initiate discussions with local football clubs to ascertain
       the club's long term intentions before modifying the provisions of
      JSafety Certificates.”
This advice has also been offered to District Councils by the Association
of District Councils.

Chould you require further information, please contact the ART Section or.
oxt 245/246.

,/ours faithfully
H lL U      S d /L o u & i                   C A \* I *        /b -         I *



<>(a P T             TAyU A                        L 'tL L             fis t XT            lA ,r * - A V t £ . I *              /vtjP             Q /v


 T b tA & < >    t> 4 -    V          2(                Y                          At             ^                    ^    ^           7K~

1)£ pft&T M £                  /vf           P/(«    6*>               ft           ft & P            /^AT /fr /                   7y

Pd.&*> &        /vr ^                      P is& /H &■                C^&r        /y\ 6.     k/^t? \a/


                     [ f             T H 6 ./L 6            i <,           fir      X > 6 * ,iA 6         tv       b f t t u K          /k ^ Y      !$ $ a


//V             ( l& L *T 19*,                     TV              1 *ti            ** O rT £A                     r            UslLl            » 4 t S l,u * L

 B6              A        W     i l   M      l*             r*             Vo              <«9;




                                                                                           c/ l   /   o

                                                                                                          ffr /h       / f lq if
                                 STATEMENT OF WITNESS

         (C.J. Act 1967,s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M. C. Rules 1981, r.70)




Name:         Mark Webster

Age:          40 years           Date of Birth:      30. 6.50

Occupation: Head of the Administration and Legal Department

Home or business address         Administration and Legal Department,
and telephone number:            Town Hall, Sheffield SI 2HH. 0742 726444


This statement, consisting of 6 page(s) each signed by me, is true to the
best of my knowledge and belief and I make it knowing that, if it is tendered
in evidence, I shall be liable to prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it
anything which I know to be false or do not believe to be true.

Dated the    U)   day of           lA.^O

Signed                                     Signature witnessed by

                                           Officers Name

                                           -Rank-                     U q~




I am employed by Sheffield City Council as the Head of the Administration and

Legal Department.        I have held this position since 18.10.89.    Prior to that

date, with effect from 1.12.78 I held the position of Assistant Head of the

Administration and Legal Department (Legal) but held’the rank of Acting Head

of Department from 24.1.89 to 17.10.89, during the absence of the Head of

Department on sickness leave.        As Acting Head of Department and Head of

Department, I had and have overall responsibility for the Licensing Section.

As Assistant Head of the Department, I had line management responsibility for

the Licensing Section, in theory, but in practice the Head of Department,

Mr. Pensam, took a personal interest in this area of work and therefore the

Chief Licensing Officer, David Bownes, invariably reported to Mr. Pensam.




Signed                                       Signature witnessed by
                                                       - 2 -



          >                                STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                              {C.J. Act 1967,s.9{ M.C. 4ct 1980, ».102; M.C. Rules 19S1, r.70)


      Continuation of statem ent of     M ark   W e b s te r




Arrangements for the discharge of functions by local authorities are specified

in Section 101 of the Local Government Act, 1972.                              The Section provides that

a local authority may arrange for the discharge of their functions by a

committee, sub committee or an officer of the authority.                              It is therefore

possible for a council to delegate its decision making powers to a committee,

sub committee or officer.



Whilst a named officer, who would usually be a chief officer, was the officer
                                                                                                           o
nominated to fulfil the delegated functions of a local authority in

appropriate circumstances, as a matter of practice, such schemes actually

operate by the relevant chief officer authorising one of his officers to take

action on his behalf.                 Thus an individual officer can take action j.n the. name

of the chief officer of that department.                        The case of R. v Southwark London

Borough Council, ex-parte Bannerman and Others, reported in "The Times" Law

Reports on the 12th October, 1989, and Provident Mutual Life Assurance & Derby

City Council (HL) 79 L.G.R.297 confirm that this is a proper decision making

process within the terms of Section 101 of the Local Government Act, 1972.                                 (   )

In this instance, David Bownes, the Chief Licensing Officer, was authorised to

take action under the powers delegated to the Head of Administration and Legal

Department.      The action to be taken was of an administrative nature as

Mr Bownes was and is an administrator as opposed to a technically qualified

expert.    The Safety of Sports Ground Act, 1975 requires consultation to take

place with technically qualified experts, ie.the Building Surveyor, the Fire

Authority and the Police.




     Signed                                                $*an2tyre witnessed bv
        \                              STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                            {C.J. Act 1967,s.9; M.C. Act 1980, ».102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


     Continuation of statement of   Mark    W sbster




In order to establish a framework within which Sheffield City Council could

exercise the functions which it was to acquire on the 1st April, 1986, David

Bownes, the Chief Licensing Officer, prepared a report which was submitted

through the Head of Department to the General Purposes Panel which was a sub

committee of the Municipal Enterprise and General Services Programme Committee

(referred hereafter as MEGS) which is in turn a committee of the City Council.

The report was submitted to the Panel on 3rd March, 1986.



The report "recommended that the following delegations be approved:-

      a)        all the powers and duties of the Council under the Safety of

               Sports Grounds Act, 1975 be delegated to the General Purposes

               Panel;

      b)        the emergency procedure powers under Section 10 of the 1975 Act be

               delegated to the Head of the Administration and Legal Department

                in consultation with the Chairman or Deputy Chairman of this Panel

                or of the Municipal Enterprise and General Services Programme

               Committee as appropriate.

      c)        The power to authorise officers under Section 11 of the Act be

                delegated to the Head of the Administration and Legal Department."



At its meeting on the 3rd March, 1986, the Panel adopted the recommendations

in .the report.         In accordance with usual practice, these were subsequently

approved by MEGS op. the 17th March, 1986 and approved by the full Council at

its meeting on the 9th April, 1986.




     Signed                                            Stansture wrtness?d bv
                                                      - 4 -




             ,                            STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                               {C.J. Act X967,s.95 M.C. Act 1980, ».102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


       Continuation of statem ent of   M ark   W e b s te r




A second report was prepared by David Bownes which was again submitted through

the Head of Department to the Panel on the 6th May, 1986.                                 The Panel resolved

(amongst other things) "that

       a)         the broad outlines of the administrative system organised by the

                  former South Yorkshire County Council under the Safety of Sports

                  Ground Act, 1975 be noted and authority be given for the

                  continuation of such system for the time being.”



This resolution took effect immediately since by virtue of the resolution of

the Panel at its meeting on the 3rd March, 1986, the Panel had full delegated

powers to deal with this issue.




As a matter of practice, the minutes of the Panel were seen by MEGS and the

City Council.           The administrative system therefore operated in accordance

with those resolutions between 6th May, 1986 and 7th September, 1987.                                During

this period, the system in operation                    was a common one throughout this local

authority and other local authorities.                        The basic principle operated on is

that if there is disagreement between the parties or a matter of policy

requires determination, then the issue should be referred to the appropriate

committee or sub committee by way of a report from the relevant officer.

Where there is a consensus of opinion between the parties, an administrative

decision can be taken not to refer the matter to the relevant committee or sub

committee, and action is taken in line with the consensus of opinion.




     S io n e a                                           S ia n sty re w ftn ss ssd bv
                                                           - 5 -



           \                                STATEMENT OF V/ITNESS
                              (C.J. Ace 1 9 6 7 . S .9 ; K.C. Act 1980, « . 1 0 2 ; M.C. Rula* 1981, r . 7 0 )


      Continuation of statem ent of     Mark W e b s t e r


In the instance of the removal of part of barrier 144, I believe that

professional advice was received from all the statutory consultees and that

the Club’s engineers were also present, given that there was apparently

consensus between all parties regarding the action to be taken, then the

correct administrative decision was taken not to refer the matter to the

General Purposes Panel.



In September, 1987, a report was submitted to the Panel through the Head of

the Administration and Legal Department.                            This report reviewed the operation

of the administrative system relating to Safety of Sports Grounds.                                               The Panel

resolved that:-

      a)       "the details contained in the report now submitted regarding- the

                operation of the Council’s certification function for the Safety

                of Sports Grounds be noted.

      b)       The revised administrative system set out in the report, including

                the establishment of a proposed Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory

                Group comprising representatives of the Building Surveyor, the

                South Yorkshire County Fire Service, the South Yorkshire Police

                and the Director of Environmental Health and Consumer Services, to

                advise the Council on matters relating to the Safety of Sports

                Grounds be approved and




     Signed                                                    S’pnalure vk'ftnessed bv
                                                     - 6 -




           ,                             STATEMENT OF V/fTNESS
                              (C.J. Act X967.S.9; M.C. Act 1980, *.102; M.C. Rules 1931, r.70)


      Continuation of statem ent of   Mark Webster


      c)        authority be delegated to the Head of the Administration and Legal

                Department to deal with all routine matters in connection with the

                administrative system."



The miniates of the meeting were considered as a matter of practice by M E G S and

the C o u n c i l at its meeting on the 7th October, 1987.




My interpretation of the phrase "routine matters" means to operate the day to

day running of the licensing system.                    It is a matter for individual judgment

taking account of the relevant factors at the time.                            In practice, I would

expect that matters about which there were disagreements or matters of policy,

would be referred to the relevant committee, but that where there was

consensus between the parties, this would be dealt with as a routine matter.




     S-cnsd                                  —                            bv
The Head of the Administration              Chief Executive
and Legal Department

23 May 1990
MW/DG
4018


STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL

HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER APPEAL - APPLICATION OF FUNDS FOR RESIDUAL PURPOSES

With reference to the copy letter from Norman Adsetts regarding the Appeal,
I enclose for your information and attention a copy of a note prepared by-
Rod Sewell the Principal Solicitor who has, from my Department’s point of
view, looked after the Council’s relationship with such body which usefully
sets out some of the background.

As clearly it w o n ’t be possible for you and I to discuss this matter before
I go on leave and in light of the suggested date for the next meeting of
the Trust may I suggest that Rita contacts Rod and has him speak to you
direct on the contents of his communication and any other issues you feel
you ought to know before the meeting.,_____


cc Rod Sewell
          R 3 7 1 9                                                                                                                            Sch 9160
                                                      C ITY OF SHEFFIELD — M E M O R A N D U M

     From                M r. J . R . .W . S e w e l l , P r i n c i p a l              j0      M r. H . M. W e b s te r , H ead o f
                         S o l i c i t o r , G rou p B                                          D e p a r tm e n t.

     Date                2 1 s t M ay, 1 9 9 0
     Ref.                GP262/JKW S
     Tel. Ext.           4016                                                            Ref.



                      T h e H i! 1 s h a r c u q h D i s a s t e r A p p e a l - A p p li c a t io n , o f F u n d s fea r R e s id u a l P u r p o s e s

                      I r e t u r n h e r e w it h y o u r c o p y o f a l e t t e r d a t e d t h e 2 n d M ay fr o m N orm an A d s e t t s
                      w r i t i n g a s a T r u s t e e o f t h e T r u s t t o t h e C h ie f E x e c u t iv e . T h is i s o f c o u r s e a
                      s e n s i t i v e i s s u e t o h a n d le a n d r e q u ir e s a p p r o p r ia t e c o n s u l t a t i o n i n m a n a g in g
                      th e resp o n se.          I n r e v ie w in g t h e i s s u e I h a v e p e r u s e d a g a in t h e te r m s o f t h e
                      T r u s t a n d a l s o h a d scone p r e lim in a r y in f o r m a l d i s c u s s i o n w it h J o h n P i l l i n g ,
                      A s s i s t a n t D ir e c t o r o f S o c i a l S e r v i c e s b e in g a w a r e t h a t h e i s a n o f f i c e r w ho
                      h a s b e e n p a r t i c u l a r l y c l o s e l y a s s o c i a t e d w it h t h e C o u n c il c o n t r i b u t i o n to w a r d s
                      v i c t i m s u p p o r t . My s u g g e s t e d a p p r o a c h i s t o lo o k r e s p e c t i v e l y a t t h e i s s u e s
                      o f t h e te r m s o f t h e T r u s t , t h e p r o c e s s f o r o f f e r i n g sa m e s u g g e s t i o n s w h ic h
                      c a r r y a m e a su r e o f a p p r o p r ia t e c o n s u l t a t i o n , a n d f i n a l l y t h e i n c l u s i o n o f a
                      r e f e r e n c e t o t h e c o n t r i b u t i o n m ade b y t h e C i t y C o u n c il to w a r d s v i c t i m s u p p o r t .

                      T h e T erm s o f t h e T r u s t

                      N a t u r a l l y t h e p r im a r y o b j e c t s o f t h e T r u s t a r e d i r e c t e d to w a r d s t h e b e n e f i t o f
                      t h e v ic t im s o f t h e d i s a s t e r an d t h e i r r e l a t i v e s o r d e p e n d a n ts. T he te r m s o f
                      t h e T r u s t D ee d t h e n m o v e o n t o d e a l w it h r e s id u a r y p o w e r s i n t h e f o l l o w i n g
                      p aragrap h s

                      " 6.1     I n a d d i t i o n t o t h e i r p o w e r s u n d e r t h e f o r e g o in g p r o v i s i o n s h e r e o f t h e
                                T r u s t e e s m ay a t a n y t im e b e f o r e t h e e n d o f t h e T r u s t P e r io d p a y o r a p p ly
                                t h e T r u st Fund o r a n y p a r t o r p a r ts t h e r e o f t o o r f o r t h e b e n e f it o f
                                s u c h o r g a n i s a t i o n s i n s t i t u t i o n s o r p u r p o s e s w h e th e r o r n o t c h a r i t a b l e a s
                                t h e T r u s t e e s i n t h e i r d i s c r e t i o n s e l e c t a n d t h i n k a p p r o p r ia t e a s s e r v i n g
                                c d im u n it y n e e d s a n d p u r p o s e s i n t h e s p i r i t o f t h i s T r u s t .

                      6 .2      I f a t a n y t im e b e f o r e t h e e n d o f t h e T r u s t P e r io d t h e T r u s t e e s s h a l l i n
                                t h e i r a b s o lu t e d i s c r e t i o n d e t e r m in e t h a t n o f u r t h e r p r o v i s i o n n e e d b e
■(    )                         m ade f o r t h e b e n e f i c i a r i e s o u t o f t h e T r u s t F u n d o r a n y p a r t t h e r e o f t h e
                                T r u s t e e s s h a l l t h e r e a f t e r h o ld t h e T r u s t F u n d o r s u c h p a r t t h e r e o f a n d
                                i n a n y e v e n t a t t h e e n d o f t h e T r u s t P e r io d t h e T r u s t e e s s h a l l h o ld
                                w h a t e v e r t h e n r e m a in s o f t h e T r u s t F u n d a n d t h e in c o m e t h e r e o f u p o n s u c h
                                c h a r i t a b l e t r u s t s a s s h a l l s e r v e c h a r i t a b l e c c s n n u n ity n e e d s i n t h e
                                C i t i e s o f L iv e r p o o l, N o ttin g h a m , a n d S h e f f i e l d o r t h e C o u n ty o f
                                M e r s e y s id e o r a n y o n e o r m o re o f th e m i n w a y s w h ic h c c n m e m o r a te b o t h t h e
                                d i s a s t e r a n d t h e g e n e r o s i t y o f t h o s e w ho r e s p o n d e d t o t h e a p p e a l
                                h e r e in b e f o r e m e n tio n e d o r s u b s e q u e n t ly g a v e m on ey in v e s t m e n t s o r
                                p r o p e r ty t o t h i s T r u st an d a s th e T r u s te e s s h a ll in t h e ir d is c r e t io n
                                d e t e r m in e ."

                      P ro cess

                      T h e p r o c e s s f o r i d e n t i f y i n g a p p r o p r ia t e r e s i d u a l p u r p o s e s m ay p e r h a p s u s e f u l l y
                      b e c o n d u c te d th r o u g h t h e v e h i c l e o f t h e S t e e r i n g G roup w h ic h J o h n P i l l i n g
                      m e n t io n s h a s m e t p e r i o d i c a l l y s i n c e t h e d i s a s t e r . I n a d d i t i o n t o
                      r e p r e s e n t a t i o n fr o m t h e F a m ily a n d C cm n u n ity S e r v i c e s D e p a r tm e n t t h e o t h e r
                      r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s o n t h e S t e e r i n g G roup i n c l u d e p e o p le fr o m t h e c h u r c h e s ,
v o lu n t a r y o r g a n i s a t i o n s , t h e H e a lt h A u t h o r it y , S h e f f i e l d W ed n esd a y a n d t h e
P o l i c e . A lth o u g h t h e S t e e r i n g G roup i s e v i d e n t l y r e a c h in g t h e s t a g e o f
f i n a l i s i n g i t s ow n a c t i v i t i e s I u n d e r s t a n d t h a t t h e r e i s t o b e a m e e t in g a t
4 . 1 5 p .m . o n t h e 4 t h J u n e i n t h e Tcw n H a l l .              J o h n P i l l i n g an d I b o th t h in k
t h a t i t m ay b e w o r t h w h ile t o h a v e a n it e m o n t h e a g e n d a f o r t h a t m e e t in g t o
a s s i s t i n p r o c e s s in g t h e fe e d b a c k t o t h e T r u s t e e s . A p p r o p r ia t e a d d it i o n a l
i n v i t a t i o n s c o u ld b e m ade t o t h e m e e t in g a n d in d e e d N orm an A d s e t t s h i m s e l f
c o u ld b e i n v i t e d i f a v a i l a b l e t o p a r t i c i p a t e i n t h e d i s c u s s i o n . A d d i t i o n a l l y
I n o t e t h a t t h e l e t t e r fr c m N orm an A d s e t t s w a s c o p ie d t o t h e L e a d e r a n d i t
w o u ld p e r h a p s a l s o b e a p p r o p r ia t e t o c o n s i d e r a n e le m e n t o f m em ber
r e p r e s e n t a t i o n a t t h e m e e t in g i f t h i s i s t o b e a g r e e d a s a u s e f u l w a y fo r w a r d .

I h a v e s u g g e s t e d t o J o h n P i l l i n g t h a t h e m ig h t u s e f u l l y p l a c e a p r o v i s i o n a l
it e m o n t h e a g e n d a r e l a t i n g t o t h e H ills b o r o u g h D i s a s t e r A p p e a l s o t h a t t h e
m a t t e r m ay b e c h a n n e lle d th r o u g h t h i s fo r u m i f a g r e e d .

C i t y C o u n c il C o n t r ib u t io n

I a p p r e c ia t e t h a t t h e r e w i l l b e a r a n g e o f c o n t r i b u t i o n s w h ic h I h a v e f a i l e d
t o i d e n t i f y a lt h o u g h i t w o u ld a p p e a r t h a t t h e m a in C i t y C o u n c il c o n t r i b u t io n
h a s b e e n th r o u g h t h e v i c t i m s u p p o r t o f f e r e d v i a t h e T a s k T eam s e t u p w it h in ,
t h e F a m ily a n d C om m unity S e r v i c e s D e p a r tm e n t.          I am a w a r e t h a t t h e i r w o r k
i n v o l v e d t h e o f f e r i n g o f s u p p o r t iir m e d ia t e ly a f t e r t h e d i s a s t e r , s u b s e q u e n t ly
a t t im e s s u c h a s t h e i n q u e s t s w h en f a m i l i e s a g a in v i s i t e d S h e f f i e l d a n d m o re
r e c e n t l y i n t h e s u p p o r t p u b l i c i t y a n d s e r v i c e a t t h e f i x t u r e t h i s s e a s o n w h en
S h e f f i e l d W ed n esd a y p la y e d h o s t t o L iv e r p o o l F o o t b a l l C lu b .

I u n d e r s ta n d t h a t t h e T a s k Team h a s now s u b s t a n t i a l l y c o m p le t e d i t s w o r k a n d
b e e n d is b a n d e d a lt h o u g h w it h t h e a s s i s t a n c e o f t h e C i t y T r e a s u r y t h e
e x p e n d it u r e a p p lie d to w a r d s t h e w o rk f lo w i n g fr c m t h e H ills b o r o u g h d i s a s t e r
h a s b e e n s e p a r a t e l y a c c o u n t e d f o r a n d c o u ld b e p r o d u c e d w e r e i t c o n s id e r e d
a p p r o p r ia t e f o r t h e T r u s t e e s t o c o n s id e r a m e a s u r e o f r e im b u r s e m e n t.

I h o p e t h a t t h e s e cc u im en ts m ay b e o f u s e t o y o u i n a d v i s i n g t h e C h ie f
E x e c u t iv e i n f u r t h e r in g d i s c u s s i o n s w i t h t h e L e a d e r a n d N orm an A d s e t t s .
with compliments         ^) ^
                         1
                                C   I  T  Y
                                C O U N C I L




           M   A L - b
                                Chief Executive
                                Pamela J. G ordon   ma


                                Tow n Hall
                                Sheffield
                                S1 2HH
                                Tel: (0742) 734000
                                Fax: (0742) 735003
                                                                                                           Sheffield
                                                                                                          insulations
                                                                                                          Group
WNA/MLC                                                                                                 piC
2 May     1990


Cllr Pamela Gordon
Chief Executive
Sh ef fie ld City Council
Town Hall
SHEFFIELD
SI 2 HH


Dear    Pamela

The i n t e r i m r e p o r t of th e T r u s t e e s of the H i l l s b o r o u g h                                              Appeal
F u n d w a s r e c e n t l y p u b l i s h e d , j u s t b e f o r e the a n n i v e r s a r y                                   of the
d i s a s t e r , a n d I u n d e r s t a n d t h a t you h a v e b e e n sent a copy.

As T r u s t e e s , we    n e e d to b e            s a t i s f i e d t h a t we h a v e c o m p l e t e d the
d i s t r i b u t i o n to i n d i v i d u a l b e n e f i c i a r i e s b e f o r e we       c o n s i d e r the
use of C h a r i t a b l e T r u s t f u n d s for r e s i d u a l p u r p o s e s in the s p i r i t
of the A p p e a l .                                                   “*           **~"--- --- -”

H o w e v e r , we ar e a p p r o a c h i n g t h i s s tag e , a n d it is p l a n n e d t h a t at
the J u n e m e e t i n g of the T r u s t , we s h o u l d b e g i n to c o n s i d e r such
matters.

In the n e x t m o n t h I w o u l d l ike to h a v e an o p p o r t u n i t y to t a l k to
you about those charitable objects which may seem appropriate,
given your own          c o n t r i b u t i o n in t h e a f t e r m a t h o f t h e d r e a d f u l
e v e n t s of l a s t  year, a n d a n y o t h e r g e n e r a l i s s u e s w h i c h          may
ari s e .

M y i n t e n t i o n w o u l d be to h a v e t h e s e i n d i v i d u a l t a l k s                                         early      in
May, a n d to c o m p l e t e d i s c u s s i o n s b e f o r e the T r u s t m e e t                                         again      on
11 J u n e , p o s s i b l y in S h e f f i e l d .

With     best    wishes

                                                                                                                     ''nil?   11J.P.O.
Yours     sincerely

                                                                                                         3 - M A Y 1990 1 m
                                                                                                                       P.t.G.U.
NORMAN ADSETTS            OBE
Chairman


                                                       Letter also sent CJC Betts

                                     Hillsborough Works, SheffieldS62LW, England
                                     Telephone 0742 852852
                                    Telex 54288, Fax Groups 1/2/30742337191
                                   Registered Office: Hillsborough Works, Sheffield S62LW, Registeredin EnglandNo. 938314
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER INQUESTS

I attended the Inquest on the morning of the 19th April, 1990 to establish
whether or not regular attendance was necessary.

The form of the Inquest is as follows

1.    The Coroner ascertains whether or not the parents or family are there.

      The Coroner then gives brief details of the original Inquest information
      and the alcohol level found in the blood.

2.    The Pathologist is then called to give the cause of death and brief
      evidence.

3.    The Reporting Officer, generally an officer from West Midlands Police,
      is then called to go through the summary prepared by West Midlands
      Police which basically consists of the movement of the deceased
      throughout   the day and what sort of ticket they had and the nature of
      that ticket, ie torn or whole.

k.    The Reporting Officer from West Midlands Police then gave evidence as to
      the visual   information available, ie when and where individualshad been
      identified   on video or photographic evidence.


NB   After each Inquest the Court rises for a short break of five minutes.

      It is anticipated that theywill complete 8 Inquests per day in this
      abbreviated format.

Note In the circumstances, there   seems little point in attending all the
      Inquests as the information available is generally personal information
      relating to the deceased, the nature of the death and the movements of
      the deceased on entering the ground and being removed to the temporary
      mortuary.
NOTE OF COURSE

INSTITUTE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT STUDIES

AFTER HILLSBOROUGH; THE IMPLICATIONS OF THE TAYLOR REPORT FOR LOCAL AUTHORITY/
FOOTBALL CLUB RELATIONSHIPS

11 MAY 1990

David Mould - Home Office

His section not involved in public order.

In consultation regarding new offences. Condition of ground and how it is run
lies with the operating of the ground. Proposed to implement all seater
stadium. Football Licensing Authority. Priority comfort and safety.
Football Licensing Authority - set up by Home Office. Commencement date
1 June 1990.   Independent Body - issue licence for ground. Do not expect
local authorities to use safety of sports grounds licence to enforce seating.
Money through football trust.

Planning policy guidance on new/redeveloped grounds. Draft circular out soon?
Recommendation 6 - national inspectorate. Expect to bring into force as soon
as possible. Can direct licence conditions.   Intend it to work with local
authorities to establish consistent approach.  Football Licensing Authority
restricted to those grounds licensed by it. Consideration to be given to
extending it to other sports.  "Green Guide" - currently revising it. Group
not yet set up. Stood up fairly well but will try and improve. If want to
put up ideas - send them to the Home Office. Expected later this year
(ideally 1990/91). Will reflect safety recommendations.   13% reduction in
capacity. Will remain non-mandatory. Mandatory conditions in safety
certificates (as original Act). By order under section 15(a). May also be
other provision.  Football Licensing Authority - constitution - experience/
technical background.  Inspectorate.

Questions.  Hooliganism not part of Hillsborough - outside but not inside.
Ban on alcohol? Ban on being drunk in the ground (Scotland). Tighter
regulation in Scotland. Football Licensing Authority - don’t know when
recommendations come out. Will set its own priorities and targets. Non­
regulated grounds - any thought given to that? Not under football licensing
authority.  Query roofing - argued that football licensing authority can make
requirement regarding roofing (doubtful).

Not aware of DoE guidelines around grounds. AMA - Football Licensing
Authority - put the point that local authorities should be involved - could
include local authority, fire service, police, building.  Similarly for
Inspectorate.

Meeting Rugby Football Union and Rugby League to discuss - reduction/all
seater.  Home Office Circular - don’t reduce seating. Lord Justice Taylor
said should apply. Green Guide - total evacuation on to pitch reflected in
Green Guide - working group may have different ideas on that - support
principles but can it be done? Barrier tests - to be modified in Green Guide.
                                      - 2 -



Gordon McCartney - Association of District Councils

Three local government associations, Sports Council and League set up working
groups. Feedback - impossible to separate Taylor Report from hooliganism and
social issues.

Safety - solution to problems lies with authority.

Social Community - financial help from local authorities.   Likely to be in a
residential area. Goals between club and local community. Have got to work
closely - club and local authority - siting and social policies, etc.

Local Authority Role

Planning Policies. Local Authority have negative attitude. Local Authority
should be going to club to try and plan way out of mutual problem.

1    Site will be capable of redevelopment.

2    Community involvement - facilities other than football.

3    Site not capable of redevelopment - able to use for purpose which will
      raise sufficient capital to build new ground. Where else/other
      residents/green built site. Social, leisure, recreational development.
      Local Authorities should take lead. Squash, banqueting, look at
      cricket. Not just use of pitch.

(My note -   Co-operation can be interpretated by clubs as being relaxation   -
             over a barrel).

Arthur Sandford - Football League Limited

The new philosophy of football set out in chapter 1 and 2 of the report.
D o n ’t react to one disaster to create another. Advisory Design Council
include Football Association and Football League Association with a view to
set it up. Looked at Professor Maunder as Chair (refused). Strategic role -
6 to 8 people - directing on strategic research, design and best practice,
design guidance, data base on football grounds, build up knowledge and
expertise.     One and a half new grounds since 1945 - Walsall and Scunthorpe.
Taylor Implementation Committee - looking at restructing of football league -
cost £130 million estimate for seating and roofing too low. Money from
football trust £75 million not new money.

New Football Trust 1990 instead of Football Trust and Football Improvement
Trust. Two committees - one professional game, one everything else. Extra
£350,000 per week from reduced football pools tax.

Hoping for capital allowance on implementation cost - not so. Repairs tax
deductable, as revenue compare Burnley case. Plant and machinery - write
down.  Terms and conditions of safety certificate - 25 % write down.

All seater enforced under Football Licensed Authority - capital allowances?

Once Football Licensing Authority up and running because don’t want to do
abortive work. Therefore Football Licensing Authority should have flexibility
on implementation of Taylor re all seater. Not asked for start date to be put
back.
                                          - 3 -




Ask local authority to bear that in mind.  Strictly speaking don’t think local
authority can alter safety certificate to implement all seater? See Home
Office guidance. Grant Aid - can local authority help clubs to tap different
sources. Preparing applications. Urban aid, environmental improvements, EEC?

Community Development. Aston Villa, Millwall.          Taking children to the club.
Dual use. Educational buildings.

View to accommodate 150,000 leading to the possibility of the sharing of
grounds.  If all seater, Liverpool may not be able to accommodate away
supporters or not many.

Away supporters go - cause nuisance to be let in without ticket?

UEFA - all matches on grass.  If want all weather pitches must tell them so
that they can vote accordingly in football league.

Conclusion

Local Authority discuss future with clubs. All clubs being asked to produce
development plans for the next 5 to 10 years. Can’t afford to waste money.
Joint use/ground sharing. Relocation. Grant Aid.

Questions

Costs - £1,300 - £2,000 for policing. Authority can reclaim £7,000 from the
club. The club recovers £3,500 from elsewhere. Cost £3,500 to the club.

Should there be better stewarding leading to less police, leading to less
costs? Stewarding has to be on a professional basis trained by police.

Councillor Dave Sullivan - London Borough of Lewisham

Press could play their part. Sports development workers based at club. Over
50s club. Schools - coaching male and female - all players involved. Creche
at every home game. Archery.   Sponsorship - Council logo. Advertising site
for Council. Council vantage card leading to reduced prices. Work with
people with learning difficulties.  School kids finals - male and female.
Five a Side.

Practice at same time as practice for first         team.

Council gave £50,000 sponsorship. They get 400 tickets foreach home game
which are given to local groups. Use of ground and Councillor as a Director.

Anyone can use the clubs physiotherapists.

Looking at n e w stadium. Council m a k e s site a v a i l a b l e . Dispose assets to have
community recreational facilities in n e w stadium.           P r o b l e m o v e r capital
financing regulations.

They have produced a book setting out how the scheme works at Millwall.
City of Sheffield
         Metropolitan District




                                 Sheffield S1 2HH
                                 Telephone 7 3 4 00 0




                                 with compliments
 "    M      W                                                                            ITEM
     P 90    07            POLICY COMMITTEE               8 FEBRUARY.1990                   li
                                                                                       I11 B   /

 ■THE T AYLOR>-.REPORT 'r>;
                                                                            .'77;-7■
                                                                                   '
     Summary                           -:

, This paper sets out the main proposals in the Report produced by Lord
  Justice Taylor into the Hillsborough disaster. The paper sets out the
  general principles previously adopted by AMA .and proposes further action.

     Recommendation

     The Policy.Committee is asked to agree the programme of action proposed in
     the paper.

     tLCual Opportunities Implications

     The Taylor Report does not deal with specific issues of race, gender or
     handicap, however, it is generally supportive of two major principles
     which the AMA has previously adopted:
                                        »
            (a)   that any member of the public should have an equal expectation of
                  personal safety at any form of public entertainment whether -
                  indoor or outdoor, and,

            (b)   that the involvement of the community- in .football, and in
                  particular of families, should be encouraged. '

     Note; This paper has been produced at- short notice to saeefc the Policy
     Comattee’s publication deadline. .A full oral report will.be given and
     further papers tabled as appropriate.           ■               •
                                                                     ;■
                                                                      .  ......

     Contact Officer: The Assistant .Secretary,;. ART. Sectoral:;.fMr                  ext
     245) is the officer of first contact.                ■ -77

     Background

 .Lord Justice "Taylor has produced'a report f o r t h e "HosSe...Office:concerning
  the Hillsborough Stadium 'Disaster .on 15 April 1989 in which 95 people lost
  their lives at the Football Association Cup seM-final ;s3atch 'between
  Liverpool FC and Sbttingham Forest -FC. There .'are-'W.'repasaendations 843
  appeared in the interim- 'Report published in August 1989) which fall into
  the following main categories:                                    ;,V.

     (a 5    ail seat accommodation

     All sports •grounds designated under the. Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
     should be converted to all seating stadiums.- First and Second Division
     Grounds , Scottish Press! ;r and -national Stadiums should convert at the. rate
     of 20% of standing capacity per annus for 5 years, btfeer grounds'’would have
     to -convert at 1014 per annum over 10 years. Major Rugby .'Onion, Rugby
     League, and Cricket grounds would also be affected, So also would
     Gateshead Athletics Stadium. "

     Comment.

     The Association has not considered the merits of ail seatsr stadiums as a
     matter of policy. The cost of carrying out this work is estimated to be


                                                 1
£130 million at current prices (about £3Gm for seats and '-.bout £-100m 'for
roofing over* fche'vnewly, Seated.: ar'eas;).V;:;;:'G^>vemaEienb policy ..ppears to be
firmly against t h e ;use of public money for this purpose, even though the
Treasury takes 42g% in duty from football pools incorae,-/The Football
Trust makes available sc ne £7.5 million per annum to the professional                 ,
game for ground improvement, the money’.1coining’frca /the://”S p o t ’the Ball"/;;//:‘//V'
competition income. However, after 1992 this income will be uncertain
because of competition from other EC country lotteries, -If.all■stadiums
were converted to all seated accommodation, would any funds be available .
for other essential work to improve the complete environment of the
grounds? Most clubs will claim that they can not meet the financial burdens
of conversion - will they turn to local authorities for help? What will
be the effect on local authorities such as Caldsrcale who already hold a
substantial stake in their local club?

(b)   Ground Design
                                                                                        I
The football authorities should establish an advisory design council to
research and provide information on .stadium desi.gr-.
                                  *■

Comment.

One of the major problems faced by local authority officers is the fact
that grounds differ considerably. Safety is affected by design faults and
anything which can help to improve ground design is to be welcomed.
However, the football authorities do net have all the knowledge or
perspectives to carry out this task single handed and a local authority
input would be of value.

(c)   National Inspectorate                                       '■ .\"V.’
                       ■ ■    ■          ■ ■'              ■


Taylor proposes a national Inspectorate-and an letfaDrity/to/oversee the-
certification of grounds.
      ,■■■■■■■• ......                           '!        -■ ':
Coansent. •                                                    ■" /
                                                                                         (
It would be far better to make the provisions o f -../.fche Green Guide, mandatory. .
At present, decisions about certification'rest at,.local, judgements based on
individual'interpretations of the minimum standards ■     'which are -set out in- the
Green Guide, An Inspectorate would siaply add .another layer, of decision­
making on top of the present system. With statutory■standards-, 'an
Inspectorate would be superfluous. If it is decided to maintain the
present unsatisfactory status of the Green Guide acd ter create- an
Authority,-the Authority should have appropriate representation by local
government.

(d)   Terraces                                                            ...   ~

The Report"""recommends-:’

      (i)‘ .   a written agreement between the police an d■the club setting out
               functions and responsible. :ties;

      (ii)     crowd limits should be specified for each area of the ground on
               the safety certificate:
       <iii) a turnstile ;rate of no"more than 660 per hour;

       (iv)     monitoring of each crowd area for signs of: distress/overcrowding;

       (v)      gangways to be kept clean and cons pi ctiQusly; marked, :

Comments

These specifications will be subject to technical consideration by
advisers.

(e)     Fences, Gates and Crush Barriers.

The Report recommends that fences should be no higher than 2.2 metres and
should not be spiked. There should be enough gates 1.1 metres wide'to
allow evacuation on to the pitch in emergency, they should' be painted;' a
distinguishing colour and should be kept unlocked and manned when thi1 pen
is in use.
                                 >

Comment

These recommendations follow closely the advice given by AMA technical
advisers.

{f )    Stewards

Should be trained at the clubs expense to high standards.

Comment       . ....

This is. AMA policy.
                                         ■■■       : v-
(g)     Tickets

Mo supporter without a ticket should be allowed to gain:;accsss -to a.                  •
stadium.
                                                   '                  ■     ■■■ "   ■
Comment

This is AMA policy. Consideration needs to be given to the ■question of
whether match day sales of tickets should be permitted,

(h)     New Criminal Offences

There should be new offences c-f:

       (il     invading the playing area,

       {ii)    throwing missiles,

       {iii)' obscene or racial abuse,

       (iv)    ticket touting.

These should be backed up by exclusion orders, attendance .orders and
electronic tagging.


                                               3
Legal and police advisers have not yet commented on this issue* but in
previous discussions there has been a.view that there are sufficient laws
available for the police to use in most cases of trouble at sporting .
events.      ■                                                    -.7

{i )   Alcohol

The report regards alcohol as an important contributory factor in crown
disturbances.  The current ban on alcohol at matches has tended to drive
the fans into public houses before matches. Taylor suggests that this
could be countered by earlier kick offs - i.e. before public house opening
hours, and good pre-match entertainment.

Comment

Opinion in the Association is divided on the question of the degree to
which alcohol is a factor ;Ln crowd trouble. However, AMA has' advocated
good pre-match entertainment as part of an improved family package at
matches.

(j )   Identity Cards

The Report rejects identity cards as being impractical and a possible
contributor to ground disturbance by virtue of their.unrealiability.

Comment

The AMA'. has been opposed to Identity Cards from the beginning..The AMA has
always supported the development, of voluntary membership schemes by which
good supporters can be brought into closer association'-;'with'-clubs and can
be offered appropriate benefits and rewards. ,             ■■   v--;1

Future' Action                                                              . .   (

A joint meeting of the Police and Fire and Emergency Planning "Committees
with the Football Development-Working Party(ART-CommitteeJ is'expected as
soon as practicable. This will enable advisers to comment fully on
the Taylor Report and .to make recommendations to fctee Policy Committee.-

 The Football Development Working Party (ART) is cccasitted to calling a
 conference of local authority, football authority and other relevant
 interests by invitation at AMA as soon as practicable (late March/early *•
 April). This conference would be jointly hosted by AMA and Footballs
•Family Forum and there are early indications of -possible Football-Trust,
 assistance to cover costs. It is essential that such.a conference take
 place as soon as possible- to demonstrate the;willingness oflocal'        -'
 authorities and the. football authorities to put the issues .raised by
 Taylor into effect. Any delay will probably trigger adverse governmental
 action.




 51 January 19-9-C
The Head of the Administration            Councillor A Wigffeld
and Legal Department
9 February 1990                           Personal
mm
4018

LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S FINAL REPORT
Attached herwith is a copy of the report and I apologise as I had given
instructions for two copies of this report to be placed in the Members'
Library. I understand that two copies have now been placed in the
Members' Library.
                            CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM

From        ALAN WIGFIELD                       To       HEAD OF ADMIN. & LEGAL

                                                         Personal A ttention
Date        5 February 1990
Ref.        AW/SM 11 SH2AAS                               Mark Webster
Tel. Ext.   4272                                 Ref.



            LORD JUSTICE TAYLORS FINAL REPORT

            Does the C ity Council have any copies of Lord Justice Taylors final
            report? On the assumption th a t they do would you make arrangements
            for me to borrow one please.




            ALAN WIGFIELD
            CHAIR OF HOUSING
                                                                      H ills

The Head of the Administration and         The Leader
Legal Department                           CJC Betts
5 February 1990
MW/DG
4018                                       cc Chief Executive



TAYLOR REPORT ON HILLSBOROUGH
Further to recent discussions between myself and the Chief Executive
I now intend to produce a report for the Policy Committee in February
to update Members on the matters outlined in the last report they received
on this issue last year and in particular to draw attention to any
variations in the interim recommendations set out in the final report
of Lord Justice Taylor and the measures that have been taken to implement
the recommendations.
In essence, as I think you are aware, we had anticipated most of his
requirements and the procedures that are currently operating in the
authority are in line with the final report.
TELEPHONE:
                                                                 7A -
                                                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
SHEFFIELD (0742) 768522                                 POLICE HEADQUARTERS
TELEX: 547996                                            SNIG HILL
FAX: (0742) 523243                                         SHEFFIELD S3 8LY


M N DAVIES Esq LLB BA
A SSISTA N T CHIEF CONSTABLE

 Ms P J Gordon
                                                                   ACC(OPS)/HMW
 Chief Executive                                                   2 February 1990
 Sheffield Metropolitan District
 Council                                       :;;r
 Town Hall
 Sheffield
 SI 2HH




 Dear Ms Gordon

Subsequent to the publication of the Taylor Report on the Hillsborough
Stadium Disaster, the Chief Constable has asked me, in accordance with
Recommendation 44, to act as the nominated Chief Officer for designated
.sports grounds.

In order to provide a co-ordinated approach to the issue for South Yorkshire
I would be obliged, therefore, if any corresp.ondence relating to the two
Sheffield Clubs could be addressed to Chief Superintendents D and F
Divisions respectively, who are responsible for those grounds in order that
they may deal with it.

All matters that require force policy will then be brought to my attention.

Yours sincerely




Assistant Chief Constable*"
Operations


                                          /OMINlSTOATfON-■& LEGAL
                                              n P flr SHEFFIELD-
                                                        A8SBTANT
                                                          HEAD
1                                        1




                                                          C IT Y O F S H E F F IE L D
                                                     M E T R O P O L IT A N                       D IS T R IC T



    To th e Pro p er Officer,


             W E T H E U N D E R S IG N E D , being t w o                    Local G o v e rn m e n t Electors fo r th e area D O HEREBY


    G IV E Y O U NO TIC E th a t a casual va ca n c y has arisen in the O ffice o f-Councillor fo r the


     H       l i o b b i a s & K ..................................................
                                    $                                           th e r e s i g n a t i o n of P E T E R A L A N DUF F
    W A R D o f th e said District in co n se q u en ce o f




    w h o w a s o n e o f the Councillors fo r th e said W a r d .




             D A T E D this                                         d ay o f


    S ig n a tu re ...


    A d d res s..


                         A,y.,
                             lh - S -.       ! ? . (? 7                                       . Sheffield.




    S ig n a tu re ..


    A d d re s s ...


                           Uf^jpr putf lS - ,                                                 .S h e ffie ld .




             I h ereby fix and appoint                    Thursday                        th e     Eighth             d ay o f   March   1 9 90

    as the day for holding the Election to fill th e ab o v e casual vacancy.




             D A T E D this        T wenty F i f t h                day of            January                           1 9 90




    T O W N HA LL,                                                                             _____________________________________________
    SH E F F IE L D
    S I 2H Y                                                                                                     Returning Officer.



                                                                Printed by City o f Sheffield Printing Services
    R 7118                                                Published by the Returning O fficer, Town Hall. Sheffield
,Surrey Street, Sheffield S1 1XZ                                                        T&epk<mm4Q742)724750

                                                                        I




  D is a s te r o p e ra tio n s
     ‘w ill b e fin e tu n e d ’
      ITT      (o ' lZ       By Philip Sherwell                         .
   T H E firs t C iv il E m ergencies          ao funding fo r c iv il em ergency
   A d v is e r y e s te rd a y re je c te d   planning on a local level.
   c ritic is m o f th e G overnm en t            He w ill also hear calls frons
   d e c is io n n o t to e s ta b lis h a     the voluntary services fo r closer
   n a tio n a l d is a s te r sqaad.          in v o lv e m e n t in c o n tin g e n c y
      R e tire d A ir-V s c e M a rs h a l     p lan s, a lth o u g h m an y lo c a l
   D avid B rook, who taok up his              authorities have already tak e s
   post on M onday and rep orts to             this iss&e on hoard.
   the Home Secretary, said his                  The issne of telephone com ­
   ro le w ouid be to “fine tane” the          munications is one of the most,
   response o f 5ocai aoth orities asd         com plicated he faces.
 _Ute em ergency services.             —^
                                                 ■Am exercise b y -th e Associa­
      Fnhu'sriag disasters such ss
                                               tion o f C S itf Polk-e 'Officers
   Zeebrngge, Claptons, X eyfferch
                                               Her Shis year found th at eves
- and H illsbo ro ug h, there w ere
                                               Telephone M a rk e tin g Services.
   caIJs fo r a co-ordinating body oa
                                               B ritain 's biggest sw itchboard,
  a nation al o r regional le v el as he
  set ap to handle s im ila r inci­            was unable to cope w ith the
                                               Soodof inq u iries th a t w ouid fo l­
  dents in the fn tn re .
                                               low a saajqr disaster, and th a t
      B a t M r Brook said he could            B ritish Telecom operators d id
  see ao ju stificatio n fo r the cre­
                                               not have the skills to obtain th e
   ation of an additional level of
                                               appropriate info rm ation fraaa
  bureaucracy when local auth ori­             oftea hysterical o ile r s .
  ties had handled previous disas­
  ters so w e ll.                                 The association and the H om e
     "This is a densely populated              Office are sow planning a aenv
  country w ith competent em er­               exercise involving B T s d ig ita l
  g en c y s e rv ic e s d is tr ib u te d     L in k iin e system, which could
  around the country" he said.                 avoid the problem of overload­
     " A fte r an extensive G avera-           ing the system by a u to m atically
  m ent review , it was decided ant            refe rrin g satis ta police officers
  to upset this relationship and I             at centres across the country.
  w ould agree w ith that. M y view              M r Brook. 53, came to his new
  is th at I am very tnnch in the              roie from his previous app oin t­
  business o f flne tuning existin g           ment as A ir Vice M arshal ia
  arrangem ents.                               control of the H A F s search ana
     “T h e re a re clearly lessons to         rescse resources.
  be learned fo r the fu tu re . hat              M r W addin?:on. Hom e Secre­
  a fte r one day in the job I fee l it        tary, has asked him to consider
  is too e a rly to com m ent as               the handling o f casualty in q u i­
  specifics."                                  ries, psychological damage ta
     One com plain t he is expected            survivors and relatives, assis­
  to encounter is that w h ile the             tance fo r fo re ig n d is a s te rs ,
 G overnm ent provides money fo r              trainin g and exercises, and Use
 c iv il defence initiatives, it gives         roie n i locai auth orities.
Head of Administration and                         Councillor C J C Betta
Legal Department                                   Leader

22 January 1990
w   i t/m

4018 - Mr Webster




ret         B1XJLSB0R088H STADIUM DISASTER KSfQOUOT -   NOTES B f SHMFPIBUJ TRADES
u a im c e m c ix .
With reference to your note shortly before Christiaas,asking for aoaaaentB
upon the submission by the above body, I now attach, for your information,
a copy of notes prepared by I r i z Baahforth who, as you know, has largely
dealt with this issue oa behalf of the Bej^rtj^nt^ ^
Notes on Sheffield Trades Union Council

Submission to the Hillsborough Inquiry


PARAGRAPH 3

Recommendations 26 to 43 of the report relate to:- Police Planning,
Communications, Co-ordination of Emergency Services and First Aid, Medical
Facilities and Ambulances.   They do not relate specifically to the "major
disaster plan'.'. As far as I am aware, there has been no specific criticism of
the "major disaster plan" although West Midlands Police are investigating how
the plan was put into operation and there may be criticism or recommendations in
the final report. West Midlands Police have assured SheffieldCity Council so
far that there has been no criticism of the way Sheffield City Council operated
its emergency plan.


PARAGRAPH 4/5

It may be the recommendation of Lord Justice Taylor that there is an emergency
plan specifically relating to football stadia.   It is difficult to plan for
every type of emergency in great detail e.g. a rail crash, air crash, motorway
pile up, or a combination,  all with varying detail. The generally preferred
course appears to be to have a general enabling plan so that you are able to be
flexible and respond to a particular problem.

The Green Guide is advisory and flexible. Lord Justice Taylor is looking at
this and our recommendation 10 suggests that the status and content of the Green
Guide is reconsidered to look at the alternative of regulations and statutory
codes of practice.

PARAGRAPH 6

See recommendation 42 and 43 of Lord Justice Taylor’s interim report. The
condition in Sheffield City Council's licence is that the club has to arrange
for the attendance of at least one ambulance on relevant occasions with South
Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service.

PARAGRAPH 7

This is broadly in line with our recommendation 12.


PARAGRAPH 8

It is clear that Lord Justice Taylor intends that football supporters should
have an opportunity to comment on proposals and put forward proposals in
relation to football grounds. It is intended that representatives of football
supporters will be included in the Advisory Forumby Sheffield City Council.


PARAGRAPH 9

The Health and Safety Executive role in Safety of Sports Grounds passes to tlie
Local Authority on 1st April 1990. The powers set out in the paragraph have
been suggested in our recommendations in particular points 2 and 10.




PB/28/EB2212
The Head of the Adm inistration           Mrs E Bashforth
and Legal Department                      Principal S o lic ito r

11 January 1990
jwW
4m    ^


STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDINTIAL

INTERNAL INQUIRY INTO STAFF RESPONSIBILITY ASPECTS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH
TRAGEDY

Further to our previous discussions in connection with th is matter,
I enclose for your information and attention a copy of my most recent
communication to              > htch largely mirrors the comments which
you le t me have on Tuesday f January in respect of this matter.
Mr M Webster                                   Mr DF Green
Head o f the Adm inistration and               D irector o f Works
Legal Department
11 January 1990
MM/Dfi
4018                                           DFG/RJB



PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL

INTERNAL INQUIRY INTO STAFF RESPONSIBILITY ASPECTS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH
TRAGEDY

Pursuant to your communication of the 21 December, and to our brief
discussion a t Management Team, I offer the following comments upon
the suggested draft terms i-

1)     Clearly any Inquiry will have to include a ll sta ff from the
       various Council Departments involved in the process in question
       some of whom have already le f t the Council's employ for one
       reason or another.
2)     Regard will have to be had I would suggest to other influences
       upon the work that was carried out and the decisions that were
       taken, including, but not limited to , the other statutory bodies
       who form part of the Advisory Group* for example the Police
       and the Fire Brigade.
         I would suggest that i t will be necessary to look a t an Officer
         decision or action 1n lig h t of what facts/suggestions were coming
         from such sources.
3)     I would suggest that i t may well be necesary for you to look
        back a t the position in the period 1979 to 1986 to some extent
        because the City Council Inherited an existing situation in
        which tin Building Surveyor's s ta ff had previously been Involved
        as advisers to the group then run by the County Council.
4}     I would also suggest th at any Inquiry of th is nature would have
        to look a t the safety of sports grounds workload in context
        1e in relation to other pressures and workloads upon Departments
        and particular O fficers, and also the general, local and national
        perception as to the degree of f a c ilitie s which should be
        committed to such work.
S)     I think i t Is worthwhile clarifying at th is stage whether you
        intend to look a t a ll the work done in relation to Sheffield
        Wednesday or merely to concentrate on the Leppings Lane end
        of the ground.
6}     As previously discussed between ourselves, the timing of this
        investigation must be carefully considered in relation to the
        CouncilTs position on the civil proceedings upon which, as I
        am sure you are aware various announcements have recently been
        made and others may well be expected shortly and also the criminal
         In v estig a tio n .


                                                         /continued
7)   I believe I t Is necessary, for a variety of reasons, not least
     from a natural justice point of view, but also from an Industrial
     relations viewpoint, that a ll s ta ff who nay be affected by th is
     Inquiry be warned and that the Trade Unions representing a ll
     such s ta ff become Involved, as although they are Involved In
     some cases I am not aware that they have picked up a ll such
     matters and these comments relate to a ll Council departments.
With regard to the la s t comment I notice that you have picked th is
up 1n the final paragraph on the f i r s t page of your communication,
and I accept that i t is Impossible to properly Inform people until
an agreement has been reached on the terms of reference but I am
ju st anxious to ensure that In lig h t of my comment In paragraph 1,
that Me do not miss out anybody who subsequently to be approached.
Interms of process i t might be best for us to have a discussion
once you have finalised the terms of reference in lig h t of my comments
with say I                1 to decide how best to introduce th is Into
the Council's procedures.
                                                                                     cc     ■"f



INQUIRY INTO THE HI                                                             I The Rt Hon LordJustice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                            HF-AO OP.                     I i Si      50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                              dept.                       J   '' I
                                                                                      London CSW1H
                                                                                      T
                                                                                                       9AT
                                                                                               W /1 H Q 4 T


                                                                                      01-273 2577/3602/2370

Mrs Pamela Gordon                                                                         Our Ref:  FEP/89
Chief Executive                                                                                     35/48/92
City of Sheffield                                                                         Your Ref: MW/DG
Metropolitan District
Town Hall                                      CHlfcf EXECUTIVE
SHEFFIELD                                            SHEWED..
S1 2HH
                                                                                          9 January 1990
                                       r"T| ' 0 JAN m o                   W8



                                )
H IL L S B O R O U G H S T A D IU M D IS A S T E R      IN Q U IR Y   -       CO STS

Your letter of 27 November 1989 confirmed                                            that work was in hand
on the preparation of a full statement of                                            account in respect of
facilities provided to the Inquiry at the                                            Town Hall, and that it
was hoped that the account would be ready                                            for submission to us
during the course of this month.

I am writing now to emphasise again the urgency of the matter and
the need for the bill to be with us no later than the end of
January. There are two reasons for this. Firstly, as my earlier
letter of 15 November explained, Treasury constraints on the
carrying-over of money from one financial year to the next mean
that there is no budget provision from which to make payment
during the coming financial year. Any bill must therefore reach
us in sufficient time for processing and payment before the 31
March 1990.

Secondly, Lord Justice Taylor has said that he hopes to complete
his Report by the end of this month. An indication of the costs
of the Inquiry will be needed for that purpose. It will be
extremely difficult to authorise payment of bills not included in
that indication.

In the circumstances, I should be grateful if either you or Mark
Webster could let me know when we can expect receipt of the
account.  I fully understand the pressures under which you
yourselves operate, but I am afraid that I must now ask for this
to be given urgent consideration, not least because I imagine you
would want your account to be capable of reimbursement.  If it
would be helpful to speak, please contact me on 01 273 2577.
                                                                               Y o Uao 5w v«.uJlj
                                                                                                     )




                                                                     R M WHALLEY
                                                                Secretary to the Inquiry
                                                                                                      Sch 9 1 6 0
    R3719
                                      CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM

From        M r D F G re e n                                To     M r M W e b s te r
            D i r e c t o r o f W o rk s                           H e a d o f A d m in a n d L e g a l
                                                                         D e p a r tm e n t
Date        21 D ecem ber 1989
Ref.        D F G /R J B
Tel. Ext.   5240                                            Ref.




            P R IV A T E AND C O N F ID E N T IA L

            IN T E R N A L IN Q U IR Y IN T O   STA FF   R E S P O N S IB IL IT Y   ASPEC TS     OF       TH E
            H ILLS B O R O U G H TRAG EDY

            Further to our recent conversations I set                                  out below my
            suggested draft terms concerning my Inquiry into                           staff aspects
            of the Hillsborough Tragedy.     I would welcome                           your comments
            and confirmation that Tim Hoskins will act as my                           adviser.

            1.      To inquire into the performance and action of those City
                    Council staff who were in any way involved in or
                    responsible for the giving of advice or issuing of
                    licences    in    respect of "Safety in Sports Grounds
                    Legislation" and Sheffield Wednesday Football Club In.
                    particular,    from the time that the City Council began to
                    prepare for the transfer and inheritance          of   such,
                    responsibilities up to the time of the Hillsborough.
                    Tragedy on 15 April 1989.

            2.       To inquire specifically into the duties, responsibilities
                     and accountability of all such staff and the associated
                     reporting procedures.

            3.       To determine whether each such member of staff properly
                     and    conscientiously   fulfilled    their  duties   and
                     responsibilities   and   demonstrated    the  degree   of
                     application and initiative that could rightly be expected
                     of them, and if not, in what ways did they fail and for
                     what reasons.

            4.       To determine specifically whether disciplinary action is
                     warranted against any member of staff and if so on what
                     grounds.

            I think it would be helpful if when these terms of reference
            are made known and available to the staff and/or the Trade
            Unions, then at the same time it should be made clear what the
            procedures will be for interviewing staff and recording the
            information and comments arising and whether such records will
            be made available to any subsequent disciplinary hearing
            should that prove necessary.   Likewise advice on staff's right
            to be represented and the right of the Council to pursue    such
            inquiries.   Those matters seem to me to be more the province
            of Personnel than me and I would be glad if you would take
            this up with them      so that there is no misunderstanding.   I
            want the Inquiries     to run      well with   people's    ready
            participation and am therefore concerned to ensure that
            everyone agrees the ground rules to start with.
                            -2 -

Finally, I would like to set some time aside for this Inquiry
in my diary and would suggest a week early in February say,
that commencing Monday 5 February. Could you check that ___
       's could be free at that time and if so give some
thought to who might be involved so that they can also be
advised; early in January and asked to keep that time free.




Director of Works
    R3719                                                                         Sch 9 1 S 0
                              CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM

From        The Head of the Administration and   To      Councillor CJC Betts
            Legal Department                             cc Councillor J Fiore
                                                            Councillor P Nelson
Date        7 December 1989
Ref.        MW/DG
Tel. Ext.   4018                                 Ref.



            HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY


            During the course of a-^conversation the other day with the Secretariat to
            the Inquiry,   it was. discovered that, there was :in fact a Working Party set
            up under the auspices of the Home Office looking at the Green Code and
            implications flowing from the Inquiry.         As a member of such group they
            have got the Building Surveyor/Engineer from Liverpool, namely Mr Bash,
            which may or may not lead to some very interesting proposals flowing out of
            such body!
City of Sheffield                   M e tro p o lita n District




 Our r e f e r e n c e   M W /D G                                 Chief Executive
                                                                  Ian L. P odm ore
Your reference
                                                                  T o w n Hall,
                                                                  Sheffie ld S1 2H H
Date                     27 November 1989
                                                                  Telephone 7 3 4 0 0 0




  RM Whalley Esq
  Secretary for the Hillsborough Stadium
  Disaster Inquiry
  50 Queen Anne’s Gate
  London
  SW1H 9AT

  Dear Mr Whalley,

  HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER - COSTS


 I thank you for your letter of 15 November into this and now write to confirm
 the contents of the telephone conversation which took place between yourself
 and Mark Webster,   Head of the Administration and Legal Department on
 Wednesday 22 November, to the effect that work is in hand on this issue and
 that you may rest assured that we will be providing you with full details of
 the account within the current financial year and hopefully, no later than
 January of next year.

  Yours sincerely,




  Chief Executive




For telephone enquiries on this matter please dial (0742) 73
'                                '




\■
                 ;

     INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH                                           T he Rt H on Lord Justice Taylor
     STADIUM DISASTER
                                                                             50 Queen Anne’s Gate

                                                           & LEGAL
                                          A D flip S X Q A T iQ N
                                                C®PT>%HEFF!ELD               01    ■273 2577/3602/2370

                                      A       (*& ?         )1 “ s   r       L.S
     Mrs Pamela Gordon                                                             )ur R e f :
     Chief Executive                                                               ^EP/89 35/48/92
     City of Sheffield                B               1 7. NOV 89            PAA
      Metropolitan District                                1 us     i CON^
                                      C       O .S .M ..
                                                                             CL
     Town Hall
                                      68
     SHEFFIELD
     S1 2HH                                                                  Date
                                                                              15 November 1989




                               0VO,


     HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY - COSTS

     Earlier this year, your predecessor and I corresponded about the
     cost of the facilities to be provided at the Town Hall during the
     oral stage of the Hil lsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry, and my
     letter of 5 May confirmed the general position on payment of
     c o s t s . As you kno w the final hearing took place on 14 July, and
     I have already expressed my gratitude to everyone at the Town
     Hall for the co-operation and assistance shown throughout our
     time in S h e f f i e l d .

     N ow that the next phase of the Inquiry is well u n d e r w a y , I
     thought it might be an appropriate moment to ask whether you are
     yet in a position to let us have a full statement of a c c o u n t .
     Given Treasury constraints on the carrying-over of money from one
     financial year to the next, and the general budgetary
     restrictions under whic h we operate, it is essential that full
     settlement is made during the current financial y e a r . Any
     failure to do so will result in considerable delay in processing
     and settling the a c c o u n t .

     From informal conversations with Pat 0'Neill some months ago, I
     had understood that a bill would be with us s h o r t l y . I should
     therefore be grateful if you would let me know where matters
     stand.  If it would be helpful to speak, please do not hesitate
     to contact m e on 01 273 2577.          \/   '




                         1   7NOV1939
                                                                  R M WHALLEY
                                                             Secretary t o the Inquiry
    R3719                                                                         Sch 9160
                               CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM

From        The Chief Executive                   To     The City Treasurer
                                                         att. Mr

Date        27 November 1989
Ref.        MW/DG
Tel. Ext.   4018                                  Ref.



            HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY - COSTS

            I attach for your information and attention a copy of a letter from Mr
            Whalley the Secretary to the Inquiry, together with a copy of my response
            thereto, the contents of which I believe are self-explanatory.

            'I would b e ;f a t e f u l : ; ; ; d o ^     ’- m the next few days, details
             of precisely where we are as an authority in terms of correlating the
             account for the work done in regard to the Inquiry, with a view to
             responding to Mr Whalley’s request at the earliest opportunity.




            cc   Chief Personnel Officer - att Mr P O ’Neill
The Chief Executive                        Director of Design and
                                           Building Services
27 November   1989                         Director of Recreation and
Mtf/DG                                     Amenities Department
4018                                       The Building Surveyor
                                            The City Treasurer
                                           The Head of the Administration
                                            and Legal Depart - Licensing
                                            Section




HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY - PART 2

During the course of a recent conversation with the Secretary to the above
Inquiry with regard to the Council’s Bill for hosting such matter, the
opportunity was taken to ask as to when the second and final part of Lord
Justice Taylor’s recommendations would be available.

In this regard Mr Whalley indicated that the documentation would definitely
be published in January, although at this stage he was unable to indicate
whether it would be the beginning or the end of January.
                                                                     3 -///1



POLICE AUTHORITY FAX ON CIVIL CLAIMS

Following discussion of the issue with Liz Bashforth, after she had checked
out the circumstances with Keeble Hawsons, I contacted Council Walayat and
explained to him that as far as I was concerned these proposals were
perfectly in order from first of all the City Council’s point of view, and
secondly, in light of the advice that the Police Authority had received, from
the Police Authority viewpoint, given that, of course, the two authorities
may have different approaches to the same topic.

He asked me to confirm the advice tendered in writing and I indicated that in
view of the delicate nature of the negotiations going on I would prefer not
to see any additional pieces of information floating round the authority for
the next 48 hours and that what I was saying to him was the proposals were
perfectly in order and that the best action he could take is to sit on the
information until something further happened which advice he then accepted.
                                            SOUTH YORKSHIRE ^
                                            POLICE AUTHORITY %
R .C . J o h n sto n B .A ., I .P .F .A .                                                                           P.O. Box 37
Clerk and Financial O fficcr                                                                                       Regent Street
                                                                                                                       Barnsley
                                                                                                    South Yorkshire S70 2 P O
                                                                                            T eleph one Barnsley (022«) 733222

                                                      Y oui He/.
° urHe,:      SW/MR                                                                               D "‘r:   22 November 1989
Thix matter is being dealt   h'Wi b y
                                               Mr S Walker                                        Telephone   rw;g2>Q




                                            F A C S I M I L E         T R A N S M I S S I O N

       jq.                      Councillor M Walayat
                                            please hand to Cllr Walayat)




                         Stephen Walker
       FROM:         ................. ......
                         Solicitor to the Authority



                         22 November 1989
       Date:         ....... .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
       No. of Pages (inc. this page)                          .. ^(two)#. . . . . . . . . . . .
       Our Fax Number                   0226/730442

       In the event of bad receipt please contact 0226/733122 Ext:




                                                                                  “1
STRICTLX PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL

NOTE FOR COUNCILLOR M WALAYAT

CIVIL CLAIMS ARISING OUT OF THE HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY

To confirm our telephone conversation today and my brief discussion with
Councillor Betts last night.
The Police Authority’s insurers, Municipal Mutual, who you will appreciate are
also the City Council’s insurers, telephoned me yesterday afternoon to confirm
that in consequence of a meeting held with Messrs Hammond Suddards, the Chief
Constable’s Solicitors, Instructed by MMI and Messrs Keeble Hawson, they had
decided to meet with the Steering Committee in Liverpool today.  The Intention
is to make certain concessions on the civil claims, subject to certain
reciprocations from the Committee.
The intention is, subject to agreement, to deal on a 100% basis with all the
injury claims fromm people within the grond at the Lepplngs Lane end. This
amounts to some 244 claims of the 1,000+ already intimated.
In the event of agreement, the quantum of each claim will be dealt with or its
merits and I should point out that any agreement will be without any admissions
of liability.
In doing this, the Chief Constable will not be admittinng the extent of his
liability and this will be left to be determined as between the various
defendants at a future trial. What it will do is relieve some of the distress
that would inevitably be caused to the claimants at a trial, although, of
course, in some cases there still may be some dispute on the amount of
compensation which will ultimately have to be resolved by the courts.
I understand your concern that such an agreement may have implications for
charges which may result from the various investigations which are presently
underway. This has been considered at a conference with both leading and junior
counsel instructed to act on behalf of the Chief Constable and it is clear
there will be no effect upon any subsequent charges or, indeed, on the nature of
the investigations,
I should also point out that I have contacted the Section 41 representatives of
the other District Councils and all are in agreement that the proposal by
Municipal Mutual which is supported by myself, is the right way forward. Please
be mindful of the fact that even 1f agreement is reached between MMI and the
Steering Committee today, formal approval is unlikely to be given for about a
week and therefore no publicity is to be given to these negotiations until that
formal approval is given. In the event of agreement being reached it is my
intention to discuss with the Chief Constable, MMI and the Solicitors, Messrs
Hammond Suddards, the appropriate publicity which should be given on behalf of
the Police.


S Walker
Solicitor to the Authority
22 Novembter 1989




11-1989   11:27                 022S 730442                                    P-02
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH                                                     The Rt Hon LordJustice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                                                                  50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                                                                    iiuuiiow i n y t \ i
                                         ADMINISIBATION & LEGAL
                                              tfePfcSHEFFIELD        01 273 2577/3602/2370
                                            / HEAOOF: J 1 ASSISTANT
                                       A ^ DEPT. ! 1 HEAD           t? )ur Ref:
Mrs Pamela Gordon
Chief Executive
City of Sheffield                      B         1 7. NOV 89        PM i'EP/89 35/48/92
 Metropolitan District                                       || UB   1
Town Hall                              C     O .S.M ..
                                                                                  VL
SHEFFIELD                             GS
S1 2HH                                                                            Date
                                                                                     5 November 1989
                                           ADMINISTRATION & LEGAL
                                              iBgfff>SHEFFELD
                                             1 HEAD OF: I 1 ASSISTANT 1
                                       A      1   C S P T .y    |    HEAD     |   LS

                                        B            2       & TO    89           PM
                        (x O )A Ova
                                        G O .S .M .. | LIB | C O N V pi
                                                                     U L
                                       GS
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM                  WTf 1R IWOUIR1 - 'COS I'K

Earlier this year, your predecessor and I corresponded about the
cost of the facilities to be provided at the Town Hall during the
oral stage of the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry, and my
letter of 5 May confirmed the general position on payment of
costs. As you know the final hearing took place on 14 July, and
I have already expressed my gratitude to everyone at the Town
Hall for the co-operation and assistance shown throughout our
time in Sheffield.

Now that the next phase of the Inquiry is well underway, I
thought it might be an appropriate moment to ask whether you are
yet in a position to let us have a full statement of account.
Given Treasury constraints on the carrying-over of money from one
financial year to the next, and the general budgetary
restrictions under which we operate, it is essential that full
settlement is made during the current financial year. Any
failure to do so will result in considerable delay in processing
and settling the account.

From informal conversations with Pat O'Neill some months ago, I
had understood that a bill would be with us shortly.  I should
therefore be grateful if you would let me know where matters
stand. If it would be helpful to speak, please do not hesitate
to contact me on 01 273 2577.           \/
                                                                         Yc
                                                         7
                                            So.p .o.

                            1 7 NOV 1989      PUB
            c f '~ i   AT                                            R M WHALLEY
                                                                Secretary to the Inquiry



                            ORIGINAL SIGNED BY                                                         pi.

                            v CHIEF EXECUTIVE                                          '           0
        City of SheffieldMetropolitan District


          Mr. Mark Webster                             Councillor C. J. C. Betts, BA(Cantab.)
          Head of Admin. & Legal Department            Leader
                                                       Sheffield City Council
          "Any comments, please?"                          v
                                                       Leader's Office
          4.12.89.
                                ADMINISTRATION &LEG,   Town Hall
                                                       SHEFFIELD
                                                       S1 2HH Tel. 734101



         Liz
               ') ■


         Com                                           with compliments
R3474
                                                                         .K'jsoy m i


/ S h effield T rades U n io n C o u n c il
                                          Established 1 8 5 8


  PRESIDENT: Blanche Flannery       TREASURER: Albert Bedford   SECRETARY: W.H. (Bill) Ronksley

                                                                  Trades & Labour Club
                  Copy for information*
  Your Ref:                                                       Talbot Street
                                                                  Sheffield S2 2TG
  Our Ref:                                                        (0742) 750744          (home)

                                                                  10th November, 1989
        Hr. R. M. Vhalley,
        Secretary to the Inquiry,
        Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster,
        50, Queen tone's Gate,
        London,
        SV1H 9AT.

        Dear Mr. Vhalley,
                            HILLSBOHOUGH STADIOK DISASTER INQUIRY.

        With reference to your letter dated 22nd Kay, 1989, in. which you stated
        that Lord Justice Taylor would find it convenient if the Sheffield
        Trades Union Council could put it's detailed submission to him in
        writing.

        Following receipt of your letter the Trade Union. Safety Committee of the
        Sheffield Trades Union Council and, additionally, a number of Delegate
        Meetings of the Council have given serious consideration to the
        circumstances giving rise to the Disaster and to Lord Justice Taylor's
        Interim Report.

        The October Delegate Meeting of t h s Sheffield Trades Union Council
        unanimously approved the submission which is attached to this letter as
        an Appendix for consideration, b y Lord Justice Taylor.

        In the event of Lord Justice Taylor requiring further information on
        this submission, cr elaboration of paints made therein, the Sheffield
        Trades Union Council would be only too pleased assist.




                                V.H. Rooksley,
                                Secretary.
                                      6 .



SUBMISSION

Introduction.

1. Sheffield TUC wrote to Lord Justice Taylor on 17.5.89 asking that two
   specific issues be addressed by the Inquiry, namely:

    (i) the adequacy or otherwise of the emergency plans which were
        in place at the time of the Disaster:

   <ii) the need for football clubs to establish consultative
        machinery via which the knowledge and experience of football
        spectators can influence arrangements at football grounds.

2. Sheffield TUC was subsequently asked to produce a written submission.

Emergency Plans.

3. Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report makes little direct reference
   to implementation of emergency plans. Paragraphs 96, 107, and 252
   refer to the Police activation of the Major Disaster Plan (MDP),
   which is presumably a "general" Disaster Plan, rather than an
   emergency plan tailored to the specific circumstances of a major
   football match at the Hillsborough Stadium. It would appear from
   the Report's recommendations 26 - 43 (which the STUC welcomes) that
   the KDP was assessed by the Inquiry and found to be lacking in
   relation to events at Hillsborough but this is not specifically
   stated in the body of the Report. If the Major Disaster Plan proved
   defective in relation to the Hillsborough Disaster, what confidence
   can the public place in it's effectiveness in the event of other
   disasters ?

4. Sheffield TUC believes that there are close parallels between the
   emergency planning requirements of major industrial hazard sites
   and those of major sporting arenas. The Control of Industrial Kajor
   Accident Hazard Regulations <CIMAH> require in relation to designated
   "Major Hazard Sites" that (inter alia) the site operator draws up an
   on-site emergency plan and that the Fire and Civil Defence Authority/
   County Council draws up and keeps up-to-date a site-specific off-site
   emergency plan which should "dovetail" together, and whose key
   purpose should be to enable the emergency services and other relevant
   parties (viz. Health and Local Authorities) to respond in an
   appropriate' a n d 'integrated way in the event of a serious prbblem at
   the site. The Health and Safety Executive is the enforcing authority
   for,-.the CIMAH Regulations, and has the power to ensure that plans
   are adequate.

5. Sheffield TUC urges Lord Justice Taylor to examine the relevant
   Sections of the CIMAII Regulations, and to recommend that
   comparable statutory requirements are imposed in relation to
   Football Stadiums. The need for statutory requirements rather than
                                     7.
       alterations to the "Green Guide" is emphasised: if a major club
       like Sheffield Wednesday failed to comply with, the "Green Guide" on
       capacity, access, etc.,there is little hope for the smaller club
       without adequately enforced statutoi~y regulations.

6. In relation to the deployment of ambulances, the Sheffield TUC
   believes that there should be a statutory requirement for Health
   Authority Ambulances to be deployed at major sporting events and
   that Football Clubs should in general be prevented from relying
   on the voluntary sector for the provision of ambulances.

Stewarding Arrangements.

7. STUC considers that there should be detailed requirements imposed on
   football clubs to adequately train Stewards in the handling of
   emergencies. Training standards should be specified in detail and
   subject to external scrutiny.

Consultative Machinery.

8. Sheffield TUC strongly welcomes Lord Justice Taylor's Interim
   Recommendation 17, in particular the inclusion of representatives
   of a recognised supporters’ club on each Advisory Group. It would
   help the establishment and operation of such Advisory Groups if the
   functions,membership, and terms of reference could be given statutory
   backing, and if the number of representatives from the recognised
   supporters' club is sufficient to give such representatives real
   influence. The Advisory Group should include Trade Union appointed
   Safety Representatives where Unions are recognised by the Club
   concerned.

General.

(p .    Many of the recommendations contained   in the Interim    Report will be
        implemented more effectively if there   is an effective method of
        enforcement. Sheffield TUC believes that, with an adequate increase
        in the resourcing of the Health and Safety Executive, it would be
        appropriate for "Football Safety Legislation" to be enforced by the
        HSE, and for such legislation to be made as Regulations.Approved
        Codes of Practice, etc., under the Health and Safety at Vorfc Act.
        The existing powers of HSE Inspectors, especially the power to issue
       •Improvement and Prohibition Hotices, are well suited to the
        enforcement of measures such as those   in the Interim Report.

       10. ^ 8 9 .
                              CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM

 From:    Neil Kay                            To:     Mark Webster
          Director of Social Services                 Acting Head of Admin and Legal Dept

 Date:    12 October 1989
 Ref:     NVK/FKL
 Tel Ext: 4844                                 Ref:




          Thank you for the draft copy of the "Hillsborough Stadium Disaster - 15
          April 1989: Recommendations to the Enquiry on behalf of Sheffield City
          Council" and having the opportunity to comment particularly on Section
          14, "Counselling and Support for Victims".

          Whilst acknowledging that the vast majority of the report was addressing
          the technical aspects of ground safety, and implementation of the "Green
          Guide", I think it would have been to the mutual advantage of Family and
          Community Services Department and the council in general had a member of
          staff from this Department been included in the working group that
          compiled the report. I make this observation particularly since FTCS
          Department has had a Task Team in existence to deal with effects of the
          Disaster since Monday 17 April 1989, two days following the tragic
          event




          Neil Kay ----------------
          Director of Social Services




GICABT
    Assistant Head of Departmentt               Councillor   C J C Betts
    Administration and Legal                    Councillor   <7 M Cromar
                                                Councillor   0 I? George
    5 September 1939                            Councillor   C M walayat
    KT/GW                                       Councillor   R Whitfield
    5599 - Mr Trelfa




    HII&SBOKOOGH DISASTER * DXRKCTGK OF PUBLIC PROSBC0TIOH8 IHQUIR*

    The Chair of the m b q s Committee, Councillor j Fiore* has asked me
    to send you a copy of a memorandum which was sent to Members of the
    GE> Panel on 24 August 1989 in connection with the Director of Public
    Prosecutions' Inquiry into the Hillsborough Disaster.

    I think the memorandum is self-explanatory but the Chair of the
    Committee thought that the information contained therein should be
    made available to the Council’s representatives on the Police Authority
    in case any contact is made with them in connection with this matter.



k
Acting Head of Departmentj                    Members of the GP Panel
Administration and Legal                      (See Circulation Below)

24 August 19B9
AII/GW
4018 - Mr Webster




HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - DIRECTOR OP PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS IKQOIRY

As you are probably aware from recent newpaper and other press
announcements the Director of Public Prosecutions has decided, not
surprisingly, to carry out an investigation into the circumstances
surrounding the Hillsborough Disaster with a view to deciding whether
or not there is any criminal responsibility on the part of any of
the persons involved.

Whilst I am of the view that such investigations are only likely to
involve the City Council, its Members and Officers, peripherally I
nevertheless think it is appropriate that arrangements be made in
the event of approaches being made to individuals to take statements
either under caution or otherwise as part of such investigation.

In such circumstances the procedure is that the person approached,
be it a Member or an Officer, should immediately ring myself or, if
I am not available, Mrs Bashforth on extension 405,9, or Mr Ward on
extension 4001, or Mrs Woodhead on extension 4004, to discuss the
circumstances of the approach and to make arrangements for a Solicitor
to be present at the actual interview.

It is felt appropriate and necessary that such Solicitor be from an
external firm and arrangements have been made for Mr Gregory from
Messrs Keeble Hawsons to represent such individuals as Mr Gregory
has been dealing with this topic on behalf of the Council's Insurers
and is therefore fully aware of all the background to this matter.

If anyone is unclear as to what the position is then please come and
have a chat with me.




Circulationt


Councillor   Aslam, Councillor Butler, Councillor Chadwick,
Councillor   Ms J Fiore, Councillor Hussain, Councillor P H Jackson
Councillor   Lamb, Councillor Moscrop, Councillor Mrs Mulhearn
Councillor   Mrs P Nelson, Councillor Saunders, Councillor Mrs E Smith
Councillor   Mrs Walton, Councillor White




cc     Councillor C J C Betts
       Councillor J Fiore
       Councillor P Nelson
       Councillor H A Knight
       D M Bownes
       Building Surveyor
       D Purehon
       P Knovrle-s
Acting Head ©f Department!                  Councillor C S C Sett*
Administration and Legal                    Leader

31 August 1909
AH / m
4018 - Mr Webster




h iu l s b o r o o g h


I attach, for what it's worth , a copy of a brief article which appeared
in the 22 August edition of "the lawyer* setting oat certain comments
from the Lawyers representing the Claimants in the Hillsborough matter.


cc           Councillor J Flore
             Councillor P Nelson
             3 6 Ward
             P woodhead
             D M Bownes
sters form                                                                                   we w ould have an o th er year to do
                                                                                             th a t.”
                                                                                                                                           b een unaffected by th e changes.
                                                                                                                                              T h e dom estic conveyancing re ­
                                                                                                K en t has b e e n particularly hit by     cru itm ent m a rk e t has also becom e
‘iation to                                                                                   th e slum p in th e residential sector,       stagnant.
                                                                                             following its spectacular boom last              “ T here is no recru itm en t in this
 et services                                                                                 year.
                                                                                                B ut firm s are suffering th ro u g h ­
                                                                                                                                           field in L on d o n o r in G re a te r
                                                                                                                                           L o n d o n ,” said A listair D ou g all of
  have form ed a C om -                                                                      o u t th e H o m e C ounties and the          Q u arry D ougall R ecruitm ent.
 ar A ' ">ciation (C O M -                                                                   p roblem s are spreading up to E ast          “ P eople are leaving firm s an d
nar!      ieir services,                                                                     A nglia and th e M idlands.                   m any o f them are trying to get into
 up has a m em bership of                                                                       Several firm s are rep o rted to be        com m ercial conveyancing.”
sters from 21 sets of                                                                        laying off residential p rop erty                A t p resen t there is a b uoyant
al cham bers. Its chair-                                                                     staff, m any m o re are expected to           d em an d for com m ercial con ­
vid Steel Q C.                                                                               do so an d one firm in E ast A nglia is       veyancing.
ociation will co-ordinate               Leigh: substantial cutbacks                          rep o rte d to b e o n a four-day w eek.      Neasa MacErlean
nt and training, as well
ing an u n d erstand ing of
 com m ercial B ar does,
ly     am on g     foreign              Convictions ‘unlikely*
 A R has n o voice o n the
cil, and was form ed with
if th e C om m on L aw and
:ial B ar A ssociation.
                                        in Hillsborough inquiry
  V e e d e r Q C , a m em b er         Law yers acting for th e fam ilies in                b ereav ed an d inju red. “B ecause
>MBAR executive com-                    th e H illsb orou gh d isaster are                   of the e m o tio n s surrounding the
 id it was form ed to take              w arning th a t th e re will be no                   disaster, the evidence has to be
; o f th e o pportu n ities             successful p rosecutions arising o ut                very substantial to have any
r th e W hite P ap er o n the           o f the crim inal investigation                      chance th a t th e ju ry will convict.”
essions, and by 1992.                   o rd ered by th e D ire c to r o f Public               H e ad d s th at H illsborough             Hillsborough: police heavily criticised
 ied th e com m ercial Bar              Prosecutions last w eek.                             should n o t be com pared too close­
iten ' ^y the loss o f its                 T h e D P P o rd e re d th e investiga­           ly with Z e e b ru g g e , w here P & O       only result has been that the
f.u          .a v e n o m o n o p o -   tio n follow ing L o rd Justice                      directo rs w ere charged with m an ­          inquests have b een ad jo u rn ed
   com m ercial co u rt and             T ay lo r’s in terim re p o rt in to the             slaughter. “ Civil negligence is one          indefinitely,” he said.
 not in arb itratio n s, yet            events leading to th e 95 d eath s                   thing b u t crim inal responsibility             B u t H illsborough Solicitors
 are sent across th e w orld            w hich heavily criticised th e p o lic e .           a n o th er. T h is is different from         G ro u p steering com m ittee m e m ­
  in a rb itra tio n .”                     B ut law yers acting fo r th e vic­              Z eeb ru g g e w h ere th e re w ere          b e r N icola H arrison o f L iverpool
n t & C o n stan t p a rtn e r           tim s an d th e ir fam ilies a re divided           b reaches o f reg u latio n s,” he said.      firm M ace & Jo n es, is m o re
n E cclestone said City                  over w hat p u rp o se th e investiga­                  A n o th e r solicitor acting for the     hopeful. “ W e will have to w a ita n d
  n o t see th e g ro u p as a           tion will serve.                                    fam ilies, Sir H a rry L iverm ore said       see w h at hap pen s. If charges do
C O M B A R could be an                     “ A t th e e n d o f th e d a y , th e re will   th e investigation should be p o st­          lead to a co nviction, it will certain­
    pressure g ro u p on                 be n o successful p ro se c u tio n s,”             po n ed . “ T h e tim ing is horrible. It     ly ad d w eight to th e civil actions we
ins and th e com m ercial                said L iverp ool solicitor R ex                      is very u n fo rtu n a te th a t the D P P   are bringing against the police and
e added.                                 M akin, w ho is acting fo r 124 o f th e             has b e e n called in at this stage. T h e   th e clu b ,” she said.



inancial Services 6 • Update 14 • Appointments 15
             AH/GW


              31 August 1989


A H Gregory Bag
Messrs Keeble Hawson
Solicitors
Old Cathedral Vicarage
St James' Row
SHEFFIELD
Si 1XA


Dear Tony

r e s HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY

with reference to your letter of 24 August I have pleasure in enclosing
a copy of the response to the "Liverpool" article as prepared jointly
by ourselves and Michael Murphy.

Yours sincerely




MARK WEBSTER
Acting Bead of Department                       734018
                                            KEEBLE HAWSON
                                                       SOLICITORS
                                            Incorporating Branson Bramley & Co.

A. H. GREGORY             N.   T. HAWSON                                              OLD CATHEDRAL VICARAGE,
C. J. PRYCE               G.   CONNELL
P. A. SEALEY              A.   J. COOMBE
K. L. WEBSTER             C.   M. M. AYRE                                                        ST.JAMES' ROW,
M. A. PLATT
                                                                                                            SHEFFIELD,
Consultant:
A. H. CONNELL
                                                                                                                       S1 1XA.

           Mr M Webster                                                               TELEPHONE 0742-722061

           Ac t i n g Head
                                                                                      MDX NO. 10537
           C i t y of S h e f f i e l d M D C
                                                                                      FAX NO. 0 7 4 2 - 7 0 0 8 1 3
           Legal & Administration Department
                                                                                       FAX NO. 0 7 4 2 - 7 5 0 2 4 3
           TOWN HALL
           Sheffield
                                                                                         24th A u g u s t               1989

                                                                                      WHEN YOU TELEPHONE OR CALL PLEASE ASK FOR:
OUR REF:


                                            An                                           MR GREGORY




           Dear Mark


           Hillsborough             Inquiry


           I r e f e r to yo ur l e t t e r of the 2 4 t h A u g u s t a n d our s u b s e q u e n t
           telephone conversation.                      I a m h a p p y to h e a r t hat y o u h a v e
           i n s t r u c t e d M i c h a e l M u r p h y to r e s p o n d . I w i l l be i n t e r e s t e d
           t o see a c o p y of th e r e s p o n s e in d ue course.

           Yours    sincerely




           A H GREGORY —
                                                                j-                    £s
           KEEBLE HAWSON



                                                                         25. AUG      89




                         THE FIRM IS REGULATED BY THE LAW SOCIETY IN THE CONDUCT OF INVESTMENT BUSINESS
                             742738955               SHEFF     UTD    FC                     25/08   '89   17:28    P . 01




                         Sheffield^
                         UnHedFm               "The Family Out"
                                                                                                           cc
                                                                                                                *889


                                                                                                                   i) M 6

                        BnunalJ Lane, Sheffield $2 4SU Telephone: (0742) 7389SS
                                                                                                                   FvJ ISO
                                                                                  Fax; 0742 723030




                                                                     FACSIM ILE

                                !   AH ' i '    'r        \
        TO:        I*           I                    ocihf J                                         ooj
                                                                                  FAX NO:



        F fK M :



        m u              xA M                                                        TIME:    ^



        NO. OF PAGES:


        MESSAGE:




D irector*; R.^Br**l«y (Chairman), D. Dooley (ManagingDirector), A.H.Lav#r,            M.A. Wragg, R, Wr*gg, P.G. Woolhoui*
             Company 5*cr«i«ry : GMNMtb,        Tft*m M*rmg»v : D.T.                        England K*g. No, 61864
                                         f-v^>v-«ije
                            ‘TJu Fmrnty dub”
  BramaU Lane, Sheffield S2 4SU Tel: 0742 738986 Fax: 0742 723030


   DC/EMF


   25 August 1939


   M, WwbrJter, Esq.,
   Acting Head nf Department,
   Administration ft Legal Department,
   Town Hall,
   Sheffield,
   SI 2 W


   Dear Sir,

   f^FBTY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - ANNUAL INSPECTION - OFFICERS REPORT

   With reference to your lot ter of 17 August, I would confirm
   that many of the conments made therein have been dealt with
   as part of our normal maintenance programme.

   Work is continuing on thotsa Items which have not as yet been
   dealt with and a progranme of work drawn up.

   We anticipate that the majority of the necessary work will be
   completed prior to ournext home game on Saturday, 9 September,

   Yours fa ith fu lly ,



   lav in a m i ,
   Oirjjrmy Ser.retaiy




K.J- Brwtoy (Chmirm*n), D, D<X>l*y (MwtAsiins DJ**«or), A.H, U v tr, MA Wi«y», R W nge, P.O. Woottiouw*
 Company Seemtwy : D. C *pp«,          T*un Mutagmr : D,T. BwMtt,       Engknd R«g. Ho. 01864
Acting Head of Department                          JG Ward
                                                   Principal Solicitor
25 August 1989                                     ce F Woodhead
AH/GW                                                 D M Bownes
4018 - Mr Webster




HILLSBOROUGH * FOTtTCE ACTIO*
During a recant discussion with Councillor Betts he asked what was going to
happen with regard to the terrace where the disaster occurred which was now
closed for the foreseeable future. Amongst the Items discussed was the fact
that it seamed to me that as the tunnel leading to that area had been the subject
of criticism In the Taylor Report immediate action would have to be taken
before further use of that tunnel could be allowed*
After further discussion Councillor Betts suggested that it might be appropriate,
for example, to consider taking down all the radial fencing as a first measure
and to substantially increase the size of the gates in the pitch perimeter fencing
and that, if it was necessary, to close the tunnel, to remove the perimeter fencing
in the pens facing the turaiel and to secure against pitch invasions by additional
policing methods as he felt that the South Yorkshire Police were possibly
overstating the protritoms, given that the Metropolitan Police had managed to
control crowds at the Arsenal and West Ham grounds which do not have pitch
perimeter fences.
Accordingly,! would be grateful if you would let me know in due course where
the discussion is with regard to the possible remedial action on the terrace
and whether thought has been given to those issues now raised by Councillor
Betts.
                             4273®955           SHEFF        UTD   FC                      25/08      ’ 89   10:03        P . 01




                      ShBttieUi                                                                                     .oj   m   T.




                      UnitadFCk         "The Family Club.it
                     Bramall Lane, Sheffield S2 4SU Telephone: (0742)738955
                                                                               Fax: 0742 733030                  nrG /\ Cfl-S
                                                                                                             ^                     S

                                                                                                             I>UAi})                   )


                                                                   FACSIMILE
                               r     ■ -v it>           <J

        TO:        'iWOJKl    ilU 'fa i         t\t<                           FAX NO:


        KRi to:


        D A V ii                                                                  TIME *     Id itZ




        NO, OF PAGES
                AGES:         ^


        MESSAGE:




Director* ; R.J, B r«l#y (Ch*im*n), D. Dod*y (Mju\*ging Diroctoi!, A.H. Lav«r, M.A. Wr*gg, K. W rtgg, P.O. WooiAouai
             Company S «cr«ttry: GNMNMRb,          T « m M»i«g»r : D.T. B**«*n,     SngUnd R«g. No. 61864
                               "The Famfy Cfub"
 Bram&l] Lane, Sheffield S2 4SU Tel: 0742 73895S Fax: 0743 723030



  ft;/IMF


   25   A u gust 1 989


  M. Webster, Esq.,
  Ac 11ng Heid n f Depnr tnient,
  Administration 8 Legal Department,
  Town Kail,
   Sheffield,
   SI 2HH


   Dear Sir.

   RADIAL     F B C E S / B ARRIERS   AT   TMB_ THE SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB

   Further to your letter of 21 August, I formally request that
   the Council consider the removal of various fences and barriers
   at our Bramall Lane Stadium as detailed In Dr. Eastwood's letter
   to you, dated 17 August, 1989 a copy of which is enclosed herewith.

   Yours faithfully,



   M V in CAPPEK,
   Company S e c r e t a r y




R.J. Br«al«y (Chairman), D. Dooley (Managing Director), A.H L»v*r, M.A W'ragg, R. WiUgg, P.C. Woolhout*
 Company S«cr«!ary: D, Capper,         Te*in           ■ D.T. B ow tl, England Reg, No, 01094
                             S        074273S955                ' SHEFF          UTD    FC                                 25/0 S       ' S9    10:04     P . 03




 E A S T W O O D 8t PARTNERS                                                                                                         St. Andrew* Howm
              (ConaultlnQ E n g i n t i n )                                                                                          23 Klngflald Road
                                                                                                                                     Sh*<f|*ld S11 fA t
 W, fc**iwood                    f Eng . fi.Eng . Pn,0 , 0 t o o ,
                                                                                                                                     Tol.s (0742) 984114
                                 C Eng , FIC f . P.P.I Struct £.,                                                                    F»*i (0742) »M230
                                 F.l M«c»< E     F G S , M .C p n . E.
A.A.Wood                         B Eng . PhD , C Sne . F.t.C.E.,
                                 f i.Stroci t , MI W,f M . MCoo* F
                                                                                                                                                            #»*d«t:
B.C.A.Eastwood                   9 Sc C Eng MI C-E-. F 1Strutt.£
G S p fr                         C          f ! C S , M I Much E                                                                        Pramiar          H«u<i
C .S < S r # fiV B *             ft Er.fl   C Fog . M t . C f    M i S'.^r.F
                                                                                                                                         12M3 H*»ton Oankn
                                                                                                                                        London      KC1N     SAM
8 . Pr««ton                      B.enfl., C.Eng., MI.C.fc . Ml Struct 6
                                                                                                                                        Tal.s <01) 243 74M
G .M . Seaman                    B Sc., C.enj., M.t C £.. f I Struct E                                                                  Pm.: {01} 404 9424
 0.6. Stephen*                   r.         r.i c f f i Suuei t          f   6 i.M
                                                                                                     Out Hof                   W E / AV/11238
                                                                                                     Your H»f
                                                                                                                               17 August 1989

M r . D . Downes,
Administration and Legal Department,
Town H a l l ,
Sheffield SI 2HB

Dear Mr. B o w n e s ,

                                             Sheffield United Football Club
                                            Action Post-Taylor Interim Report
                   At the request of the Police,                                                   a meeting with Club representatives
was held this afternoon to discuss a radial barrier and the three radial
fences,            amongst other things.                                               The meeting was attended by a
representative of the Fire Service and two representatives of the
Sheffield City Council Building Surveyors Department,                                                                                  in addition to Mr.
D, Dooley and Mr. D. Capper representing the Club.                                                                                  I was present at
the later part of the discussions following the meeting of the General
Purposes Panel at the Town Hall earlier in the afternoon.
                   The Police representatives expressed disquiet about the effects
of the fences and the barrier on crowd movement in the event of an
emergency,               and requested that they be removed.
                   Dealing with the Kop end first, there is a continuous radial
fence from top to bottom of the Kop which was erected in 1980.                                                                                                It has
a gate at the horizontal gangway approximately half way down the Kop.
The fence is situated some distance to the south of the goal line
dividing the Kop roughly two-thirds and one third.
                   When the crowd is leaving the ground at the end of a game, it is
noticeable that this radial fence causes a considerable obstruction to
those people trying to leave at the John Street/Shoreham Street corner,
and in particular creates a bottleneck at the top of the Kop.


 J. A. Strange           A. J. Clough                           R. Tandy                     J. M, Wood             C.M. Pollard                R. K.Goddon
 Clng.. JfJ.SlfUCt.fi.   B.A., C.Enj) , MC-I P.Se ,             C.fna. F.l.Struet.E.         B Ss Clog , Mi C.E.,   6.Eng., C.EnQ., M.I.C.E.,   FS.C.A. (Aiwgrttim
                                                                                             Ml Struct f.           Ml Strutt.E                 &AdtniniitrMioni

                                             An Unlim ited Company, Registered in frtgland - No. 1833144
                8   0742733955   SHEFF   UTD   FC        25/08   '89   16:05   P . 64




 BAiTWOOD * PARTNER*                                              sheet 2.



The situation would obviously be worse in an emergency.                The Police
feel strongly that the fence should be taken out as they believe the
original purpose of trying to segregate fans at that end of the ground
no longer applies.          The view was supported by the Fire Service and I
believe that    the Building Surveyors Department      representatives also
thought that    on balance it should be taken out.        X am also infavour
of removing the fence.
           A barrier at the Kop end of the ground consists of a single
rail running between the tops of the successive lines of crush barriers
from the horizontal gangway to the perimeter fence.              It is offset
slightly to the north of the centre line of the pitch and would clearly
be an obstacle to people and spectators trying to move away in the event
of an emergency or crowd trouble in the area immediately behind the goal.
It was felt that it has very little purpose as there has been no history
of horizontal crowd surges in the Kop in recent years, mainly I believe
because of the very beneficial effects of the very good array of
continuous horizontal lines of crush barriers.           There is also a very
short   length of single rail barrier running down from the horizontal
gangway,    almost immediately behind the goal,
           Turning now to the Bramall Lane terrace,      there are two fences
which run from the columns supporting the front of the new stand down
to the perimeter fence.           One of these is located at the northernmost
column and the other one is three bays along from the north end.                        To
complete the picture, there used to be a third fence at the south end
of the Bramall Lane stand but this was removed          some years ago.             It may
be that that third fence is still shown on the drawings which
accompanied the very first application for a Safety Certificate, but
it is no longer present.
           These remaining two fences at the Bramall Lane end are also
considered by the Police to present a potential hazard in emergency,
and have negligible effect in preventing lateral crowd surges.
           The Club has accepted the advice put forward by the P o l i c e ,
with my concurrence,        and has asked me to write formally requesting
permission to remove the three fences and the two barriers.
           The Police view is that having established that there is
p os s ib l y a safety hazard arising from the presence of these fences and
                                                                                  25/68   ’ 89    10*05    P■6 5
                        S   0?427'3S955      SHEFF   UTD   FC




J iA S T W O G ®    %   PARTNERS                                                          SHEET      3 .




barrier,           it is desirable that they should be removed at an early date,
1 think that in the post-Taylor report climate that is a proper
attitude.               There will be no first team fixtures between Saturday,
26 August and Saturday,                      9 September 1989.              That gives a convenient
two weeks window in which the work could be carried out,                                             I believe
that we could make the necessary arrangements on behalf of the Club
for the work to be done provided that the City Council can give
authority by Friday,                      25 August.
              It is realised, of course,                        that    it may   not be possible for
the    General              Purposes Committee to consider the                   matter at        such short
notice.             In that case there will be a further gap of rather more
than two weeks between a home match on Tuesday,                                  26 September,             and
the next home league match on Saturday,                                 14 October.
              l am arranging for six copies off each of a plan                                    of the Kop
and    a plan of the Bramall Lane terrace to be coloured up                                       and
forwarded to you by tomorrow’s post.                                   There was not sufficient time
to have       these printed and coloured this evening.



                                                                         Yours sincerely.




Copies to.
Sheffield United Football Club - Mr. D. Capper
Sheffield United Football Club - Mr. D. Dooley
South Yorkshire Police
               *



fU   7   d )
Sheffield Wednesday
             Football Club PLC




our Ref:      GHM/JB/D34

24th August 1989


Mr. M. Webster,
Acting Head of Department,
City of Sheffield,
Administration and Legal Department,
Town Hall,
Sheffield.
SI 2HH


Dear Mr. Webster,

Re;   Annual Inspection - Officers Comments

I am in receipt of your letter dated 17th August 1989.

As you will appreciate the schedule provided is comprehensive and requires
clarification on many points.

We have met the Fire Service and have arranged site meetings with the Local
Authority Surveyors Department and Health and Consumer Services.

Once these meetings have taken place we will be in a position to report,
hopefully within the next seven days,

Yours sincerely,




G.H. Mackrell




            Hillsborough, Sheffield S6 iSW
Tel: (0742) 343122 Grams: W ednesday Sheffield 6.                                                                   Cc    HU,
 Telex No. 547709 WEDNES Fax No. 0742 337145                                                                              U
                                                                                                           •WV:"          A
                    Chairm an: H. E, McGee, Secretary: G. H. Mackrell, F.C.C.A.. M anager: R Atkinson •$[■*
Directors: M, Sheppard, J.P., F.C.A. (Vice-Chairm an), S. L. Speight, O.B.E., C. W oodward, K.T. Addy, E. Bgnron,   G. K. Hulley.
                                                 Registered in England No. 62478
       Sheffield Wednesday
                    Football Club PLC




        Our Ref:      GHM/JB/D34/

        24th August 1989


        Mr. M. Webster,
        Acting Head of Department,
        City of Sheffield,
        Administration and Legal Department,
        Town Hall,
        Sheffield.
        SI 2HH


        Dear Mr. Webster,

       Re:    Safety of Sports Grounds

        I am in receipt of your letter dated 21st August 1989.

       I would be pleased to show the General Purposes Panel of the City Council round
       Hillsborough and will await contact from you to arrange a mutually convenient
       date and time.

B      Yours sincerely,




    C ^ S T h T Mackrell
         Secretary      ■




                   H illsborough, Sheffield S6 1SW.
       Tel: (0742) 343122 Grams: W ednesday Sheffield 6.
        Telex No. 547709 WEDNES Fax No. 0742 337145

                           Chairm an: H, E. McGee, Secretary: G. H. Mackrell, F.C.C.A,, M anager: R Atkinson
       Directors; M. Sheppard, J.P., F.C.A, (Vice-Chairm an), S. L. Speight, O.B.E., C. W oodward, K.T, Addy, E. Barron,   G. K. Hulley,
                                                        Registered in England No. 62478
Sheffield Wednesday
              Football Club PLC




Our Ref:        GHM/JB/D34

24th August 1989


Mr. M. Webster,
Acting Head of Department,
City of Sheffield,
Administration and Legal Department,
Town Hall,
Sheffield.
SI 2HH


Dear Mr. Webster,

Re:     Capacity of Standing Accommodation on the Kop

I am in receipt of your letter dated 16th August 1989.

Please find enclosed a copy of a letter to me from Eastwood & Partners together
with a copy of drawing 11237/5, setting out details of the capacity calculations.

Yours sincerely,




 ;.#r'1?iacRT«4vl
.Secretary




   t        Hillsborough, Sheffield S6 1SW.
Tel: (0742) 343122 Grams: W ednesday Sheffield 6.
  Telex No. 547709 WEDNES Fax No. 0742 337145
                     Chairm an: H. E. McGee, Secretary: G. H. Mackrell, F.C.C.A., M anager: R Atkinson
       Drs: M. Sheppard, J.P„ F.CA, (Vice-Chairm an), S. L. Speight, O.B.E., C. W oodward, K.T. Addy, E. Barron,   G. K. Hulley.
                                                Registered in England No. 62478
                                                                                                                                                                                       11




                                                                                                                                                   S t.   A n d re w s    H ouse
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS
                                                                                                                                                   23     K in g fie ld     Road
                (Consulting Engineers)
                                                                                                                                                   S h e ffie ld    S11      9AS
D irecto rs :
                                                                                                                                                   T e l.: (0 7 4 2 )     554554
W . E a s tw o o d                F. Eng . B.Eng. , Ph. D. , D. Eng. .
                                                                                                                                                   F a x : (0 7 4 2 )     554330
                                  C . E n g. . F. I. C. E. , P. P. I .St ruct .E. .
                                  F . I . M e c h . E . , F . G . S. , M. C on s . E.

A. A. W ood                       B.Eng. . Ph. D. . C. Eng. . F. I. C. E. ,
                                  F. I. St ru ct .E . M . I . W . E . M . , M . C on s . E                                                                                  and at :
R .C . A . E a s tw o o d         B. Sc. . C. Eng. , M i .C. E. , F. I .St ruct E
                                                                                                                                                      Premier       House
G .S p ir                         C. Eng. , F. I. C. E. . M . I . M e c h . E .
                                                                                                                                                      12/13 Hatton Garden
C .S .G r e a v e s               B.Eng. , C. Eng. , M. I . C . E . , M .I . S t r u c t . E
                                                                                                                                                      London EC1N 8AN
S . P re s to n                   B. Eng. . C. Eng. . M .I . C . E . , M .I . St r uc t .E .                                                          Tel.: (01) 2 4 2 7436
G .M . Seam an                    B. Sc. . C. Eng. . M l . C . E . . F. I. St ruct. E.                                                                Fax.: (01) 4 0 4 5424
D .S . S te p h e n s             C. Eng. , F. I. C. E. , F. I. St ruct. E. , F. B. I .M.


                                                                                                                 Our R e f :                   WE/KB/11789
                                                                                                                 Y our Ref :



The Secretary,                                                                                                                              22 August 1989
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club PLC,
Hillsborough,
Sheffield S6 1SW.



Dear Graham,
                                         Safety of Sports Grounds Act
                               Lord Justice Taylor's Recommendations
                       Capacity of Standing Accommodation on the Kop

                As requested I have pleasure in enclosing information for
transmission to Sheffield City                                                                     Council regarding the capacity
of the Kop as it exists at present when calculated in strict
accordance with the Green Guide and when the Green Guide figure
is reduced by 15%.
                Attached is a coloured up print of our drawing 11237/5 on which
the areas which are properly protected by crush barriers are marked
 in blue.                     It will be seen that on some parts of the old Kop there
are white areas where the rows of barriers are too far apart
or whether there are gaps in barriers.
                The blue areas have a total area of 3893.7m2 which gives a
permitted capacity of 21,026.                                                                      After a reduction of 15% this
gives a total of 17,872.

                                                                                                        Yours sincerely,




   Associates:
                               A . J. C lo u g h                                R. T a n d y             J. M. W ood                C. M . P ollard             R. K. Godden
   J. A . S tra n g e
                                                                                C.Eng., F.I.Struct.E.    B.Sc., C.Eng., M.I.C.E.,    B.Eng., C.Eng,, M.LC.E.,   F.S.C.A. (Accountant
   C .E n g., F.I.Struct.E.    B.A.,C.Eng.,M .C.t.B.S.E.,
                                                                                                         M .t.Struct.E.             •M.I.Struct.E.              & Administration
                               M.IJtfech.E.
                                                                                                                                                                M anager)

                                                      An Unlimited Company. Registered in England - No. 1833144
^DojvJi'cL   £)0\yOK^



 kl(LQj/V§J<
            AH/6W


            24 August 1989


The Editor
The Municipal Journal


Dear Sir*

I was surprised and rather saddened to read the article by Mr Norman
Bush in the Municipal Journal on the 18th August 1989, In aoewenting
upon the Interim Report of Lord Justice Taylor and in suggesting the
approach whieh should be adopted in the future to the safety of sports
grounds he suggests that the members of local authorities and the
administrators should delegate what he describes as, "the real technical
task" to the Building Surveyor.

Mr Bush directs fierce criticism at Sheffield City Council for not
involving a Building Surveyor in the discharge of its licensing
functions under the Safety of Sports Groups Act 1975. Re saysj-

       *The Health and Consumer Services Officer (presumably an expert
       on the priee and freedom from food poisoning of the meat pies
       consumed at half time was involved, but no Building Surveyor*.

The Building Surveyor was and still is one of the members of the
multi-disciplinary advisory group whieh performed inspections of sports
grounds in this area and which reported its findings and made its
recommendations to the elected members of the local authority.       To
suggest that the Building Surveyor was not Involved is quite simply
wrong*   To go on to say that the Sheffield City Council's evidence
did not even get the title of the Building Surveyor right unfortunately
displays the fact that Hr Bush has simply not read the City Council's
evidence. The mistake in terminology was not a mistake made by this
Counoil.

The Interim Report recommends, intar-alia, that loeal authorities
should ensure that an accountable administrative structure exists,
"Whereby the functions of the local authority are regularly and
effectively supervised by senior officer® and elected members and
deolslons are properly taken in accordance with the local authority's
rules”. The general proposal made by Mr Bush seems dlreetly contrary
to that reeoMRendation. The dangers of delegating the functions
involved to one party must surely be obvious. The Fire Service, the
Police, the Ambulance Service and the Bnvironmental Health Officers
all have a part to play in what Hr Bush describes as *the real technical
task*.

                                               Mr Webster -
                                               734018
Tha Bnvironmental Health Officers of this Authority are certainly
not n*p«iiiblt for meat pies as Mr Bash somewhat facetiously remark*.
They, togathar with tha Building Surveyor's Department, the Police
and the Fire and Ambulance services join forces to make up the advisory
group.    The  administration of    the system rested within the
Administration and Legal Department under the auspioes of the Chief
Licensing Officer.   Vo say that officers were not accountable is
erroneous*

The   tragedy of     Hillsborough did reveal      shortcomings  in the
administrative system operated in Sheffield*      The City Council, no
doubt like many other Councils, has taken fully into account the
recommendations made in the Interim Report.        Already changes have
been made and this Council intends to build upon and improve its
existing administrative arrangements. Safety Management is, we believe,
a multi"-disciplinary matter and no one profession has all the necessary
expertise* The Building Surveyor will continue to be one of several
experts whose views are taken into account but 1 would suggest that
the Council must use all the skills available to it rather than
attempting the kind of delegation suggested by Mr Bush. I sincerely
hope that other authorities %cill exercise caution before considering
the adoption of the procedure suggested by Mr Bush. They are a recipe
for disaster.

Yours faithfully




Acting Head of Department
JU»ting iMd of Sapudtamti                               Director of Works
A M M itn tiw n d te y il
24 Angust 1939
AH/W
4018 - Nr Webster




ASShRSQiSSmSBwSww^




                     g xsft89m «*   vossxasui M t c m in n MOCMBSIVBS

In light of the findings of the *aylor Report (copy enclosed) it is
necessary for consideration to bo given as to whether or not Council
Offloors, either within this DoportMont or tho othor departswwita who
supply information to and forn port of tho Officor Working Group which
advises Heathers on tho safety of sportsgrounds should bo tho subject
of disciplinary proceedings os a rosult of tho oircuMstances which
appertained o b that unfortunate day.

Whilst Z have given sosMt thought to this topic X h a w not taken it
vary far in light of first of all tho need to deal with tho inquiry
and not to pre*|udge its conclusions and now of course thoro is tho
second Inquiry on potential criminal liability basis by tho Director
of Vublio Prosecutions. However, it eeeae to m that notwithstanding
thoso factors thoro ought to bo gonoral oonsidoration given as to
whether or not thoro aro any priaa faolo basis for tho ooamoneoiMttt
of disolplinary proooduro against any offioors of tho Authority.

 Xa light of tho oloso involvement of tho Bepartaent for whioh x an
 now rosponslblo in tho proooss X think it is inportant that sensene
 also takes a hard# objootiwo look at tho activities to data in ordor
 to c o m to at loast a preliminary view as to whothor or not such
 proceedings nay bo warranted and l would therefore bo grateful if
 you would oonaider carrying out this task* Ho doubt when you have
 had an opportunity to consider this witter you will wish to disouss
 this eeswualeatlon with ae and if you agree to undertake the matter
 to disouss how it is best dealt with under the oiromstanoes.

 X look forward to hearing txom you shortly.




 oo          Councillor C J C Betts# Leader
             Councillor 1 A Knight
             Mrs B Bashforth, Principal Solicitor, Coowon X>aw
              AH/GW


             24 August 1989


A Gregory
Messrs Keeble Hawson
Solicitors
Old Cathedral Vicarage
St James* Row
SHEFFIELD 1


Dear Tony

res HIMtSBOROOGH - H Q D I K I Bf DPP

As you are aware the Director of Public Prosecutions has recently
announced that he intends to inquire into the circumstances surrounding
the Hillsborough Disaster through the medium of the West Midlands
Police.

Whilst I believe it is unlikely that proceedings will be taken against
Council officers and even more unlikely Council Members I nevertheless
feel that it would be appropriate for me to make arrangements to have
legal representation for anyone who may be interviewed as part of
this criminal investigation.

Accordingly, I would be grateful if you could confirm that in the
event of an approach being made to a Council officer and/or Council
Member you will be willing, in view of your previous experience with
this topic, to act on behalf of such individuals in the form of
tendering advice and representing them in relation to this topic.

Yours sincerely




MARK WEBSTSR
Acting Bead of Department




cc      M r ________ Barrister at Law
        Mrs B Bashforth# Principal Solicitor, Common Law




                                                  734018
Acting Head of Department:                  Councillor G J C Batts
Administration and Legal                    Leader
                                            Councillor H A Knight
24 August 1989
AH/GW
4018 - Hr Webster




Further to our brief conversation of Monday 21 August in connection
with the above matter# X now attachr for your information and attention,
a copy of my reply to the recent communication from the Liverpool
City Solicitor requesting, as you indicated, clarification of various
issues before the Authority to consider responding to their invitation*

z will, of course# contact you immediately X hear anything further
from their Authority.



cc     Director of Health and Consumer Services
       Director of Social Services
       City Treasurer
City of Sheffield           M etropolitan District

Roger Pensam, MBIM, Solicitor                                                             A d m in is tra tio n a n d Legal D e p a rtm e n t
Head of Department
                                                                                          Town Hall,
                                                                                          Sheffield S1 2HH

Our reference     AH/G W

Your reference    S S /G P D /K H

Date              23 August         1989


City Solicitor
Liverpool City Council
PO Box No 88
Municipal Buildings
Dale Street
LIVERPOOL
L69 2DH


 Dear Sir

 HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

 I thank you for your letter of 16 August concerning the above topic,
 it has been passed to Senior Members of my Authority for their
 consideration.

 In the interim I believe it is appropriate that I take this opportunity
 of drawing your attention to the concern that Members of my Authority
 have regarding certain statements made by the Leader of your Authority
 on the issue of the responsibility of Members of the City Council
 in either their capacity as Members of the Authority or as members
 of the Police Authority and that they would welcome clarification
 of such statements.    Further, they would also like to know whether
 it is being suggested that the official position of your Authority
 is that such Members should resign as a result of the recent decision
 to allow the Chief Constable to remain in post.

 In addition, my Members are also very concerned at the tenor and content
 of a recent article in the Municipal Journal prepared by an officer
 of your Authority (copy enclosed) and again I have been asked to obtain
 clarification as to whether the comments expressed in such article
 are those of the Authority as such article has caused considerable
 offence to both officers and Members of the City Council.

 I look forward to receiving clarification of these issues shortly.

 Yours faithfully______ ______________




 MARK W EBSTER
 Acting Head of Department

                                                                                       734018
                        For telephone enquiries on this matter please r in g .....................................(STD Code 0742)
                                                      Telex 54243 (Administration & Legal)
Acting Bead of Departmenti                      Members of the OF Fanel
Administration and Legal                        (See Circulation Below)

24 August 1989
m /m
4018 * Mr Webster




HTIJ.SBOBtOllGH ©tMUHHBI - DIK8CTP0® 0P V0S&XC PBOSBCOTIOWS IHQUIftK

As you are probably aware from recent newpaper and other press
announcements the Director of Public Prosecutions has decided# not
surprisingly# to carry out an investigation into the circumstances
surrounding the Hillsborough Disaster with a view to deciding whether
or not there is any criminal responsibility on the part of any of
the persons involved*

whilst X am of the view that such investigations are only likely to
involve the City Council# its Menfoers and Officers# peripherally X
nevertheless think it is appropriate that arrangements be made in
the event of approaches being made to individuals to take statements
either under caution or otherwise as part of such investigation*

In such circumstances the procedure is that the person approached,
be it a Member or an Officer# should immediately ring myself or, if
I am not available# Mrs Bashforth on extension 4059# or Mr Ward on
extension 4001# or Mrs Woodhead on extension 4004# to discuss the
circumstances of the approach and to make arrangements for a Solicitor
to be present at the actual interview*

Xt is felt appropriate and necessary that such Solicitor be from an
external firm and arrangements have been made for Mr Gregory from
Messrs Keeble Rawsons to represent such individuals as Mr Gregory
has been dealing with this topic on behalf of the Council’s Insurers
and is therefore fully aware of all the background to this matter.

If anyone is unclear as to what the position is then please come and
have a chat with me*




sysssdjES&ER*


Councillor   Aslam# Councillor Butler# Councillor Chadwick#
Councillor   Ms 3 Fiore# Councillor Hussain* Councillor F H Jackson
Councillor   Lamb# Councillor Moacrop# Councillor Mrs Mulhearn
Councillor   Mrs P Kelson# Councillor Saunders, Councillor Mrs 8 Smith
Councillor   Mrs Walton# Councillor white



cc      Councillor C J C Betts
        Councillor 3 Flore
        Councillor F Nelson
        Councillor 8 A Knight
        0 M Bownes
        Building Surveyor
        0 Furchon
        It Knowles
                                                            "The Family Out"                                                                                  Ue
                      BramaU Lane, Sheffield S2 4SU Tel: 0742 738955 Fax: 0742 723030                                                                                    ]/

                       DC/EMF

                                                                                                                             f ror^ca sj C X U A c f
                       24 August 1989


                      M. Webster, Esq.,
                      Acting Head of Department,
                      Administration 8 Legal Department,
                      Town Hal1,
                      Sheffield,
                      SI 2HH


                      Dear Sir,

                      Re: Safety of Sports Ground

                      Please find enclosed report prepared by Eastwood 8 Partners on
                      the capacities for the Spion Kop, Bramall Lane and John Street
                      terraces calculated in accordance with the Green Guide.

                      If you require any further information please contact me.

                      Yours faithfully,



                      D W 1 D CAPPER,
                      Company Secretary




                                                                                                                      2 5. AUG




D ire c to rs :   R.J. B re a le y (C hairm an),    D . D o o le y (M anaging D ire c to r),   A .H . L a v e r,   M .A . W ra g g ,   R. W ra g g ,   P .G . W o olh ou se
                   C o m p an y S e c reta ry : D . C a p p e r,        T eam M a n a g e r : D .T . Bassett,             En glan d R eg. N o . 61564
m   .EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                                                                                                              S t. A n d rew s H ouse
                 (Consulting Engineers)                                                                                               2 3 K in g fie id R o ad
                                                                                                                                      S h e ffie ld S11 9 A S
    Directors:
                                                                                                                                      T el.: (0 7 4 2 ) 5 5 4 5 5 4
    W . E astw o o d                F.Eng., B.Eng., Ph.D., O.Eng.,
                                    C.Eng.. F.t.C.E., P.P.I.Stm ct.E..                                                                Fax: (0 7 4 2 ) 5 5 4 3 3 0
                                    F .I.M ech .E .. F.G .S., M.Cons.E.

    A .A .W o o d                   B.Eng.. P h .D ., C.Eng., F.I.C.E.,
                                    F .I.S truct.E .. M .I.W .E .M ., M.Cons.E.
                                                                                                                                                              and i t :
    R .C .A .E a s tw o o d         B.Sc., C.Eng., M .I.C .E ., F.(.Struct.E.

    G .S p ir                       C.Eng., F.I.C.E.. M .I.M ech.E.                                                                      Premier          House
                                                                                                                                         1 2 /13 H a tto n G arden
    C .S .G re a v e s              B.Eng., C.Eng., M .I.C .E*, M .I.S truct.E.
                                                                                                                                         London E C 1N 8 A N
    S . Preston                     B.Eng., C.Eng., M .I.C .E .. M .I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                                                         T e l.: (0 1 ) 2 4 2 7 4 3 6
    G . M . S e am an               B.Sc., C.Eng., M .I.C .E ., F.I.Struct.E.                                                            Fax.: (0 1 ) 4 0 4 5 4 2 4
    D .S . Stephens^                C.Eng., F.t.C.E., F.I.Struct.E.. F.B.t.M .


                                                                                                    O ur R e f :               W E/KB/11238
                                                                                                    Your R e f :



    The Secretary,                                                                                                             22 A u g u s t 1989
    S heffield U n i t e d F o o tball Clu b pic,
    Bramall Lane,
    Sheffield S2 4SU.




    Dear M r . C a p p e r ,
                                                    Safety of Sports Grounds                                        Act
                                        L o r d Justice T a y l o r 1s Recommendations
                                                       C apacity of Standing Areas
                 As r e q u e s t e d I have p l e asure in reporting on the capacity of
    the Kop, B r a m a l l Lan e and John Street terraces.                                                                   D e a l i n g first
    w i t h the Kop,                  I e n c l o s e a copy of our drawing 6518/102B w h i c h
    shows the layout of crush barriers and perimeter fences following
    the construction of the fa cilities for disabled persons in 1986.
    T h e total area of the Kop w h i c h is pro t e c t e d by c r u s h barriers in
    accordance w i t h the Green Guide is 3483.5m2 w hich on the basis of
    5.4 persons p e r m 2 gives a capacity of 18,811 spectators.                                                                                    Lord
    Justice T a y l o r has recomm e n d e d that the capacity should be reduced
    by 15% w h i c h gives a new c apacity of                                                    15,989 persons.                          Howe v e r I
    s hould also p o i n t ou t that in February,                                                        1986,        the c a p acity of the
    K o p w hic h was p u t f o r w a r d was 18,590.                                                  If that figure is accepted,                                        the
    reduction of 15% w o u l d give 15,801.
                 Turn i n g n o w to the B r a m a l l L ane end, I enclose a p rint of our
    d r a w i n g 6 5 1 8 / l O O A w h i c h shows the layout of crush b a r riers and
    perimeterfences.                              The area w h i c h is p r o tected using the G reen G uide
    r u l e s is 1 3 6 1 . 8 5 m 2 w h i c h gives a calc u l a t e d standing c a p a c i t y of
    7354.                If this is reduced by 15% the n e w capacity w i l l be 6251.


     Associates:
     J. A . Strange          A . J. Clough                       R. Tandy                J. M.VUood                 C. M . Pollard              R. K. Godden
     C.Eng., F.I.Struct.E.   B.A., C.Eng., M.C.I.B.S.E.,         C.Eng., F.I.Struct.E.   B.Sc., C.Eng., M.I.C.E.,   B.Eng., C.Eng., M.I.C.E.,   F.S.C.A. (Accountant
                               M .I.M ech.E.                                             M.I.Struct.E.              M.I.Struct.E.               & Administration
                                                                                                                                                  M anager)

                                                An U nlim ited C om p an y. R e g istered in E ngland - No. 1833144
STWOOD & PARTNERS                                                              SHEET   2 .




        Th e t e r r a c e in front of John St r e e t stand is shown on
our drawing No.        6518/101B.        The a r e a p r o t e c t e d b y c r u s h
b a r rier s and the p e r i m e t e r fence is 827. 5 9 m 2 w h i c h gives a
c a l c u l a t e d c a p a c i t y in accordance w i t h the G r e e n G u i d e of
4469.     A p p l y i n g the 15% reduction gives a standing capacity
of 3798.


                                        Yours sincerely,
            AH/GW

            SS/GPD/KH

            23 August 1989


City Solicitor
Liverpool City Council
PO Box No 88
Municipal Buildings
Dale Street
LIVERPOOL
L69 2DH


Dear Sir

HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

I thank you for your letter of 16 August concerning the above topic,
it has been passed to Senior Members of my Authority for their
consideration«

In the interim I believe it ia appropriate that I take this opportunity
of drawing your attention to the concern that Members of my Authority
have regarding certain statements made by the iettfier of your Authority
on the issue of the responsibility of Members of the City Council
in either their capacity as Members of the Authority or as members
of the Police Authority and that they would welcome clarification
of such statements*    Further, they would also like to knew whether
it is being suggested that the official position ©f your Authority
is that such Members should resign as a result of the recent decision
to allow the Chief Constable to remain in post.

In addition# mgr Members are also very concerned at the tenor and content
of a recent article in the Municipal Journal prepared by an officer
of your Authority (copy enclosed) and again 1 have been asked to obtain
clarification as to whether the comments expressed in such article
are those of the Authority as such article has caused considerable
offence to both officers and Members of the City Council.

I look forward to receiving clarification of these issues shortly.

Yours faithfully




mxiK mrasxrai
Acting Bead of Department

                                                 734018
                                                                                                                     SsuvA/                                                                      C

            EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                                                                               fVcmcO-'S j
                                                                                                                                                S t . A n d r e w s House^
                                  (Consulting Engineers)                                                                                        2 3 K in g f ie ld R o ad
                                                                                                                                                S h e f f ie ld S 1 1 9 A S
            Directors :                                                                                          O o m d                        T e l.: ( 0 7 4 2 ) 5 8 3 8 7 1
            W . E a s tw o o d                 F.Eng., B.Eng., Ph.D., D.Eng.,
                                              C.Eng., F.I.C.E., P.P.I.Struct.E.,                                                                T e le x :          547266
                                               F.I.Mech.E., F.G.S., M.Cons.E.
                                                                                                                                                F ax : ( 0 7 4 2 ) 5 5 4 3 3 0
            A . A . W ood                     B.Eng., Ph.D.,C. Eng., F.I.C.E.,
                                               F.I.Struct.E., M .I.W .E.M ., M.Cons.E.                                                                                            and a t :

            R. C . A . E a s tw o o d         B.Sc., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., F.I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                                                                    Premier           House
            G . S p ir                        C.Eng., F.I.C.E., M .I.M ech.E.                                                                       1 2 /1 3 H a tto n Garden
            C .S . G re a v e S                B.Eng., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.                                                              London         EC 1N             8A N
            S . P r e s to n                   B.Eng., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., M.I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                                                                    T e l.: (01 ) 2 4 2 7 4 36
                                                                                                                                                    Fax.:      01 - 4 0 4 5 4 2 4
            G. M . Seam an                     B.Sc., C. Eng., M .I.C.E., F.I.Struct.E.


            C o n s u lta n t:
            A . G. B u rd e tt                 G .M ., B.Sc.(Eng.), C.Eng.,
                                                                                                              O ur R e f:      WE/YA
                                               F.I.C.E., F.I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                              Y o u rR e f:    GP/262/DMB

            Acting Head of Department                                                                                                                                                                & LEGAL
            A d m inistr ation and Legal De partment
                                                                                                                                                                                                     'iZLO
            Town Hall
            Sheffield
            SI 2HH                                                                                           24 August 1989


                                                                                                                                                            c n ?

            Dear Sir

                              The Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations 1987 - R egulation 5

                                                             Amended Safety Certificates for
                                                Sheffield Wed nesday Football Club Pic and
                                                          Sheffield United Football Club Pic


                                         Thank you for your letter of 15 August 1989, with the
    >   i
            a c c o m pany ing copy of the two documents relating to each club.                                                                                                  Your
             thoughtfulness                        in sending these to us is much appreciated.                                                                        It will
             be mos t useful to have copies read i l y available on our files.


'                                                                                                     Yours faithfully
[




            A s s o c ia te s :
            J. A . S tra n g e          A . J. C lough                      R. T a n d y            J.fV L W o o d              C . M . P ollard             R.K. Goddsen
            C.Eng., F.I.Struct.E.       B.A., C.Eng., M.C.I.B.S.E.,         C.Eng., F.I.Struct.E.   B .Sc.,C.Eng.,M .I.C.E.,    B.Eng., C.Eng., M.I.C.E.,    A . S . C . A . ( A c c o u ntant
                                        M.I.Mech.E.                                                 M.I.Struct.E.               M.I.Struct.E.                & Ad minis tratio n
                                                                                                                                                             Manager)

                                                         An Unlimited Company. Registered in England - No. 1833144
E A S T W O O D & P A R T N ER S                                                                                                                     St. A ndrew s House
              (Consulting Engineers)                                                                                                                 2 3 K in g fie ld R e a d
                                                                                                                                                     S h e ffie ld S11 9 A S
Directors :
                                                                                                                                                     Tel.: (07 42 ) 5 5 4 5 5 4
W . E a stw o o d                F. Eng. . B. Eng. , P h . D . , D. Eng. ,
                                 C . Eng. , F. I . C . E. , P . P. I .S tr uc t .E . ,                                                               Fax: (0 7 4 2 ) 5 5 4 3 3 0
                                 F.I.Mech.E ., F.G.S., M.Cons.E.

A .A .W o o d                    B. Eng. . Ph. D. , C . E n g . , F. I. C. E. ,
                                 F. I . S t ru c t . E , M . I . W . E . M . , M . C o n s . E .
                                                                                                                                                                             and a t :
R .C . A . E a stw o o d         B. Sc. , C . Eng. . M . I . C . E . , F. I. St ru ct .E .

G .S p ir                        C . E ng . , F . I .C. E. , M . I . M e c h . E .                                                                      Premier      House
                                                                                                                                                        12/13 H atton Garden
C . S. Greaves                   B. Eng. , C. E n g. , M . I . C . E . , M . I . S t r u c t . E
                                                                                                                                                        London EC1N SAN
S . Preston                      B. Eng. , C. E n g. , M . I . C . E . , M . I . S t r u c t . E .
                                                                                                                                                        T el.: (01 ) 2 4 2 7 4 3 6
G .M . S e am an                 B. S c. , C . E ng . , M . I . C . E . , F . I. St ru c t. E .                                                         Fax.: (01 ) 4 0 4 5 4 2 4
D .S . Stephens                  C . Eng. , F . I .C. E, , F. I . St r u ct . E . , F . B. I . M .


                                                                                                                   Our R e f :                   WE/KB/11789
                                                                                                                   Y o u r Ref :



The Secretary,                                                                                                                                 22 A u g u s t 1989
Sheffield Wed n e s d a y Football Clu b P L C ,
Hillsborough,
Sheffield S 6 1SW.




Dear Graham,
                                      Safety of Sports Grou n d s Ac t
                            Lor d Justice Taylor's R e c o m m e n d a t i o n s
                    Capacity of Standing A c c o m m o d a t i o n on the Kop


            As requested I have pleasure in enc l o s i n g information for
tr a n s mission to S h e ffield City                                                                C o u n c i l re g a r d i n g the capacity
of the Kop as it exists at pres e n t w h e n c a l c u l a t e d in strict
accor d a n c e wit h the G reen Guide and w h e n the G r e e n Guide figure
is reduced by 15%.
            At t a c h e d is a c o l o u r e d up p rint of our drawing 11237/5 on which
the areas w h i c h are properly p r o t e c t e d by c r u s h barriers are marked
in blue.                 It will be seen that on some parts of the old Kop there
are w hite areas w here the rows of b a r r i e r s are too far apart
or w h e t h e r there are gaps in barriers.
              The blue areas have a total area of 3 8 9 3 . 7 m 2 w hich gives a
p e r m i t t e d capacity of 21,026.                                                                A f t e r a r e duction of 15% this
g i v e s a total of 17,872.


                                                                                                       Yours sincerely,




Associates:

J. A . Stran ge            A . J. Clough                                     R. Tandy                    J. M . Wood                C. M . Pollard              R. K. Godden
 C.Eng., F.I.Struct.E.     B.A., C.Eng., M.C.I.B.S.E.,                  , % C.Eng., F.I.Struct.E.        B.Sc., C.Eng., M.I.C.E.,   B.Eng., C.Eng., M.I.C.E.,   F.S.C.A. (Accountant
                           M.IJVIech.E.                                                                  M.I.Struct.E.              ■M.I.Struct.E.              & Adm inistration
                                                                                                                                                                M anager)

                                                  An U nlim ited C o m p any . R e g iste re d in E ng lan d - No. 1833T44
                                                                             !/    'y    r - n v x a.
                              CITY OF SHEFFIELD
                                                                                 -£=>
From      D. W. Purchon                                 Councillor C. J. C. Betts./
          Director of Health and Consumer
                                 Services               c.c. Councillor Mrs Pat Md\ggley                A
Date      22 Aug 89                                         ^||k|||b s t e r ^ A c t i n g Head of
Ref       DWP/PAF
Tel Ext    4614 - Mr. Purchon                     Ref




          "DISASTERS NEVER WALK ALONE"
          ARTICLE IN MUNICIPAL JOURNAL 18TH AUGUST 1989


          I would like to respond to the enclosed article on the lines outlined
          unless you are doing so, in which case you may wish to include reference
          to these points.




          IT. W. Purchon
          Director of Health and Consumer Services




          Enc.
Cliff Davis-Coleman
Editor
Municipal Journal
178-202 Great Portland Street
LONDON
WIN 6NH

              D R A F T     L E T T E R


                                    DWP/PAF            22nd August 1989

Dear Sir

"DISASTERS NEVER WALK ALONE" - MUNICIPAL JOURNAL 18TH AUGUST 1989

Norman Bush writes sensibly on the need for "a single competent officer to
get on with the task" (of issuing and updating safety certificates for
sports grounds on behalf of local authorities). He mentions the detailed
technical work involved in the licensing function and the importance of
engineering and surveying expertise but he chooses provocatively to elevate
surveying expertise amongst all other and he chooses to be insulting about
the input of Environmental Health Officers to the multi-disciplinary team of
advisers in Sheffield.

Safety Management is a multi-disciplinary matter if it is to be successful:
no one profession has all the necessary expertise. It matters little where
the delegated authority lies to issue licenses or certificates ; it does
matter that they are meaningful in content, i.e. enforceable and enforced.
Members should decide 'where the buck stops.'

The Health and Safety Commission propose to allcoate responsibility for
Health and Safety at Work etc. Act enforcement to local authorities in
respect of places of public entertainment including Sports Grounds (no doubt
subject to what Lord Justice Taylor has to recommend). Norman Bush would do
well to learn to co-operate and value the input from colleagues with
complementary expertise to his own. Certainly in Sheffield the multi­
disciplinary advisory group on Safety in Sports Grounds has always had
valuable input from the Building Surveyors and will be doing itsutmost    to
improve the Council's performance in Safety inSports Grounds
administration, using all the skills available to a local authority within
direct employment and from any field of relevant expertise.

Yours faithfully




D. W. Purchon
Director of Health and Consumer Services
                                              PF2AMX


734614 - Mr. Purchon
         ILDING CONTROL                                                                                            Norman Bush highlights
                                                                                                                   the overriding role of the
                                                                                                                   local authority to set the
                                                                                                                   pattern of control for
                                                                                                                   safety in public places.




W
                  hen Lord Wheatley was conducting
                  his inquiry and preparing his report
                  into crowd safety, after the disaster
                  which killed 66 football spectators
at Ibrox Park in 1971, he invited my predeces­
                                                                m m m m

                                                                  II   HI   IU JM I1K 1I




                                                                             l
                                                                                           II M U   I
                                                                                                        WMw&s

                                                                                                        I
                                                                                                                                                                         NEVER                                                                                              A              •

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          I strongly hold, that defined local authority
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      statutory functions which are not party politi­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      cally sensitive, which are mostly technical and
sor to discuss his submission to that inquiry.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      deeply detailed, are best delegated to the most
     T he latter was clear about the police author-                          * ' ■-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      appropriate expert departmental chief officer
ity’s role in keeping law and order inside as well                                         m m rn               rap#lli|                                                                                                                                                              available. Apart from reporting the status now
as outside football grounds and he understood
that the fire service would fight any fires and                                                                 m b m rh                                                                                                                                                              and then and in the absence of any justified
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      complaint, he should be given the necessary
undertake the rescue of any spectators trapped by
                                                                                                                                               irti     y                                                                                                                             resources and left to get on with the work. He
an accident at a match. W hat he had not settled
                                                                                                                                                      “ »<i                                                                                                                           knows that it’s his head on the block. He can get
in his mind, was which authority was most
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      any legal or administrative etc. advice he needs
s u i t ' ' t o control the layout, services, construc-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      from the authority’s solicitor or chief executive.
tic         .d maintenance of the buildings which                                                                        Chn».
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      He can consult his fellow chief officers if they
comprise football stadia, together with the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      have any expertise which would be helpful, but
staffing necessary, to ensure the safety of specta-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      he must not be inhibited by traditional local
      re.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      government hierarchy, which dilutes his author­
      W heatley appreciated that because many
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ity and confuses his responsibility.
 football grounds had a high percentage of
 covered stands, making them buildings of public                              LocalAuthority                                                                                                                                                                                              T hat is the general pattern for building
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      regulation control. It is the same one I recom­
 resort, their ingress, egress and internal circula­
 tion spaces were therefore controllable by local
                                                                 BUILDING                                                                                                                                                                                                             mend for the suitability of premises for licensing,
 authority building control departments, under                   CONTROL                                                                   iiisi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      the safety of sports grounds and other clearly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      professional building surveyor’s functions.
 the 1936 A ct provisions, which are now Sec­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          T hat was not the pattern adopted by Sheffield
 tions 24 and 71 of the Building Act 1984. He                                                                            ..   ..   .....
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      for the control of Hillsborough. Paragraphs 150
 understood that their original design and con­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      and 158 of the Taylor Interim Report describes
 struction, alteration, or extension, was control­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       its pattern, or perhaps the lack of it. Administra­
  led by Building Regulations. He appreciated                                                                       Above: Lessons to be learned from three disasters.                                                                                                                tive and legal officers, who ‘knew very little
  that, for those same reasons, responsible magis­                                                                  Right: Norman Bush.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      about football grounds’ (it was said) ‘bore the
  trates committees, which licensed public enter­
                                                                                                                       In 1985 Mr Justice Popplewell was conducting                                                                                                                   brunt of the council’s duties’. The health and
  tainment in most of the country, looked to the
                                                                                                                   his enquiry and preparing his report, on the loss                                                                                                                  consumer services officer (presumably an expert
  chief building control officer of the local author­
  ity for advice, on the suitability of buildings          ‘Administrative and legal                               of life at the Bradford, Birmingham and Heysel                                                             had undertaken the club’s role for the match day        on the price and freedom from food poisoning of
                                                                                                                   stadia. A submission by the Society of Chief                                                               control of safety of visiting supporters, at the         the meat pies consumed at half-time) was
  holding those licences. Finally, he understood           officers, who knew “very                                Building Regulation Officers (SOCBRO),                                                                     Leppings Lane end. T hat they did not have the           involved, but no building surveyor. Shades of
  that uncovered stands were controllable in many
  urv        areas, by local legislation, enforced by
                                                           little about football                                   caused him to discuss the organisation and                                                                 expertise to match that responsibility is regrett­       Valley Parade, Bradford! The report mentions a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              able, and is the subject of stem criticism in the
  bt       .ig control departments. All that pointed       grounds . . . bore the brunt                            allocation of responsible control of football
                                                                                                                   ground safety, with a small group of such officers,                                                        report.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ‘building engineer’, which may indicate, symbo­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       lically, that the council’s evidence to Lord
  him to regard the building control authority to          of the council’s duties”.                               in which 1 was included. The result can be seen                                                                 W hether the local authority ought to have          Justice Taylor didn’t even get the title right.
   be the most appropriate to control safety at
   football grounds, in the statutory regime he            The health and consumer                                 in his Final Report at paragraphs 3.77 to 3.80.       ropolitan districts, where the majority of large     allowed this to happen, given its very clear                 For those who haven’t been able to read the
                                                                                                                   There, Popplewell made it quite clear, that the       high-risk grounds exist, and where the best          responsibility, for all aspects of reasonable safety,    Hillsborough Report, who might think I am
   proposed, in order to avert another fatal football      services officer was                                    designation of the building control authority as      expertise on the function was directly available,    including stewarding, under the Safety of Sports         being a little over-critical of the city administra­
   crowd disaster.
        Unfortunately, th a t intention went astray. A t
                                                            involved, but no building                              an ‘interested party’, had a real and logical         on the spot. The work is detailed and technical,     Grounds A ct 1975, is not discussed in the               tion, I would point to the position in respect of
                                                                                                                   purpose of employing the building control ex­         not politically sensitive, and is unsuited to        report. Popplewell had, in 1986, pointed to the          the two designated football grounds in Sheffield.
   the time of his report, Wheatley had every               surveyor.’                                              pert, to ensure that the design, construction,       committee council debating and administrative        overriding role of the local authority, to set the       T he Safety Certicate for Hillsborough (Sheffield
   reason to believe that the impending re­
                                                                                                                    maintenance, use and stewarding of grounds           procedures.                                          standards and pattern of control for safety under        Wednesday), despite Popplewell’s report and
   organisation of local government would place
                                                                                                                    provided a reasonably safe standard. The                The demise of Metropolitan counties enabled       that Act. The need to identify the numbers               alterations at the ground, has not been updated,
   building control at county level. The Maud
                                                              In practice, some county authorities, viewing         SOCBRO delegation also urged him to recom­           the district councils to make a simple delegation    required and secure the training of club stewards        and the total absence of one for the Sheffield
   report and the Governm ent’s W hite Paper on re­
                                                           the expertise available locally for designated           mend that safety certification be put on the same    of the function to their chief building control      performing safety duties, through conditions in          United Football Club, has not been remedied,
   organisation said so. T hat suited his concept for
                                                           stadia, opted for an administrative - only role,         basis as all other licensing of places of public     officer. If they had any sense they did that, and    the Safety Certificate was clear. Popplewell              since the duty was passed to the city in April
    the licensing of football grounds, which he
                                                           and delegated the setting and monitoring of stan­        entertainment. It was argued that such an            the buck stopped there. T hat happened in            caused a revision of the ‘Green Guide’ (football          1986.
    thought should be an objective, expert technical
                                                           dards of safety in relation to construction,             arrangement would force authorities and football     Liverpool for the two designated clubs of Liver­     grounds safety code) to be carried out, and that             The lesson I hope will be learnt from the
    function, rather th a n a subjective parochial and
                                                           maintenance, use and stewarding to the building          clubs, to review provisions annually, and conve­     pool and Everton. Safety certificates were re­        included new and detailed advice on matters              deaths of a total of 217 persons, in the three
    political one. In th e run up to the 1975 Safety of
                                                           control department of the district council. One          niently in the closed summer season, to good         viewed, rewritten and updated then, and              very relevant to Hillsborough.                            football ground disasters of Ibrox Park, Valley
    Sports Grounds A ct, the 1974 re-organisation of
                                                           ground where that was not done and indeed, I             effect. T hat obligation would regularly refresh     annually since.                                           The popular press, understanding the damn­           Parade and Hillsborough, is that the local
    local government perversely held building con­
                                                           understand, where the chief building control             responsibilities and cause financially constrained       In 1989, Lord Justice Taylor was appointed to     ing case against senior police officers, has             authorities, with a powerful duty to set reason­
    trol at district level. It was readily apparent that
                                                           officer was not even consulted, by the responsi­         local authority to allocate appropriate and suffi­   carry out an enquiry and to report on the loss of     justifiably given much space to that. This has, to       able safety standards and certify the safety of
    county authorities would not have the necessary
                                                           ble county, was Valley Parade at Bradford. On            cient resources to the onerous task of safeguard­    95 lives at the Hillsborough Football Stadium,        some extent, diverted popular attention from the         designated football grounds, now need to tackle
    experts in the enforcement of building design,
                                                            11 May 1985, a fire, the source and rapid spread        ing lives. Popplewell concurred with that view,      Sheffield, on 15 April last. His Interim Report       failures of the city council. Readers of Municipal       the work diligently. I hope ‘they’ - the members
    construction and use standards. Parliamentary
                                                           of which was easily forseeable, killed 56 specta­        but his recommendation for that (Chapter 6,          and 43 recommendations, 28 of which are              Journal, and particularly building control officers,      and the administrators - will stop talking about it
    draughtsmen for the 1975 Act overcame the
                                                            tors at Bradford. Any half-trained building              Item C9) was not implemented by the Govern­         advised for immediate implementation, are just        will better understand the gravity of their ‘serious     and instead delegate the real technical task to
     problem, by designating the ‘building authority’
                                                            control officer, with more than a year’s experi­         ment.                                               published. W hat should ‘they’ leam.sfrom it?         breach of duty’. Sheffield Council had delegated         the chief officer of their authority best qualified
     an ‘interested party’ in the certification proce­
                                                            ence of making firm, impartial, enforceable                 A few months after Popplewell’s Final Report     Who are ‘they’?                                        its powers and obligations, acquired in April           and experienced to carry it out. Finally, I hope
     dure. T hat called for prior and ongoing consulta­
                                                            decisions on site, would never have walked away          was published, abolition of the local government        Hillsborough was, in one important respect,        1986, to a committee of members. No single              that he will give it top priority: 217 avoidable
     tion with building control, and gave it clout, not
     only through the Building Regulations, but also        from the visible ingredients of that disaster, until     two-tier system in Metropolitan areas, took         different from what you should expect at other        competent officer was delegated to get on with           deaths are 217 too many.                         I
                                                            he had seen them removed with his own eyes. It           place. This placed the statutory duty of the        designated football grounds. The normal balance        the task. Like Bradford, the Hillsborough disas­        N orm an Bush FRICS, CEng, MIStructE,
     by a right of appeal against anything included in,
                                                            was totally avoidable.                                   certification of football ground safety with Met-    of responsibility had been rearranged. The police     ter was totally avoidable.                              FIAS is city building surveyor for Liverpool.
     or omitted from, a Safety Certificate,
    R3719                                                                                                                     Sch 9 1 6 2
                                CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM
                                                               C U M )
From                                                    To
                                                                                    W o J^S K JhaS r
                                                                                    H       u       m         O JK
Date          1 8
Ref.                                                                                                                                        <—
                                                               c C '   b    K   s   o   J   c   jf ijA   J   iL   a   &   l

Tel. Ext.    5 ° l 'V i                                 Ref.
                                                                           f y U L n                     u w a A s L l^ jK d




            f^Ju                                                                                             p,rUu

       V v ^ c ,          » s u j+   p .   r v    —     n      ^                                              ^
        <^'Vp-jo                           ^     S-'-'Co .
           NOTES OF THE DISCUSSION AT SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY MEETING

                                 Friday, 18th August, 1989


          Relating to Items 23A, B and C on the Agenda - Hillsborough Tragedy


       Item 23 C

       Interim Report of Taylor Inquiry and Progress to date

       The Chief Constable outlined recent developments in relation to the Taylor
       Inquiry and explained that Mr. Peter Hayes would be answering further
       questions and reporting on progress in implementing the recommendations.
       As far as criminal liability is concerned the Director of Public
       Prosecutions has made clear that a criminal inquiry should now take place
       to see if any further action should be taken in relation to all parties
       involved in the tragedy.  Since Mr. Dear of the West Midlands Police has
       gathered most of the information and evidence in the first part of the
       Inquiry, the Chief Constable has asked him to conduct the criminal
       investigations.

       Mr. Peter Hayes, Deputy Chief Constable then outlined the steps taken to
       date to implement the Taylor recommendations. These were as follows:-

(i )   Liaison between Agencies:

       Mr. Hayes has been appointed to liaise with the Football Clubs and other
       agencies and has set up an Implementation Team consisting of the
       Superintendents and Chief Superintendents who act as commanders in control
       at football matches. Before publication of the Taylor Report the Force
       had been examining the events at Hillsborough. They have concentrated
       their efforts on the recommendations needing to be implemented before the
       start of the football season on Saturday, 19th August. It was reported
       that written Agreements between the Police and the Football Clubs were now
       required. At the time of the meeting, three of the five South Yorkshire
       clubs had signed the agreements, two were outstanding. It was the
       intention of the Force to implement one system of ground control which
       would apply Force-wide in order to get consistency and simplicity and to
       avoid confusion. Before outlining precisely the steps taken to date to
       implement these recommendations Mr. Hayes pointed out that there was still
       some liaison work to complete, some training of stewards and officers, and
       that the issue of financing of football matches needed to be put on the
       Police Authority's agenda. The issue here is that the contract for the
       recovery of policing costs at football matches is based on a sliding scale
       relative to the number of spectators attending. Mr. Hayes' view is that
       the actual costs of policing matches will increase as a result of Taylor,
       whilst the number of spectators may reduce. This will need to be
       addressed in some detail at a future meeting.

(ii)   Admission of Spectators

       Clubs will monitor the access to the ground              through their
       computers. When capacity is reached, the Club will be responsible for
       stopping access. The Police will respond should any difficulties arise.

(iii) Monitoring Crowds in Standing Areas:

       Clubs will appoint stewards to monitor any signs of distress or
       overcrowding. Every officer on duty will be briefed on this. Perimeter
       gates will be kept open; each one monitored by an officer with radio
       control linked to overall ground control.

(iv)   Training

       The Police are producing a video for training purposes which will be ready
       within one month. In the meantime, photographs showing situations of
       crowding and of distress situations will be used with officers and
       stewards. An aide memoire is to be available to all with clear
       descriptions of the symptoms of distress.

(v)    Cutting equipment:

       All clubs have undertaken to provide this equipment which will be kept on
       the perimeter tracks and stewards trained to use it. The final decision
       regarding use will rest with the Force commander. Before each match there
       will be liaison between the Club, stewards and Police regarding the
       anticipated numbers of the crowd. If tickets are to be used, all
       information printed on those tickets, including colour codes, etc. will be
       carefully considered before the match.

(vi)   Crowd Arrivals and Departures:

       Contingency plans will be drawn up and available in all the relevant
       sub-divisions and at pre-match briefings.

(vii) Kick-off Postponement:

       The decision will lie with the Force commander. Crowd safety will be of
       paramount importance in his/her considerations. Clubs will in future
       provide telephone lines between operational Police and the officials'
       room.

(ix)   Liaison:

       Between all the emergency services. Each service has now appointed a
       Senior Liaison Officer and meetings are to be held in the near future.

       A number of questions were then directed to the Chief and Deputy Chief
       Constable by members of the Authority.

       Members' Questions

       1. A question was asked regarding the costs of the criminal investigation
       and who would meet these. Also about the appropriateness of officers from
       the West Midlands carrying out this investigation given the recent reports
       on the investigations into the activities of the Serious Crimes Squad in
       that Force. Mr. Wright responded by saying that the officers carrying
       out the South Yorkshire criminal investigations are appointed at the
       discretion of the West Midlands Chief Constable. It is likely that the
       team who conducted the Taylor Inquiry investigations will continue to be
       involved in the criminal investigations. When asked whether any of those
       officers were also subject to internal inquiry from West Midlands, Mr.
       Wright replied that he did not know.

       2. Clarification was sought as to which clubs had signed the required
       agreements. The response was that Sheffield Wednesday, Sheffield United
       and Doncaster have all signed. The finalising of the other agreements was
       anticipated that day.
3. The Chief Constable was asked about communications systems between
Police officers inside and outside the Ground - an issue criticised by
Taylor. The response given was that on 15th April, there was a
malfunction of the communications system for a brief period. The
emergency system was immediately switched on. The Police have now started
to improve the radio systems used at the Hillsborough Ground, and will be
coming forward to a future meeting of the Authority with an application
for improved equipment.

4. The question of consistency of practice was raised and the issue of
whether sufficient briefing was given upon a change of personnel at senior
level.  The response to this question was that ground commanders stay on
the same patch for a considerable period. They also do have experience of
policing other grounds. An officer experienced in football control will
always be available and involved in policing the matches. Constables,
sergeants and inspectors will in future find it easier to police different
matches because of the standardisation of functions, for example, clothing
of stewards or key personnel at each ground will indicate functions across
the Force area.

Item 23 B

Claims for compensation:

Report of the Police Authority's insurers (MMI)

It was reported that 701 claims from the killed or injured have now been
received.  Solicitors estimate there will be 1,000 claims in total,
therefore, 300 are outstanding. In July, the insurers had met with the
Liverpool Steering Committee. It had been suggested that in order to make
progress a number of test cases be brought foward, six in number, to be
heard by the same circuit judge for purposes of consistency. This is
likely to take place early next year.  The proposal from the insurers is
that no money changes hands until the courts have settled liability. Most
claims are for nervous shock.

It is estimated that the full liability on   claims could amount to
£15 million. The limit on South Yorkshire    Police Authority's current
indemnity is £8.5 million. There are four    possible defendants involved on
liability; the Police, the Club, Sheffield   City Council, Dr. Eastwood.

The insurers outlined the two options as they saw it for the Committee's
consideration.

Option 1

To take the test cases forward, bearing in mind that they are likely to be
heard around the anniversary of the Hillsborough Inquiry next April, and
the possible public relations effect of this.

Option 2

To discuss with Sun Alliance, the company representing other defendants,
the possibility of reaching agreement and apportioning a settlement out of
court. The insurers anticipate that it will be two or three years before
there is a final solution of the claims. They stressed that Option 2
would mean the admitting of some liability by the Police. It was also
stressed that, in the end, the decision as to the way forward would be
made by the insurance company on a commercial basis, but that that
decision would take into account views expressed by the South Yorkshire
Police Authority.
It was agreed that members may need further time to consider complexities
and that it would be referred to a subsequent meeting of F&GP.

Item 23 A

Costs of the Inquiry

Mr. Johnston pointed out that the arguments used by the Police Authority
in support of its claims to more funding from the Home Office had now been
substantially changed in the light of the decision that further criminal
investigations were necessary. His view was that the offer from the Home
Office to extract a ceiling of a V 4 of a penny rate product (i.e.,
£975,000) from the Police Authority, after which all costs would be met by
the Home Office was the optimum that could be expected at this point in
time. The Committee concluded that the offer should be accepted from the
Home Office on condition that assurances be received that the further
costs to be covered by the Home Office would include those of both the
criminal investigations and the Coroner's Inquiry.

Item 23 C -   Closed Season; Part Two

Interim Taylor Inquiry Report

Further questions from members were invited on this issue in the closed
part of the meeting. These consisted of;

1. Briefing of officers to the Inquiry; who was responsible? The Chief
Constable replied that officers at senior level were not briefed, they
wrote statements of evidence and presented these to the Inquiry, and on
the basis of these they gave evidence.

2. Further moves within the Force of senior officers; the Chief Constable
explained that Mr. Duckenfield was moved for a variety of reasons, both to
implement a review of community consultations, and in the light of his
recent experience and sensitivity around policing major football matches.
Mr. Murray was moved for similar reasons. Mr. Jackson was moved in order
to provide continuinty from the retiring A.C.C, Mr. Watson.

3. When questioned further about the responsibilities given on 15th April
to two senior officers (Mr. Murray and Mr. Duckenfield) who had had little
experience of policing major football matches, the Chief Constable
reiterated his view that to have retained the previous commander in charge
would have undermined the authority of Mr. Duckenfield at that point. He
also said that both officers had had some experience of policing football
matches at previous points in their career.

4. Internal disciplinary action: This was a question about any further
action to be taken against members of the Force. The Chief Constable
replied that four complaints had been received to date. One against Mr.
Duckenfield, one against Mr. Peter Hayes, one against another individual
and one relating to officers accused of taking money from football fans
upon entering the ground.

Apart from the complaint about Mr. Hayes, which was to be dealt with on
the current Police Authority agenda, the other issues would be dealt with
in due course by himself.


22nd April, 1989
RP2AAC/JJJ
               OT/GW


               21 August .1989



Barrister at Lav?
12 Paradis® Square
SSEPFIEKtD 1


Dear Michael

re* HII&SBOROOGH DISASTER - JU5TICUS XU M0JIICIPAL JOORMJU,

I M e l O M i for your information and attention, lest it has not already
been brought to your attention, a copy of an article produced by Mr
Bush who you will perhaps recall we met during the aftermath of the
Hillsborough Disaster,, being the City Building Surveyor for Liverpool
and who# front his comments, seems to fit the mould of Or Eastwood!

it occurs to me in the light of the very scathing attack he has choaoM
to (Street against this Authority, consideration needs to be given as
to what * if any, response this Authority ought to give.

In this regard I would add that contact has been wade with the Press
Office by the Municipal Journal asking if the Council wished to send
a 150/200 word letter responding to the article - to be available try
Wednesday/fhursday of this week.

If you have any comments or observations ujson the issue I would fe«
grateful if 1 could receive them shortly.

Yours sincerely




MASK WEBSTKR
Acting Bead of Departwsnt




                                                   734018
            AH/GW


            21 August 1989


A Gregory Bsq
Messrs Keefole Hawson
Solicitors
Old Cathedral Vicarage
St James* How
SHEFFIELD 1


Dear Tony

ret HII.LSBOROOGH DISASTER - ARTICLE IM MDHICIPAL JOORHAL

I aaclOM« for your information and attention, last it has not already
been brought to your attention, a copy of an article produced by Mar
Bush who you will perhaps recall we met during the aftermath of the
Hillsborough Disaster, feeing the City Building Surveyor for Liverpool
ana who, from his comments, seems to fit the mould of Dr Eastwood!

It occurs to me in the light of the very scathing attack he has chose®
to direct against this Authority, consideration needs to be given as
to what, if any, response this Authority ought to give.

In this regard I would add that contact has been Bade with the Press
Office by the Municipal Journal asking if the Council wished to send
a 150/200 word letter responding to the article - to be available by
Wednesday/Thursday of this week.

If you have any comments or observations      upon   the issue X would b«
grateful if I could receive them shortly.

Yours sincerely




HUSK WEBSTER
Acting Ham# of




                                                  734018
Acting Hoad of Departmentt                  Councillor C J C Betts
Administration and Legal                    Leader

21 August 1989
AH/GW
4018 - Mr Webster




ret HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - ARTICLE HI NOHICIPAL JOORMAL

I enclose, for your information and attention, lest it has not already
been brought to your attention# a copy of an article produced by Mr
Bush who you will perhaps recall we mat during the aftermath of the
Hillsborough Disaster, being the City Building Surveyor for Liverpool
and who, from his cements seems to fit the mould of Dr Eastwood!

It occurs to me that in the light of the very scathing attack he has
chosen to direct against this Authority, consideration may need to ba
given as to what, if any, response this Authority ought to give.
Accordingly, I have also copied this article to both the Council's
Insurer's Solicitors and to Mr Murphy of Counsel who, as you know, has
represented us throughout*

1 would add that contact has been made with the Press Office by thei
Municipal Journal asking if the Council wished to send a 150/200 word
letter responding to the Article - to be available by Wednesday/Thursday
of this week.

Whilst, of course, a lot of effort has now been put into a revised system
for report due to be ready for the nest Committee meeting in September
you may feel that as part of the discussion at the Policy Group scheduled
for next week consideration ought to be given to the sort of issue raised
in this article as to whether it would be better or more appropriate
to move the licensing function within the Authority.

In this regard, whilst 1 feel obliged to raise the topic I feel it would
not be appropriate for several reasons, not least of which being that
I do not believe that the model suggested by Mr Bush would necessarily
be duplicated outside his particular circumstances, and moreover seems
to be at odds with part of Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations*




cc     Councillor J Fiore, Chair* MBGS
       Councillor P Nelson, Deputy Chairt MB6S
       Councillor H A Knight
       Mrs E Bashforth. Principal Solicitor, Common Law
       Mr J 6 Ward, Principal Solicitor
       Mrs P Woodhead, Senior Solicitor, Licensing
       Mr D M lownes, Chief Licensing Officer
                                ILDING CONTROL
                                                                                                                                       Norman Bush highlights
                        p |e (V II/O                                                                                                   the overriding role of the
                                                                                                                                       local authority to set the
                                                                                                  H O M E OFFICE                       pattern of control for
                                                                                                                                       safety in public places.
18 August 1989 No 33




                                                       M        LEGAL                       HIELSBOROUGH
                                                                                       & STADIUM DISASTER;-"

                                                                                                     f               '
                             - w «^h en Lord >Xfliea{lev was conducting
                         % % / his inquiry and preparing his report                               iNOUIKY BY
                                                                                     “ TH E RT HON IO R D JU STIC E I \V 1 OR
                          % / % / into crowd safety, after the disaster        W}:
                            V Y w’hich killed 66 football spectators
                       at Ibrox Park in 1971, he invited my predeces­                            INTERIM REPORT
                       sor to discuss his submission to th at inquiry.
                          T he latter was clear about the police author­
                       ity’s role in keeping law and order inside as well                           • **mtw
                       as outside football grounds and he understood                                                                                    Ho^    off1ce
                       that the fire service would fight any fires and                                         Wg&M
                       undertake the rescue of any spectators trapped by
                       an accident at a match. W hat he had not settled
                       in his mind, was which authority was most                            ..
                       suitable to control the layout, services, construc­
                       tion and maintenance of the buildings which
                       comprise football stadia, together with the
                       staffing necessary, to ensure the safety of specta­
                                                                                                                                  s
                                                                                                                                                                 £W«wsefl
                       tors.
                          Wheatley appreciated th at because many
                       football grounds had a high percentage of                                                                                      M**fS
                       covered stands, making them buildings of public                           LocalAuthority
                       resort, their ingress, egress and internal circula­
                       tion spaces were therefore controllable by local                BUILDING                                 mmmz
                       authority building control departments, under
                       the 1936 A ct provisions, which are now Sec­
                                                                                       CONTROL
                       tions 24 and 71 of the Building A ct 1984. He
                       understood that their original design and con­
                       struction, alteration, or extension, was control­
                       led by Building Regulations. H e appreciated
                       that, for those same reasons, responsible magis­                                                                Above: Lessons to be learned from three disasters.
                       trates committees, which licensed public enter­
                                                                                                                                       Right: Norman Bush.
                       tainment in most of the country, looked to the                                                                     In 1985 Mr justice Popplewell was conducting
                       chief building control officer of the local author­                                                             his enquiry and preparing his report, on the loss
                       ity for advice, on the suitability of buildings        ‘Administrative and legal                                of life at the Bradford, Birmingham and Heyse!
                       holding those licences. Finally, he understood
                       that uncovered stands were controllable in many
                                                                              officers, who knew "very                                 stadia. A submission by the Society of Chief
                                                                                                                                       Building Regulation Officers (SOCBRO),
                       urban areas, by local legislation, enforced by         little about football                                    caused him to discuss the organisation and
                       building control departments. All that pointed         grounds . . . bore the brunt                             allocation of responsible control of football
                       him to regard the building control authority to                                                                 ground safety, with a small group of such officers,
                       be the most appropriate to control safety at           of the council’s duties”.                                in which 1 was included. The result can be seen
                       football grounds, in the statutory regime he           The health and consumer                                  in his Final Report at paragraphs 3.77 to 3.80.
                       proposed, in order to avert another fatal football     services officer was                                     There, Popplewell made it quite clear, that the
                       crowd disaster.                                                                                                 designation of the building control authority as
                          Unfortunately, that intention went astray. A t      involved, but no building                                an ‘interested party’, had a real and logical
                       the time of his report, W heatley had every            surveyor.’                                               purpose of employing the building control ex­
                       reason to believe that the impending re­                                                                        pert, to ensure that the design, construction,
                       organisation of local government would place                                                                    maintenance, use and stewarding of grounds
                       building control at county level. The Maud                                                                      provided a reasonably safe standard. The
                       report and the Government’s W hite Paper on re­           In practice, some county authorities, viewing         SOCBRO delegation also urged him to recom­
                       organisation said so. T hat suited his concept for     the expertise available locally for designated           mend that safety certification be put on the same
                       the licensing of football grounds, which he            stadia, opted for an administrative - only role,         basis as all other licensing of places of public
                       thought should be an objective, expert technical       and delegated the setting and monitoring of stan­        entertainment. It was argued that such an
                       function, rather than a subjective parochial and       dards of safety in relation to construction,             arrangement would force authorities and football
                       political one. In the run up to the 1975 Safety of     maintenance, use and stewarding to the building          clubs, to review provisions annually, and conve­
                       Sports Grounds Act, the 1974 re-organisation of        control department of the district council. One          niently in the closed summer season, to good
                       local government perversely held building con­         ground where that was not done and indeed, I             effect. T h at obligation would regularly refresh
                       trol at district level. It was readily apparent that   understand, where the chief building control             responsibilities and cause financially constrained
                       county authorities would not have the necessary        officer was not even consulted, by the responsi­         local authority to allocate appropriate and suffi­
                       experts in the enforcement of building design,         ble county, was Valley Parade at Bradford. On            cient resources to the onerous task of safeguard­
                       construction and use standards. Parliamentary          11 May 1985, a fire, the source and rapid spread         ing lives. Popplewell concurred with that view,
                       draughtsmen tor the 1975 A ct overcame the             of which was easily torseeable, killed 56 specta­        but his recommendation for that (Chapter 6,
                       problem, by designating the ‘building authority’       tors at Bradford. Any halt-trained building              Item C9) was not implemented by the Govern­
                       an ‘interested parry’ in the certification proce­      control officer, with more than a year’s experi­         ment.
                       dure. T hat called tor prior and ongoing consulta­     ence of making firm, impartial, enforceable                 A few months after Popplewell's Final Report
                       tion with building control, and gave it clout, not     decisions on site, would never have walked away          was published, abolition of the local government
                       only through the Building Regulations, but also        from the visible ingredients of that disaster, until     two-tier system in Metropolitan areas, took
                       by a right of appeal against anything included in,     he had seen them removed with his own eyes. It           place. This placed the statutory duty of the
                       or omitted from, a Safety Certificate,                 was totally avoidable.                                   certification of football ground safety with Met-
                                                                                                                                                                     I9H1
                                                                                                                                                                     Munic ip al J o u r n a l 18 A u g u s t
  EVER WALK
 ALONE
                                                                                                                  I strongly hold, th at defined local authority
                                                                                                              statutory functions which are not party politi­
                                                                                                              cally sensitive, which are mostly technical and
                                                                                                              deeply detailed, are best delegated to the most
                                                                                                              appropriate expert departmental chief officer
                                                                                                              available. A part from reporting the status now
                                                                                                              and then and in the absence of any justified
                                                                                                              com plaint, he should be given the necessary
                                                                                                              resources and left to get on with the work. He
                                                                                                              knows th a t it’s his head on the block. He can get
                                                                                                              any legal or administrative etc. advice he needs
                                                                                                              from the authority’s solicitor or chief executive.
                                                                                                              H e can consult his fellow chief officers if they
                                                                                                              have any expertise which would be helpful, but
                                                                                                              he must not be inhibited by traditional local
                                                                                                              governm ent hierarchy, which dilutes his author­
                                                                                                              ity and contuses his responsibility.
                                                                                                                  T h at is the general pattern for building
                                                                                                              regulation control. It is the same one I recom­
                                                                                                              m end for the suitability of premises for licensing,
                                                                                                              th e safety o f sports grounds and other clearly
                                                                                                              professional building surveyor’s functions.
                                                                                                                 T h at was n o t the pattern adopted by Sheffield
                                                                                                              for the control of Hillsborough. Paragraphs 150
                                                                                                              and 158 o f th e Taylor Interim Report describes
                                                                                                              its pattern, or perhaps the lack of it. Administra­
                                                                                                              tive and legal officers, who ‘knew very little
                                                                                                              about football grounds’ (it was said) ‘bore the
          IlMxi                                                                                               brunt of th e council’s duties’. The health and
                                                                                                              consumer services officer (presumably an expert
                                                      had undertaken the club’s role for the match day        o n the price and freedom from food poisoning of
                                                      control of safety of visiting supporters, at the        the m eat pies consumed at half-time) was
          iiB aifssiiiat*                             Leppings Lane end. T h at they did not have the         involved, b u t no building surveyor. Shades of
                                                      expertise to m atch th at responsibility is regrett­    Valley Parade, Bradford! T he report mentions a
                                                      able, and is the subject of stem criticism in the       ‘building engineer’, which may indicate, symbo­
                                                      report.                                                 lically, th a t the council’s evidence to Lord
                                                         W hether the local authority ought to have           Justice Taylor didn’t even get the title right.
ropolitan districts, where the majority of large      allowed this to happen, given its very clear                For those who haven't been able to read the
high-risk grounds exist, and where the best           responsibility, for all aspects of reasonable safety,   Hillsborough Report, who might think I am
expertise on the function was directly available,     including stewarding, under the Safety of Sports        being a little over-critical of the city administra­
on the spot. The work is detailed and technical,      Grounds A ct 1975, is not discussed in the              tion, I would point to the position in respect of
n o t politically sensitive, and is unsuited to       report. Popplewell had, in 1986, pointed to the         the two designated football grounds in Sheffield.
committee council debating and administrative         overriding role of the local authority, to set the      T h e Safety C erticate for Hillsborough (Sheffield
procedures.                                           standards and pattern of control for safety under       W ednesday), despite Popplewell’s report and
   T he demise of Metropolitan counties enabled       that A ct. T he need to identify the numbers            alterations at the ground, has not been updated,
the district councils to make a simple delegation     required and secure the training of club stewards       and the total absence of one for the Sheffield
of the function to their chief building control       performing safety duties, through conditions in          U nited Football Club, has not been remedied,
officer. If they had any sense they did that, and     the Safety Certificate was clear. Popplewell            since the duty was passed to the city in April
the buck stopped there. T h a t happened in           caused a revision of the ‘G reen G uide’ (football       1986.
Liverpool for the two designated clubs of Liver­      grounds safety code) to be carried out, and that            T he lesson I hope will be learnt from the
pool and Everton. Safety certificates were re­        included new and detailed advice on matters             deaths of a total of 217 persons, in the three
viewed, rewritten and updated then, and               very relevant to Hillsborough.                          football ground disasters of Ibrox Park, Valley
annually since.                                          T he popular press, understanding the damn­           Parade and Hillsborough, is that the local
    In 1989, Lord justice Taylor was appointed to     ing case against senior police officers, has            authorities, with a powerful duty to set reason­
cam ' out an enquiry and to report on the loss of     justifiably given much space to that. This has, to       able safety standards and certify the safety of
95 lives at the Hillsborough Football Stadium,        some extent, diverted popular attention from the        designated football grounds, now need to tackle
Sheffield, on 15 April last. His Interim Report       failures of the city council. Readers of Municipal       the work diligently. I hope ‘they’ - the members
and 43 recommendations, 28 of which are               Journal, and particularly building control officers,    and the administrators - will stop talking about it
advised for immediate implem entation, are just       will better understand the gravity of their ‘serious    and instead delegate the real technical task to
published. W hat should ‘they’ leam from it?          breach of duty’. Sheffield Council had delegated         the chief officer of their authority best qualified
W ho are ‘they’?                                      its powers and obligations, acquired in April           and experienced to carry it out. Finally, I hope
    Hillsborough was, in one im portant respect,       1986, to a committee of members. No single              that he will give it top priority; 217 avoidable
different from what you should expect at other        com petent officer was delegated to get on with         deaths are 217 too many.                          ■
designated football grounds. The normal balance       the task. Like Bradford, the Hillsborough disas­        Norman Bush FRICS, CEng, MIStructE,
of responsibility' had been rearranged. T he police   ter was totally avoidable.                              FIA S is city building surveyor for Liverpool.
   R3719                                                                                               Sch 9 1 6 0
                              CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM

From The Building Surveyor,                     To Acting Head of Administration and
     Department of Land and Planning               Legal Department

Date 21st August, 1989                                              ■"'•^STRAT!ON & LEGAL
                                                                       D'Sri. SH EFFIELD
Ref.      BSD/ABu/GS/KTH                                               H EAD    Of        ASSISTANT
Tel. Ext. 4162 - Mr. Butler                     Ref.          A          DEPT               HEAD
                                                                                                       LS

                                                              B          2 2. M ) 89                    HIA
                   _ ^  J j
              -U s -G T tC      I ^                           c
                                                              <3S
                                                                    U .S M ..    1   UB     1   CONV
                                                                                                       CL

     Meeting at Bramall Lane Stadium, 17th August, 1989

     At the request of the Police, a meeting was held at the above sports
     ground and various issues arising out of the Interim report of the Taylor
     Inquiry were discussed with the Club representatives. A representative of
     the Fire Authority was also present.

     My Division was represented by Messrs. Butler and        who made it known
     that they were present as my representatives, and not able to corrment on
     behalf of the Council as Certifying Authority.

     The issues raised by the Policewere items 1 to     9 and 12 as follows

     1.    Removal of the radial fence      on the 'Kop'

           It was considered that this fence originally erected to segregate fans
           of opposing clubs was now serving no useful purpose, and was acting as
           an obstruction to the evacuation of spectators from this terraced
           area. The Club were not adverse to the removal of this radial fence.

           In principle, I have no objection to its removal subject to:-

           a) An additional support being provided for the rail of barrier 42 at
              the point where the radial fence is removed.

           b) Part of the post at the      top of the radial fence tobe leftin(or
              replaced by a new post) in order to maintain the stability of the
              balustrading to the top gangway.

           c) A return barrier be provided to the end of barrier No. 31,
              returning up the radialgangway a similar distance to that on the
              return of barrier No. 32.

           d) I am still considering the need for replacing the radial fence with
              a radial barrier in the same position or at sane other more
              suitable position.

           e) Lengths of barrier which have either been consequentially altered
              or unable to be previously tested due to the proximity of the
              radial fence, should be tested on couplet ion of the works.

      2.   Removal of 2 No. short radial fences on the Bramall Lane Terrace

           These fences may have been originally installed to inhibit lateral
           migration of the spectators, however their use may now be outlived.

           In principle, I have no objection to the removal of these 2 radial
           fences, however I am still considering the need for replacing the
           fence adjacent to the goalmouth with a radial barrier either in the
           same position or at sane other more suitable position.
                                         -    2   -




3.      Removal of the radial barrier on the lower part of the Kop

        Similar to 2 above, I am still considering the desirability of the
        removal of this radial barrier, or the position of any replacement if
        it is removed.

        Its removal would necessitate the replacement of two barrier rails
        where they were severed and welded on to the radial barrier when it
        was installed.

4.      Public Address System

        Speaker adjacent to police box to be removed.

        Additional speakers to be provided outside the ground to direct
        spectators.

        The club anticipated that the work would be carried out iirmediately
        after their game with Ipswich, so avoiding hone fixtures.

5.      Perimeter Fence

        Gates in the perimeter fence have been previously removed.

        Gate posts have been painted white.

        Signs showing the position of those pitch perimeter exits have not yet
        been installed.

6   .   Signs

        In addition to those to the pitch perimeter fence openings, and those
        required as part of the scheduled improvement works, the police have
        requested that signs directing away supporters to the correct end of
        the ground are provided outside the ground.

7.      C.C.T.V.

        The Police have requested the Club to provide two additional cameras
        on to the existing system, in order to adequately monitor both the
        inside and outside of the ground.

8   .   Police Control Box

        a) it was confirmed that repairs had been carried out on the fire
           alarm circuit, now equipping the police control with a flashing
           light and a warning buzzer.

        b) drawings are being prepared by Eastwood and Partners for a scheme
           to reduce noise from the Police Control Box.

9.      Capacity of Terraces

        The Club noted the figures in the General Safety Certificate and were
        aggrieved at the cuts which have been imposed.
                                     - 3 -


10.   Fire Authority attendance at matches

      The Fire Authority representative reported that it was no longer
      policy for thou to have a presence at all matches. They would however
      attend all "big" matches.
          •*
11.   Non return gate at John Street side of ground

      It was pointed out by Mr. Butler that on the occasion of the emergency
      procedure practice (5th August, 1989) this full height turnstile only
      rotated in order to facilitate egress, and was potentially dangerous,
      since on that occasion the exit door was still padlocked.

      Both the Club and the police confirmed that they would speak to the
      stewards about this and to monitor the situation.

12.   Turnstiles 7 to 10 - Bramall Lane end

      The Club confirmed that at present these are not serviceable. The
      Police requested that they be made capable of being used, particularly
      for larger crowds at popular events.

      The Club confirmed that they would be made serviceable within 3 to 4
      weeks.

      Since they have been unused for a considerable tine it is thought
      necessary for a check to be made of their structure and any necessary
      repairs done before they are re-used.

NOTE: Mr. Butler has arranged to carry out an inspection at the ground on
      Tuesday evening (22nd August, 1989), this being the next available
      tine when spectators will be using both the Kop and the Bramall Lane
      Terrace. It is hoped that my comments to clarify the observations
      in (l)(e), 2 and 3 above will be available on the 23rd August, 1989.




K30ADD
                   Bramall Lane, Sheffield S2 4SU Tel: 0742 738955 Fax: 0742 723030

          DC/1989
                                                                                                                                  21st August 1989
         M. Webster,
         Acting Head of Department,
         Administration and Legal Department,                                                                    nrn'r f.HEFHtu. 0
         Town Hall,
         Sheffield,
         SI 2HH


                                                                                                                              UB


         Dear Sir,

         re Safety of Sports Ground.

         With reference to your letter dated 17 August, I set out below our numbered
         comments by reference to the paragraphs in your letter:-

         2. We were under the impression that the maximum capacity figures had been
         revised by the Council when the Safety Certificate was issued on 11th August
         1989. These revised figures show a reduction in capacity of 23.04% on Bramall
         Lane Terrace, 18.14% on John Street Terrace (Bramall Lane End), 27.61% on
         John Street Terrace (Kop End) and 21.73% on the Spion Kop.

         I have, however, instructed Dr Eastwood of Eastwood and Partners to supply
         the capacity figures as calculated in accordance with the recommendation.
         This information will be submitted by fax on Tuesday 22nd August.

         3. When the number of spectators admitted to any of the terrace areas reaches
         within 10% of the capacity figure for that area the computer monitor operator
         will inform Police Control by telephone. Police Officers will then be given
         instructions to instuct the turnstile operators to close down the necessary
         turnstiles.

          4. A copy of the written agreement between the Club and the Police was
          submitted on 16th August. Copies of the Steward's Deployment Sheets are
          enclosed herewith.

          5. Six Crowd Safety Stewards will be used on the perimeter track to monitor
          specific areas for possible overcrowding and distress.

         10. Four Bolt Croppers have been purchased by the Club for use as cutting
         equipment. These will be used by stewards of the club and I have requested
         that the Fire Service instruct such stewards in their use.

          11. Copy submitted on 16th August.



                                                                                                                    -Cont 2-

D ire c to rs : R.J. B rea le y (C hairm an),   D . D o o le y (M an ag ing D ire c to r),   A .H . L aver,   M .A . W ra g g ,    R. W ra g g ,   P .G . W oolhouse
                C o m p an y S ecretary ; D . C a p p e r,           T eam M an a g e r : D .T . Bassett,            E n glan d R eg. N o . 61564
                                       -2 -




12.   Copy submitted on 16 August.

18.   Report submitted on 16 August.

19.   Comments submitted on 16 August.

22.   Details submitted on 16 August.

23.   Details submitted herewith.

41. The Medical Practioner will be seated in our Directors Box in the New
South Stand and will be immediately contactable by means of a telephone
which is situated by the entance to the Directors' Box. Evidence of his
competence in advanced First Aid will follow.


All stewards were addressed by the Fire Service, Police and St. Johns
Ambulance at a meeting in our Executive Suite on Tuesday 8th August. They
received instruction on Evacuation Procedures, Fire Drill and Fire Fighting
and were shown a Police Video on these lines.

Our stewards also took part in an Evacuation Drill with the Emergency Services
on Saturday 5th August.

Training exercises and instruction for Stewards will take place at least every
three months.



Yours faithfully,




DAVID CAPPER
CCMPANY SECRETARY.
                               Ovkfc^v^V\i^>        "Ws*          cKjSca^V

                                                     )                  ___
            v^jvJsJk       f Y ^ C ^ V v a X^.                      \M\VsJ            J\Q;^r

           ^ />r^--- <^y~>^ dL               '^    0 ° S
                                                       ^ t^ s ^

                           J     { / ) _____ (/v       Pk V\<j
                                                          \V-}          ^^orvK^.
                                 V?


                                 c s m V?l                                   \jsr    X/mvK»v     Vs              ?V\N
\KX            O                       o d        V<                                      \MCaj.\^o      V?      ^

                                      VN^                CAjVf)     ^               C/O^X^            L-^>fVva       v~\

V   q ^v   O f^o^
TO JOINT POLICY/MEGS COMMITTEE

REPORT OF ACTING HEAD OF ADMINISTRATION & LEGAL DEPARTMENT CONCERNING
SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS


1.        PurposeofReport

       To update members upon the action taken as a result of the Inquiry
       of Lord Justice Taylor into the Hillsborough Disaster and to enable
       members to give consideration to further action which is required.
       This report contains a summary of the action which has been taken
       so far and Enumerates a number of issues which require views from
       members.

2.        SummaryofAction Taken

       2.1.   Lord Justice Taylor published his interim report on the
              4th August, 1989. oA copy of the Report is available in the
              Members Library.

       2.2.   A copy of the Interim recommendations contained in the Report
              is attached at Appendix A. The items marked with an asterisk
              required implementation prior to commencement of the football
              season.

       2.3.   Immediately after publication of the Report, the Acting Head
              of the Administration & Legal Department wrote to Sheffield
              Wednesday Football Club, Sheffield United Football Club and
              Sheffield Sports Stadium asking for confirmation of the
              action they had taken to activate those recommendations.

       2.4.   The Acting Head of the Administration & Legal Department also
               wrote to the Police, the Fire Service, the Building Surveyor
               and the Director of Health & Consumer Services for their
               views upon the interim recommendations and the action which
               needed to be taken as a matter of urgency.

       2.5.   On the 9th August, it became known that a pre-season match
              was taking place at Sheffield United Club. To regulate the
              position, the Chief Executive issued an interim Safety
              Certificate to the Club. This contained basic safety
              provisions and also made specific reference to the interim
              recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor, which required
              implementation forthwith.

       2.6.   The Chief Executive also issued a Notice of Amendment in
               respect of the certificate issued to Sheffield Wednesday
               Football Club to reflect the items which needed immediate
               implementation pursuant to Lord Justice Taylor's interim
               recommendations.

       2.7.   The action of the Chief Executive was approved by the General
              Purposes Panel on the 17th August. The General Purposes
              Panel also approved further amendments relating to the use of
              the North Stand at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and the
              use of the North West Terrace at Sheffield Wednesday Football
              Club. A copy of the resolution of the General Purposes Panel
              is attached at Appendix 2.

       2.8.   Most of the interim recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor
            have been implemented.   Revised capacities have been
            calculated and the appropriate reduction made.   Arrangements
            have been made to count the number of spectators entering
            each self-contained area.   Written agreements have been
            entered into with both the Football Clubs and the Police
            setting out responsibilities for crowd safety and control and
            the filling of terraces.   Stewarding arrangements have been
            improved in accordance with Lord Justice Taylor's interim
            recommendations.   Gates in radial or perimeter fences have
            been painted in a distinctive colour.   The Football Clubs
            have confirmed that gates to the pitch will be kept open
            during specified activities.   Police Officers have been
            allocated in respect of each perimeter fence.   Cutting
            equipment has been made available.   Inspections of crush
            barriers have taken place and arrangements are in hand for
            replacement Of those affected by corrosion.   The question of
            layout of barriers has also been addressed.   The Clubs have
            also inspected turnstiles.   Signposting has been reviewed and
            also the information printed on tickets.   Police planning has
            also been revised and the co-ordination of emergency
            facilities.  The first aid and medical facilities as required
            in recommendations 39 to 42 of Lord Justice Taylor have also
            been effected.   Members should, however, note that a
            satisfactory response has not been received from Sheffield
            Sports Stadium concerning these general safety issues.

3.   Matters for Consideration

     3.1.   Visits

            At its meetings on the 17th August, the General. Purposes
            Panel expressed a desire to visit all sports grounds within
            the City.  All three Clubs have been notified of this re##€st
            and a suitable date for a visit will arranged.

     3.2.   The function of members in the futu re .

            It is clearly essential that a proper accountable procedure
            is set up for dealing with the issue of Safety of Sports
            Grounds.   At present, the General Purposes Panel has
            delegated authority to deal with Safety of Sports Grounds
            issues.   In the past, matters have been referred to the
            General Purposes Panel for decisions as and when they were
            necessary.   It is appreciated that members m^^3|iSh to
            participate more fully in this area.           This clearly requires
            officers to make members more aware of the regular
            discussions which take place concerning safety issues.            The
            function of the Advisory Group must be to advise members and
            assist them in providing enough information for members to
            make an informed and rational decision as and when required.
            The Advisory Group is made up of the Police, the Fire
            Service, the Building Surveyor, a representative from the
            Department of Health and Consumer Services and the Ambulance
            Service since the interim recommendations of Lord Justice
            Taylor were published.        Prior to Lord Justice Taylor's
            Inquiry, the meetings of t ^ ^ A d v i s o r y Group were rather
            informal.   This nm S ’fP-n-ow Jae improved.    Arrangements have
            already been made for the Acting Head of the Administration
            and Legal Department .to c h a i r ^ n e meetings o t t h e Advisory
            Group and for full detailed minutes to be taken.            It is
            suggested that one way of members becoming more involved in
/           this issue would be for them to be supplied with agendas of
            the meetings prior to the meeting taking place and minutes of
            meetings which have taken place.  Any views members have upon
            this proposal would be useful.

    3.3.    Inspections

            There is a statutory duty upon the local authority to inspect
            designated sports grounds at least on an annual basis.  In
            his interim recommendations, Lord Justice Taylor has said
            that he feels more frequent inspections would be of benefit.
            It is suggested that it may be appropriate to undertake
            quarterly inspections, once during the close season, once at
            the commencement of the season, once in the middle of the
            season and once at the end.  This would obviously require a
            substantial devotion of resources.  Members views upon this
            would be appreciated.

    3.4.    Emergency Procedures

                                                        will obviously be
            referred to the a ■^uTl/committee ^eHE^-the Council for
                                                       sently holds the
            delegated authority in respect of these functions is the
            General Purposes Panel.   Recent events have highlighted the
            need for a proper emergency system to be set up.      In view of
            the fact that the Licensing Department is part of the
            Administration & Legal Department, it would seem logical for
            this emergency delegation to be granted to the Acting Head of
            Administration & Legal Department in consultation with the
            chair of the General Purposes Panel.      Members are asked to
            comment upon t h is .

    3.5.     Resources

              Since the 15th April, the Chief Licensing Officer has been
              engaged full time upon Safety of Sports Grounds issues.
              Members will appreciate that this means that other work has
              been neglected and there have been repercussions upon the
              Licensing Section generally.   It is clear that proper
              resources must be devoted to this issue.   It is also fairly
              clear that there is a need for an additional senior member of
              staff to undertake the function.   A draft committee report is
              attached at Appendix 3 which sets out the proposals for the
              restructuring of the Licensing Section.   This report is based
              on the assumption that this function will remain within the
              Licensing Department at least for the time being.   It is
              considered that there is a need for at least one full time
              post to deal with the issues arising out of Lord Justice
              Taylor's report. It should also be noted that there will be
              additional duties in respect of the Sports Ground which will
              need certification as a result of the World Student Games
           •? operations.  Members will note from the draft report that i &
              i£ proposed that an additional post of Chief Licensing
              Officer is created with specific responsibility for Safety of
              Sports Grounds issues.   In addition, it is considered there
              is a need fox an additional Licensing Officer to provide a
              support function.   It is calculated that the cost of this
              will be approximately £26,500.   This cannot be financed from
              the existing budget allocated to the Licensing Section.
              There is statutory authority to enable the Council to charge
                                                             '   .    - j ->v       '     —   -
             fees for the issue,. N                ok» J?              , /r-*-.^
            C ^ v V ^ cjKT-'-i- C ~ » ■V.-.OJ-'.:  5S ^ W ^ t h c ap p lication.
             There" is a need for a costing exercise to be undertaken.         At
             this stage, members views upon the principle are required.




                  *             v* w* w-v'                           cdv'oM'u             AJ- J   V-jLX- ""-***

                               -w .N~v>   C--                         cf        -r\^.4/
SD1AAR/JL
                                          **.>.•   -^;ci   J<j CDCi»ui
REPORT OF THE ACTING HEAD OF ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT TO MEGS




Purpose of Report

To review the structure of the Licensing Section in the light of the
additional responsibilities viz a viz safety of sports grounds.

The existing structure of the Licensing Section is shown in the attached
diagram.  It consists of a Chief Licensing Officer, a Principal Licensing
Officer, three Licensing Officers and an Administrative Assistant.   The
Section was originally comprised of five staff which were increased to six
by the addition of the Administrative Assistant's post in 1986 upon the
abolition of South Yorkshire County Council.  The increase was fco take
account of the additional responsibilities taken on by the Section upon
abolition of South Yorkshire County Council.

The Section is responsible for the processing, issuing, monitoring'and
enforcing of numerous licences and consents;  for example hackney carriage
licences and private hire licences, public entertainment licences, cinema
licences, theatre licences, street collection permits, sex shop permits,
mini bus licences and the licensing of sports grounds.  The work requires
a comprehensive knowledge of the relevant legislation and much of the work
is carried out under delegated powers.


The Effect of the Hillsborough Disaster

This has had repercussions throughout the Section 3ince the Chief
Licensing Officer has been engaged full time since April in dealing with
the Inquiry and subsequently the interim recommendations of Lord Justice
Taylor.

One of the recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor is that ”each Local
Authority should review its arrangements for issuing, monitoring,
enforcing, reviewing, amending and renewing safety certificates."   It is
clear that at present, this requires a substantial devotion of officer
time and that this is likely to continue indefinitely.  Whilst tlie Chief
Licensing Officer is engaged full time on this task, other important
duties are neglected.

It is clear that further resources need to be devoted to the issue of
safety of sports grounds.  It is anticipated that it will require between
75% and 100$ of one persons time to deal with safety of sports grounds
issues in the short term.  This will entail dealing with the existing
designated sports grounds in the City, namely Sheffield Wednesday Football
Club, Sheffield United Football Club and Sheffield Sports Stadias.  It is
hoped that by next Spring, a workable and well understood administrative
system will be in effect which should mean that there will be no need "to
repeat much of the work which has been done to improve the administrative
systems.  However, the World Student Games Facilities are currently under
construction and will have a significant impact in respect of the work on
safety of sports grounds.

It is anticipated that additional staff will be required to fulfill these
functions.  A proposed new structure is shown in diagram form and attached
to this report.  The proposal is that an additional post of Chief
Licensing Officer with specific responsibility for sports grounds is
created.  There is also a need for an additional Licensing Officer who
will have direct responsibility to the Chief Licensing Officer for sports
grounds.  Also attached to this report are draft job descriptions.  In
addition to their specific duties relating to sports grounds, it is
anticipated that these two officers will as and when necessary provide
support to the existing structure which will continue to deal with the
general licensing functions.



The benefits of the changes

The increase in staff should ensure that the Licensing Section can
continue to function efficiently and provide a reasonable level of
service.  It should enable the Licensing Section to improve its service
delivery and enable a review of licensing systems to be undertaken, and
proper enforcement of legislation to take place.  During the last two
years, it has become clear that the quantity of work carried out within
the Licensing Section has increased.  There has been an increase in the
number of private hire vehicle licences issued in particular as well as a
general increase in most areas.  The World Student Games Facilities will
also in all probability require public entertainments licences requiring
additional devotion of time from the Licensing Section.  In the light of
the Hillsborough Disaster, it is important that a proper allocation of
resources is made and consideration needs to be given to the allocation of
resources and priorities in other areas.

The cost of the proposals

Taking account of the recent pay offer, the cost of implementing the
proposals will total £26,460, taking account of salaries and additional
costs.  Clearly, some of this will be recoverable by way of licensing fees
which can be charged for the issue and amendment of safety certificates
for sports grounds.  However, there may be a need for additional devotion
of resources to cover the necessary expenditure.


Recommendations

Members are asked to note the contents of this report and to authorise the
creation of the two additional posts of Chief Licensing Officer and
Licensing Officer to deal with safety of sports grounds issues.




1MS/JS
PR ESE NT

P02i                                                PRINCIPAL     SOLICITOR


P01 f                                               ASSISTANT     SOLICITOR


POld                                           CHIEF      L I C E N S I N G OFFICER




S c . 6.               PRINCIPAL          LICENSING
                       OFFICER


                  I                             I                               I
'Sc. 4/5        LICENSING                  LICENSING                    LICENSING
                OFFICER                    OFFICER                      OFFICER



S c . 1/3                                                                                           ADM IN .
                                                                                                    ASS T.




PROPOSED



P02i                                                 PRINCIPAL      SOLICITOR
                                                              I
POlf                                                 ASSISTANT SOLICITOR




POld                        CHIEF LICENSING                                                 CHIEF LICENSING
                            OFFICER        (GENER A L)                                    O F F I C E R ( S P O R T S G RO UN DS )




S c . 6.                    PRINCIPAL         LICENSING
                            Of f ic e r    (g e n e r a l )




Sc .4/ 5    LICENSING                       LICENSING                   LICENSING                LICENSING
            OFFICER                         OFFICER                     OFFICER                  OFFICER




Sc.     1.2/3                                                                         CLERICAL
                                                                                      OFFICER
                                     City of Sheffield
                                     JOB DESCRIPTION
    DEPARTMENT
                   Administration             a nd Legal

          •»


DIVISION/SECTION

                   Li ce n s i n g



      POST TITLE
                   L i c e n s i n g Of f i c e r




         GRADE
                   S c . 4/5




 RESPONSIBLE TO
                   C hi e f    Li ce n s i n g O f f i c e r    (Sports Grounds)




RESPONSIBLE FOR


                   -




; * HOLIDAY AND
SICKNESS RELIEF
                   To be c o v e r e d       by o t h e r      Licensing Officers

                   To p r o v i d e co v e r        for   other    Licensing Officers




 PURPOSEOF JOB

                   To en su r e that the s t a t u t o r y l i c e n s i n g      functions   of   the
                   C ou n c i l are m a i n t a i n e d a n d e n f o r c e d .




                                     W orking for                    w
 SPECIFIC DUTIES
            AND
RESPONSIBILITIES

        These duties must at all tines be carried out in compliance with the
        Council's Equal Opportunities Policy.


             To provi de , m a i n t a i n and e n f o r c e the r e l e v a n t s t a t u t o r y l i c e n s i n g
             f u n c t i o n s r el at in g to S a f e t y of S p o r t s G r o u n d s Of the C o u n c i l ,
           k i n c I u d i n g :-


             (aj     r ec eiv in g, c h e c k i n g      a nd    processing         applications,               r e f e r e n c e s etc.
                     w h i c h includes:

                      (i)    dealing w i t h t h e         general        p u bl ic ;
                    (i i ) h a n d l i n g ca sh - i n c l u d i n g r e c e i p t i n g a n d p a y i n g in to C it y Treasurer,:
                   (iii)   l ia is in g w i t h o t h e r o f f i c e r s , d e p a r t m e n t s a n d a u t h o r i t i e s ;
                    (iv)   is s ui ng licences , p er mi t s, etc. w h e r e a p p r o p r i a t e ;
                     (v)   to p r o p e r l y e x e r c i s e t h ei r s t a t u t o r y p o w e r s u n d e r t h e r e le va n t
                           l e g i s l a t i o n e.g. r e q u i r e m e n t to p r o d u c e d o c u m e n t a t i o n ;
                    (v i } m a i n t a i n i n g a c c u r a t e rec or ds .


             (b)     enforcement duties which                      incl udes:-

                     (i)     e n s u r i n g l ic e n s e e s   comply with sta t u t o r y standards;
                    (ii)     enforcement duties                 f r o m i n t e r v i e w i n g i n d i v i d u a l i n v o l v e d and
                           i n c l u d i n g a l l s t e p s up to p r e s e n t a t i o n erf. e v i d e n c e          in court;
                   (iii} g i v i n g s t a t e m e n t s (e.g. to t he p ol i ce )
                    (i v } p r e p a r i n g p r o s e c u t i o n files;
                     (v) g i v i n g e v i d e n c e in court.


             (c)     d e a l i n g w i t h ge ne ra l      queries        and     complaints            from    the public         and
                     o t h e r de pa rt me nt s.


             (d)     a s s i s t i n g the C h i e f L i c e n s i n g O f f i c e r s      in       the e x e c u t i o n   of   the
                     o v e r a l l f u n c t i o n s of t he s ec ti on .




        Any other cuties and responsibilities as may be determined after negotiation
        between management, the post holder,.and the appropriate Trade Unions.




     ISSUE DATE




                                             *-.. «ft f .***=
                                                    * «
                                                                   :         *-          m*m jrtr.                                      -   ,—iv.
                                                                                                                                                    8
                                                                                                                                                    9   r
                                              VVUf^MiQ                                    tO                 D M -:M !d IU
                                   City of Sheffield
m    m    k
                                   JOB DESCRIPTION
         DEPARTMENT
                       Administration           and    Le gal



DIVISION/SECTION
                       Licensing



          POST TITLE
                       C hi ef   Licensing        Officer       (G eneral)




              GRADE
                       POld




    RESPONSIBLE TO
                       Assistant       Soli citor



RESPONSIBLE FOR
                       Principal       Licensing Officers
                       Licensing       Officers
                       Admin.     Assistant




      ' HOLIDAY AND
    SICKNESS RELIEF

                       To be c o v e r e d     by C h i e f L i c e n s i n g   Officer    ( S po rt s   Grounds)
                       and A s s i s t a n t   Solicitor
                       To p r o v i d e c o v e r for C h i e f L i c e n s i n g O f f i c e r   ( Sp or ts
                       Grounds) a nd P r i n c i p a l L i c e n s i n g O f f i c e r




    PURPOSE OF JOB



                       To e n s u r e that the s t a t u t o r y l i c e n s i n g     functions         of the
                       Co un ci l ar e m a i n t a i n e d a n d e n f o r c e d .




                                   Workino for o i w .h^ sc
 SPECIFIC DUTIES
            AND
RESPONSIBILITIES

        These duties must at all times be carried out in compliance with the
        Council's Equal Opportunities Policy.

        1.    To e n s u r e that the li c e n s i n g f u n c t i o n s of the C i t y C o u n c i l f r o m time
               to t i m e a l l o c a t e d to the A d m i n i s t r a t i o n a n d L e g a l D e p a r t m e n t a r e
               p r o p e r l y c a r r i e d out in a c c o r d a n c e w i t h s t a t u t o r y r e q u i r e m e n t s ana
             fcthe C o u n c i l ' s policies.

        2.   To as si s t the A s s i s t a n t         S o l i c i t o r in e n s u r i n g the p r o p e r s u p e r v i si o n ,
              t r a i n i n g and d i s c i p l i n e   of all e m p l o y e e s in the L i c e n s i n g Se ct io n.

        3.   To p r e p a r e r epo rts on l i c e n s i n g m a t t e r s for the A s s i s t a n t S o l i c i t o r
             a nd a p p r o p r i a t e Co mmi t t e e s , a n d to i n s t i t u t e , m a i n t a i n .acid o p e r a t e
              p r o p e r p r o c e d u r e s to e n s u r e that all r e l e v a n t m a t t e r s a r e b r o u g h t
              to the a t t e n t i o n of any C o m m i t t e e or O f f i c e r of the C o u n c i l r eq u ir e d
              to m a k e a d e c i s i o n on a ny of the l i c e n s i n g m a t t e r s r e f e r r e d to in (1)
              above.

        4.    To li ai s e w it h Members , o t h e r d e p a r t m e n t s of t he C o u n c i l                and outside
              b o d i e s on all m a t t e r s a f f e c t i n g t he L i c e n s i n g S e c t i o n .

        5.    To m a i n t a i n a se rv i c e to the g e n e r a l           p u b l i c on l i c e n s i n g m a t t e r s ,
              i n c l u d i n g d e a l i n g with e n q u i r i e s a n d    correspondence.

        6.    So far as r es o u r c e s permit, to e n s u r e th at the r e q u i r e m e n t s i mp o se d
              upon l i c e n s e e s by law a n d by l i c e n c e c o n d i t i o n s a r e c o m p l i e d w i t h
              an d in this c o n n e c t i o n to c o p o r d i n a t e t h e acti.vities of the C o u n c i l ' s
              O f f i c e r s and the polic e, f i r e and o t h e r r e l e v a n t a u t h o r i t i e s .

        7.    To be r e s p o n s i b l e for all m o n i e s r e c e i v e d by t h e L i c e n s i n g S e c t i o n
              and to m a i n t a i n p r o pe r r e c o r d s to t h e s a t i s f a c t i o n o f the C it y
              Treasurer.

        8.    To take s t a t e m e n t s and to p r e p a r e r e p o r t s on a n y m a t t e r s w h e r e legal
              p r o c e e d i n g s ma y be c o n t e m p l a t e d a n d to a p p e a r in a n y C o u r t p r o c e e d i n g s
              w h i c h i n v o l v e the C o u n c i l ' s l i c e n s i n g f u n c t io n .

        9.    To a s s i m i l a t e and i m pl e m e n t the i n c r e a s i n g i t e m s of n e w l e g i s l a t i o n
              r e l e v a n t to the C o u n c i l ' s l i c e n s i n g f u n c t i o n s , w h i c h is b o t h v a r ie d
              and com ple x.

       10.    A s s i s t a n c e in re se arc h of n e w l e g i s l a t i o n       and     the    relevant       case
              law a f f e c t i n g the l i ce n s i n g f u n c t i o n .




        Any other duties and responsibilities as may be -determined •after nesroris.ticn
        between management, the post holder, and the appropriate Trade Unions.




      ISSUE DATE
tfH T      .......
                                        City of Sheffi eld
                                        JOB DESCRIPTION
    DEPARTMENT
                     Administration           and       Legal
                                                                                                                                     .




          «k

DIVISION/SECTION

                     Licensi ng


      POST TITLE
                     C hi ef   Li c e n s i n g O f f i c e r   ( S po rt s G r ou n d s )



          GRADE

                     Po ld



 RESPONSIBLE TO

                     Assistant        Sol i c i t o r


RESPONSIBLE FOR
                     Licensing        Of f i c e r




   - HOLIDAY AND
 SICKNESS RELIEF
                     To be c o v e r e d by C h i e f           Licensing      Officer         (G e n e r a l )/ A s s i s t a n t
                     S o li ci to r
                     To p r o v i d e c o v e r for C h i e f L i c e n s i n g       Officer         (G e ne r al )/
                     Pr in c ip al L i c e n s i n g O f f i c e r




 PURPOSE OF JOB
                     To e n s u r e that        the s t a t u t o r y    licensing           functions        relating         to
                     Sa fe t y of Spo r t s G r o u n d s of the C o u n c i l               are maintained              and
                     enforced.




                                         Working for                                                                                     j
' SPECIFIC DUTIES
             AND
 RESPONSIBILITIES

        These duties must at all times be carried out in compliance with the
        Council's Equal Opportunities Policy.

        1.   To e n s u r e that the lic e n s i n g f u n c t i o n s r e l a t i n g to S a f e t y of S p o r ts
             G r o u nd s and the i m p l e m e n t a t i o n of the S a f e t y o f S p o r t s G r o u n d s
             lic en s in g s y s t e m of the C i t y C o u n c i l f r o m t i m e t o t i m e a l l o c a t e d
             i o the A d m i n i s t r a t i o n a nd Legal D e p a r t m e n t a r e p r o p e r l y c a r r i e d out
             in a c c o r d a n c e w i t h s t a t u t o r y r e q u i r e m e n t s a nd the C o u n c i l ' s p o li cies .

        2.   To liaise as r eq uir ed w i t h p e r s o n n e l at a s e n i o r level in o t he r
             d e p a r t m e n t s of the C i t y C o u n c i l a n d P u b l i c S e r v i c e Bod ie s.

        3.   To assis t the A s s i s t a n t S o l i c i t o r in e n s u r i n g the p r o p e r s u p e r v i s i o n , t r a i n i n g
             and d i s c i p l i n e of all e m p l o y e e s in the L i c e n s i n g S e ct io n.

        4.   To p r e p a r e r epo rt s on l i c e n s i n g m a t t e r s for the A s s i s t a n t S o l i c i t o r and
              a p p r o p r i a t e Co mm it te es , a n d to institute'; m a i n t a i n a n d o p e r a t e p r op e r
              p ro c e d u r e s to e n s u r e that all r e l e v a n t m a t t e r s a r e b r o u g h t to t he a t t e n t i o n
              of any C o m m i t t e e or Of f i c e r of t he C o u n c i l r e q u i r e d to m a k e a d e c is i o n
              on any of the l ic e n s i n g m a t t e r s r e f e r r e d to in (1) above.

        5.   To liaise wi th Membe rs , o t h e r d e p a r t m e n t s of the C o u n c i l an d o u t s i d e
              b o di e s on all m a t t e r s r e l a t i n g to S a f e t y of S p o r t s G r o u n d s a f f e c t i n g
              the L ic e n s i n g Section.

        6.   To m a i n t a i n a s e r v i c e to t he g e n e r a l p p b l i c on l i c e n s i n g m a t t e r s r el a t i n g
              to Sa fe ty of S p o r t s G r o u n d s i n c l u d i n g d e a l i n g w i t h e n q u i r i e s a nd
              c o rr es po nd en ce .

        7.   So far as re so u r c e s per mi t, to e n s u r e that the r e q u i r e m e n t s i m p o s e d upon
              l ic en s ee s by law and by l i c e n c e c o n d i t i o n s a r e c o m p l i e d with, a nd in t h i s
              c o n n e c t i o n to c o - o r d i n a t e the a c t i v i t i e s of the C o u n c i l ' s o f f i c e r s a nd
              the police, fire and ot h e r r e l e v a n t a u t h o r i t i e s .

        8.   To be r es p o n s i b l e for all m o n i e s r e c e i v e d by t he L i c e n s i n g S e c t i o n and          to
              m a i n t a i n pro p er re cords to the s a t i s f a c t i o n of the C i t y T r e a s ur e r.

        9.   To take s t a t e m e n t s and to p r e a p r e r e p o r t s on a n y m a t t e r s w h e r e legal
              p r o c e e d i n g s ma y be c o n t e m p l a t e d a n d to a p p e a r in a n y C o u r t p r o c e e d i n g s
              w h i c h in vol ve the C o u n c i l ' s l i c e n s i n g f u n c t i o n r e f e r r e d to in (1) above.

        0.   To a s s i m i l a t e and i mp le m e n t the i n c r e a s i n g i t e m s of n e w l e g i s l a t i o n
              r ele van t to the C o u n c i l ' s l i c e n s i n g f u n c t i o n s r e f e r r e d to in (1) a b o v e
              w hi ch is both v a ri ed an d com pl ex .

        1.   A s s i s t a n c e in re sea rc h of n e w l e g i s l a t i o n a nd t he r e l e v a n t      cose     law
              a f f e c t i n g the l i c en si ng f u n c t i o n r e f e r r e d to in (1) above.



         Any other duties and responsibilities as may be determined after negotiation
         between management, the post holder, and the appropriate Trade Unions.




      ISSUE DATE
r



                 South Yorkshire Police                                                                                                         ''Ua t;H
                                                                                                                                                  f vvA ■ |4 V X \   I 'H v


                                                                                                                       DIVISIO N A L HEADQUARTERS
                                                                                                                       WES T BAR GR EEN
                                                                                                                       SH EFFIE LD    SI 2 D A
                                                                                                                       T E L E P H O N E (0742) 7 6 85 22



               A L L C O M M U N I C A T I O N S T O BE A D D R E S S E D T O " T H E C H I E F S U P E R I N T E N D E N T "



                Mr. I.L. Podmore,                                                                                      Y O U R R E F E R EN C E

                Chief Executive,
                                                                                                                       O U R R E F E R EN C E      D/LB/PH /W B
                Sheffield City Council,
                Town Hal 1,                                                                                             D A TE                     18 August 1989
                Sheffield SI 2HH                                                                                                                            ■e • ’




                Dear Sir,

                REMOVAL OF RADIAL FENCES
                SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL GROUND

                A meeting was held at Sheffield United Football Ground on Thursday 17 August
                1989, the main topic of discussion being the removal of the radial fences
                1 - on the Spion Kop which extends from the perimeter fence to the walkway
                at the top of the section, 2 - two short fences on Bramall Lane Terrace.

                Present at the meeting were Mr. Capper, Club Secretary, Mr. D. Dooley, Managing
                Director, Sheffield United Football Club, Dr. Eastwood of Eastwood 6 Partners,
                Divisional Officer Liversidge of the South Yorkshire Fire Service,
                Superintendent Hale and Inspector Beeden, both from West Bar Police Station
                and responsible for football planning, Mr.          and a colleague, both of
                the Building Surveyors1 Department of the Town H a l l .

                With the exception of Mr.         ^nd his colleagues, both of whom expressed
                reservations, there was unanimous agreement that the above mentioned radial
                fences prevented lateral movement of the spectators and represented a danger
                in impeding an emergency evacuation or sudden sideways movement of the
                spectators for whatever reason.    Dr. Eastwood endorsed the feelings of the
                police and fire service and suggested the fences should be removed as soon
                as possible.

                I must formally record that the police feel the radial fences mentioned above
                represent a danger to crowd safety and they should be removed iirmediately.
                I understand that the fences can be removed without difficulty subject to the
                required approval from your offices.

                Yours fgiffiifully,




               A/ChJ^ef Superintend'
                                                                                                                                            UB
                                                                                                                         GS




           T H E O F F I C E R D E A L I N G W I T H T H I S C O R R E S P O N D E N C E IS
                                                                                                     Superintendent Hale                                                      3746

    A D M /3
                                  City of Sheffield
                         Administration and Legal .Department



                             C O M M I T T E E    R E P O R T
                                  F R O N T    S H E E T




REPORT TO:               G ENE RA L P U R D O S E S   ° A N EL



DATE OF COMMITTEE:        THURSD A Y     17th A U G U S T        1989



SUBJECT:
             SAFETY     OF SPORT S G R O U N D S A C T       1975



ORIGINATING OFFICER:        AC TI N G H E A D OF A D M I N I S T R A T I O N A ND L EG AL
                                                                        DFPARTMFNT


LIST OF BACKGROUND PAPERS (As applicable and unless confidential/exempt*):




                       SAFETY    OF S P O R T S G R O U N D S F IL ES




             *Full details of what constitutes confidential/
              exempt information are available on request
    REPORT OF THE ACTING HEAD OF ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT
                      TO THE GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL__________________


SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 - ISSUE AND AMENDMENT OF SAFETY
CERTIFICATES                __________________________ __________


PURPOSE OF REPORT
      To advise members of interim         action which has been taken in
respect of the issue of a general Safety Certificate to Sheffield United
Football Club pic., and in respect of the amendment of the general Safety
Certificate Lssued--by—South— 1¥e*Lks-h±r-e County Council to Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club p i c .


INTRODUCTION
      Members have already been made aware of the fact that Lord Justice
Taylor published his interim report upon the Hillsborough Disaster on 4th
August, 1989. A copy of the interim recommendations of Lord Justice
Taylor are attached at Appendix A. A number of the interim
recommendations are specified as requiring implementation before
commencement of the 1989/90 Season.   These items are asterisked" in the
interim recommendations.   The official date for commencement of the
1989/90 Season is the 19th August, 1989.   However, it was drawn to the
attention of the Council that a football match was to take place at
Sheffield United Football Club on Saturday, 12th August, 1989.    In view of
the fact that a Safety Certificate had not been issued to Sheffield United
Football Club, urgent consideration was therefore given to the matter on
Friday, 11th August, 1989.   Additionally, consideration was given to the
serving of a notice of amendment of certificate in respect of Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club.

SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB
      When it came to the attention of officers that a pre-season football
match was to take place at Sheffield United Football Club on 12th August,
consideration was given to whether an interim safety certificate should be
issued to the Club prior to a match taking place.   Members are referred to
recommendation 14 of Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations which states
that where a sports stadium has been designated under the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975 and a safety certificate has not yet been issued, the
Local Authority should proceed forthwith to issue a certificate.   In the
light of this recommendation, a general safety certificate was issued by
the Chief Executive on 11th August, 1989. A copy of the certificate
issued is attached at Appendix B. This contains what can be best
described as basic safety provisions and particularly incorporates those
recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor which he considered should be
implemented immediately.
      Condition 7 specifies the number of first-aid attendants which are
considered necessary taking into account Lord Justice Taylor's
recommendations in this respect.
      Condition 7(c) also requires the attendance of the medical
practitioner as recommended by Lord Justice Taylor.
      CGijui cion 7(d) lays dfwn a -requirement few at5t'endatiice’,iof - the'*-
ambulance service where appropriate, again as recommended by Lord Justice
Taylor.
      Conditions 22-28 also take account of Lord Justice Taylor's
recommendations.  The capacity levels have also been amended. Members
will appreciate that this is one of the key issues considered.
             SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB
                   There is already in force a Safety Certificate in respect of
             Sheffield Wednesday Football Club. This certificate was issued by South
             Yorkshire County Council.    A notice of amendment of the Safety Certificate
             has therefore been served.    The Notice of Amendment was served as a matter
             of urgency to give the Club the maximum available time to comply with its
             requirements.  This was served upon the Club on 11th August, 1989. The
             first football match is to take place at Sheffield Wednesday Club on 19th
             August, 1989. The amendments and additions reflect the recommendations of
             Lord Justice Taylor which he required to be implemented before the
             commencement of the new football season.    A copy of the notice of
             amendment is attached at Appendix C. The amendments relate to first-aid
             provisions and capacities at the ground.    The additional conditions
             incorporate the recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor.
                   Members of the Advisory Group and representatives from Sheffield
             Wednesday Football Club have-had lengthy discussions about the use of the
             north west terrace at the Sports Ground. The terrace is divided into an
             upper and lower area.    It is considered that it is reasonably safe to use -
             the upper area but no use should be made of the lower area at the m o m en t.
             One option would be *to prohibit the use of the entire north west terrace.
             However, the upper portion is considered to be reasonably safe and the
             police have indicated that for operational purposes they would like to be
             able to utilise a part of the upper portion of the terrace.    The
             suggestion has been made by them as a result of the interim
             recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor since it is suggested in the
             interim report that the police should have contingency plans to deal with
             the problem of large numbers of ticketless fans arriving at football
             grounds.  If use is made of that portion of the ground, fans will gain
             access by turnstiles servicing only that area and the perimeter gate at
             the back of the area will remain open during the match.- There is no
             access to the pitch area from the portion of the stand which is proposed
             to be in use.
                   The amended Safety Certificate envisages that use will be made of
             both the upper and lower areas of the north west terrace.    It is therefore
             necessary to issue a further notice of amendment either specifying that no
             use of the west terrace should be made or amending the capacity and
             Condition 10 to reflect the fact that only the upper area should be used.
                   A copy of the Sheffield Wednesday General Safety Certificate is to
             be found at Appendix 4).

              GENERAL ISSUES
                   The whole issue of Safety of Sports Grounds .will be the subject of a
             detailed report to the Policy Committee at its meeting in September,
             1989.

             RECOMMENDATIONS
                   The Panel is recommended:-

             1.    To confirm the action of the Chief Executive in issuing an interim
                   Safety Certificate to Sheffield United Football Club.

             2.    To confirm the action of the Chief Executive in amending the current
                  ' certificate for Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.

             3.   To authorise the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
                   to issue a further notice of amendment in respect of the certificate
                   issued to Sheffield Wednesday Football Club (as amended) as
                   follows:-


MS1ABR/PGT
 (i)         Schedule 3 of the amended Certificate shall be further
             amended to state that the maximum capacity for the upper area
             of the north west terrace shall be 2,300.

  (ii)       Schedule 3 of the amended Certificate shall be further
             amended to specify that the maximum total capacity for the
             Sports Ground shall be 43,724.

  (iii)       For the sake of clarity, additional Condition 10 of the
              amended Certificate shall be amended to reflect the fact that
              only the upper part of the terracing of the north west
              terrace shall be used.




              August, 1989             MARK WEBSTER
                                       Acting Head of Administration and
                                       Legal Department, Town Hall,
                                       SHEFFIELD    SI 2HH




                             I\
J m s i a b r /p g t J
                                                                                                                            g m
                                  CHAPTER 24 - THE RECOM M ENDATIONS

  315. The recommendations which follow are the m inim um necessary to ensure that existing football
grounds can for the present be safely used, based upon the evidence which I have heard at Sheffield and other
information I have received. They complement the recommendations which M r Justice Popplewell set out
after his inquiry at Bradford.

   316. Those which are asterisked should be carried out before the 1989/90 season starts. The rest should be
started forthwith and completed as soon as possible.

Maximum Capacities for Terraces
★         1. Where a viewing terrace is divided into pens or areas which are self-contained, the Safety Certificate
        should specify the maximum number of spectators to be admitted to each such pen or area.

        A pen or area is to be deemed “self-contained” notwithstanding that it has a gate or gates affording access to
        another peri or area and whether such gate or gaites be open or shut.

★        2. Each figure for maximum capacity should be assessed in accordance with Chapter 16 of the Green
        Guide (“the Green Guide figure”) subject to the following qualifications:-

        (a) in arriving at “the Green Guide figure'', proper and realistic allowance must be made for all factors
            which should reduce the permissible density in accordance with the range of maximum figures specified
            in paragraphs 221 and 222 of the Green Guide:

        (b) after assessing “the Green Guide figure’', a deduction of 15% should be made to improve the safety
            margin.

★        3. Arrangements should be made:-

        (a) to limit the number of spectators entering each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity
            figure assessed in accordance with Recommendation 2 above either electronically, mechanically, by a
            ticketing arrangement, by counting or otherwise, and

        (b) to close off further access to such pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.


Filling and Monitoring Terraces
    ★     4. There should be a written agreement between the club and the police setting out their respective
        responsibilities for crowd safety and control and in particular for the filling of each self-contained pen or
        other terraced area and the monitoring of spectators in each such pen or area to avoid overcrowding. Any
        variation of the agreement in respect of an individual match should be agreed in writing in advance.

    ★    5. At each match, there should be on the perimeter track, for each self-contained pen or other terraced
        area, a steward (if the club is monitoring that area) or a police officer (if the police are monitoring it) whose
        sole duty' is to check crowd conditions in that area for possible overcrowding or distress throughout the
        period the area is occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed should be in addition to any other steward
        or police presence. H e should have ready access to the police officer authorised under Recommendation 9
        below, and by radio to the control room.


    Fences and Gates
          6. All police officers and stewards with duties in relation to the terraced areas and especially those with
        duties under Recommendation 5 above, should be fully briefed and trained with regard to the recognition of
        crowd densities, to the recognition of signs of distress and to crowd dynamics. Training should include
                          at the giwwi and photogsaplis*    designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise
        uiueiem cru»u uensmes.

    ★    7. All gates in radial or perimeter fences of pens or other self-contained areas should be painted in a
        different colour from the rest of the fence and marked “Emergency Exit”.



                                                             57
★    8. Where there are perimeter fences, ail gates to the pitch should be kept fully open during the period
    when spectators are on the terrace.

★     9. There should be in respect of each gate in a perimeter fence (or group of gates if they are close together)
    a police officer authorised to decide whether or not to allow spectators through a gate to relieve overcrowding.
    The officer so authorised in respect of each gate should be identified for each match and known to be so by all
    stewards and police officers in that vicinity. He should be able to make radio contact with the control room
    either himself or via an officer close at hand.

★     10. Suitable and sufficient cutting equipment should be provided by the club at each ground where there
    are perimeter fences to permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release numbers of spectators if
    .necessary. Agreement should be reached as to whether the equipment should be used by police. the fire
    brigade or stewards. Whoever is to use it should be trained to do so. Whether to use it should be adecisionof a
    nominated senior police officer at the ground.


Crush Barriers
★      11. All crush barriers should be visually inspected immediately for signs of corrosion. Any barrier fsand
    to be affected by a significant degree of corrosion should be repaired or replaced.

★     12. The layout of barriers in each pen or terraced area should be reviewed immediately to ensure that it
    complies with the criteria-contained in Chapter 9 of the Green Guide. If it does not. the assessment of the
    maximum capacity figure for that pen or terraced area, in accordance with Recommendation 2 above, should
    reflect the fact.


Safety Certificates
      13. There should be an immediate review of each Safety Certificate by the responsible locai authority,
    which should consult the club in respect of which the Certificate is issued, the police, the fire service, the
    ambulance service and the building authority. Such a review should include an inspection of the stadium. Its
    object should be to ensure that the operative conditions of the Certificate are complied with and to add or
    substitute any condition shown to be necessary as a matter of urgency following the findings and
    recommendations in this report.

      14. Any local authority within whose area there exists a sports stadium designated under the 1975 Act for
    which no Safety Certificate has yet been issued should proceed forthwith to remedy the situation.

      15. Every Safety Certificate should be reviewed by the local authority at least once annually and each
    Certificate should require to be renewed annually/


       16. Each local authority should review its arrangements for issuing, monitoring, enforcing, reviewing,
    amending and renewing Safety Certificates. Such review should require that there exists or is provided an
    accountable administrative structure whereby the functions of the local authority are regularly and
    effectively supervised by senior officers and elected members and decisions are properly taken in accordance
    with the local authority’s rules.

       17. To assist the local authority in exercising its functions, it should set up an Advisory Group consisting
    of appropriate members of its own staff, representatives of the poiice. of the fire and ambulance services, of
    the building authority, of the club and of a recognised supporters' club. The Advisory Group's terms of
    reference should encompass all matters concerned with crowd safety and should require regular visits to the
    ground and attendance at matches. The Advisory Group should have a chairman from the local authority,
    and an effective procedure. Its resolutions should be recorded and it should be required to produce regular
    written reports for consideration by the local authority.


Dittos of each"Football Club
★     18. Each turnstile should be inspected and its potential rate of flow measured. Thereafter, regular
    inspections should be made to ensure that each turnstile remains capable of admitting spectators at the rate
    anticipated.



                                                        58
★ •       19. The.correlation between each viewing area in the stadium and the turnstiles serving it should be such
        as to ensure.that all the spectators intended to be admitted to that viewing area can pass through the
        turnstiles within one hour. If that cannot be done, the capacity of that viewing area should be reduced
        accordingly.

★         20. Turnstiles should be closed when the permitted capacity of the area served by them is about to be
        reached and arrangements should be made .to ensure quick and effective communication with turnstile
        operators for this purpose.

          21. Closed circuit television should be so installed as to enable crowd densities outside the ground, within
        concourse areas and in pens and other standing areas, to be monitored before and throughout a match.

★         22. All signposting for spectators both outside and inside the ground should be comprehensively
        reviewed. It should, in relation to the arrangements for each match, be unambiguous, eye-catching, simple
        and clear and should be designed to ensure the rapid movement of spectators to their appropriate viewing
        area.

★          23. Information on tickets should be unambiguous, simple and clear and should correlate absolutely with
         the information provided in respect of each match both outside and inside the ground. Retained ticket stubs
         should contain information necessary to guide spectators once inside the ground.

★         24. Information on tickets requesting spectators to be in position by a particular time should be reviewed
         by clubs in conjunction with the police to ensure that it corresponds with the planned arrangements for
         admitting spectators to tfce ground.

           25. Each club should consult with a recognised supporters’ club as to the provision of pre-match
         entertainment aimed at attracting spectators to the ground in good time.


Police Planning
★         26. The Chief Constable of each police force in whose area there is one designated stadium or more
         should nominate a chief officer to liaise with the management of each football elub and local authority
         concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.

★           27. The Operational Order for each match at a designated stadium and the pre-match briefing of all
         officers on duty there should alert sach officers to the importance of preventing any overcrowding and. if any
         is detected, of taking appropriate steps to remedy it.

★           28. The Operational Order for each match at a designated stadium should enable the police to cope with
          any foreseeable pattern in the arrival of spectators at a match and in their departure. It should provide for
        . sufficient reserves to enable rapid deployment of officers to be made at any point inside or outside the ground.

    ★     29. The option to postpone kick-off sheaki be in the discretion of the officer in command at the ground.
         Crowd safety should be the paramount consideration in deciding whether to exercise it.

            30. There should be available in the poiice control room the results of all closed circuit television
         monitoring outside and inside the ground aad the record of any electronic or mechanical counting of numbers
         at turnstiles or of numbers admitted to any area of the ground. Officers in the control room should be skilled
         in the interpretation and use of these data.


    Communications
           31. There should be sufficient operators in the police control room to enable all radio transmissions to be
         received, evaluated ami answered The           system should be such as to give operators in the control room
         p*» * («j   • . '<                , .«••»» mw. w                                                    should be -
                                   td;'pi$(i£&"<Qta$&owding o f the airwaves. Consideration should be given to
         sound-proofing the control room against excessive crowd noise.




                                                              59
       32. To complement radio communications, there should be a completely separate system of land lines
     with telephone links between the control room and key points at the ground.

       33. Within the control room, there should be a public address system to communicate with individual
     areas outside and inside the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole ground. Important
     announcements should be preceded by a load signal to catch the attention of the crowd despite a high level of
     noise in the ground. T his arrangement should be prominently advertised on every programme sold for every
     match.

       34. Use should be made where possible of illuminated advertising boards to address the crowd.
     Consideration should ateo be given to the use by police officers of a simple code of hand signals to indicate to
     the control room the existence of certain emergencies or requirements.


 Co-ordination of Emergency Services
 ★      35. The police, fire and ambulance serrices should maintain through senior nominated officers regular
     liaison concerning crowd safety at each sjadium.

 ★     36. Before each match at a designated stadium, the police should ensure that the fire service and
     ambulance service are fi*en foil details* about the event, including its venue, its timing, the number of
     spectators expected, tasiy likely routes ai entry and exit.:and any anticipated or potential difficulties
     concerning the control or movecaent ofd se crowd. Such details should be readily available in the control
     rooms of each of the emsnsency serncss.

 ★     37. Contingency plaasr for the arrival a* each designated stadium of emergency vehicles from all three
     services should be reviewed. They shoefet include routes of access, rendezvous points, and accessibility
     within the ground itself.

 ★     38. Police officers posted at the entrasces to the ground should be briefed as to the contingency plans for
     the arrival of emergency services and shoaM be informed when such services are called as to where and why
     they are required.


■ First Aid, Medical Facilities and Ambulances
 ★      39. There should be at each stadium at each match at least one trained first aider per 1.000 spectators. The
     club should have the responsibility for securing such attendance.

       40. There should be ar each stadium oae or more first aid rooms. The number of such rooms and the
     equipment to be maintaiBed-withinthem saould be specified by the local authority' after taking professional
     medical advice and should be made a reqoisemeni of any Safety Certificate.

 ★     41. The club should employ a medical ^sactitioser to be present at each match and available to deal with
     any medical exigency at the ground. H e should be trained and competent in advanced first aid. He should be
     present at the ground at least an hour before kick-off and should remain until half an hour after the end of the
     match. His whereabouts should be known to those in the police control room and he should be immediately
     contactable.

 ★      42. At least one fully equipped ambelaace from the appropriate ambulance authority should be in
     attendance at all matches with an expected crowd o f 5.000 or more.

       43. The number of ambulances to be in attendance for matches where larger crowds are expected should
     be specified by the local authority after consultation with the ambulance service and should be made a
     requirement of the Safety Certificate.




                                                         60
City of Sheffield       Metropolitan District
                                                     Jg"
                                                     ISffifMMwy




Our reference                                            Chief -Executive
                     FW/DMB                              Ian L Podmore

Your reference                                           Town Hall.
                     DC/ABP
                                                         Sheffield S1 2HH
Date                                                     Telephone 7 3 4 0 0 0
                     11th August, 1989




        Sheffield United Football Club Pic
        Bramall Lane,
        SHEFFIELD.
        S2 4FU


       Dear Sirs,

       Re: Safety of Sports Grounds - Hillsborough Inquiry

       The City Council has decided that in view of the recommendations of Lord
       Justice Taylor pursuant to the Inquiry into the Hillsborough Disaster, it is
       appropriate for an interim Safety Certificate to be issued to Sheffield
       United Football Club.

       I, therefore, enclose for your attention, a copy of the Safety Certificate
       which has been issued. You will note that it contains basic safety
       provisions and also incorporates the recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor
       which he considered should be implemented immediately.

        The Council is in the process of reviewing the conditions which should be
        attached to the Safety Certificate and it is likely that this will be
        concluded in the near future and you will be issued with a new final Safety
        Certificate.

        I should also say that in the intervening period, it is likely that
        amendments will be made to the Certificate you have been issued with today
        and you should, therefore, regard the Certificate as temporary.

        Please acknowledge receipt of the Certificate.

        Yours faithfully,




        Chief Executive




        HB6AAR/JJJ
                          SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL


                    SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975
                        GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE


Address of pranises for which          Sheffield United Sports Ground,
this Certificate is issued             Bramall Lane, Sheffield

Occupier of the prsnises                Sheffield United Fcotball Club
and Holder of this Certificate         Limited

Use of the premises in respect         Football Matches,
of which this Certificate is issued    Religious Conventions.


1.     This Certificate is issued by Sheffield City Council in respect of
       the premises described above, being a Sports Ground designated by
       Order under Section 1 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975 as a
       ground requiring a Safety Certificate.

2.      The terms and conditions set out in the Schedules attached hereto are
       hereby imposed.

3.     The terms and conditions hereby imposed are those which the Sheffield
       City Council consider necessary or expedient to secure reasonable
       safety at the Sports Ground when it is in use for an activity in
       respect of which this Certificate is issued.

4.     The words used in this Certificate and the Schedules attached hereto
       have the meaning assigned to than by Schedule 1 to this Certificate
       and Section 17 of the Act.

5.     The Schedules and Plan attached hereto all form part of this
       Certificate.

6.     This Certificate cotmences on the    12th      day of August       One
       thousand nine hundred and eighty nine for an indefinite period.



                11th August, 1989       Signed .

                                               Chief Executive on behalf
                                               of and duly authorised by
                                               the Sheffield City Council.
                             SCHEDULE   1

                          SHEFFIELD CITT COUNCIL


Interpretation of General Safety Certificates issued by the Council

Word/Phrase           ■ Meaning

The Act                 The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 including .any
      Id                modification or re-enactment thereof and any
                        subordinate legislation made thereunder.

Authorised Officer      Any police officer, any officer of the South
                        Yorkshire Fire and Civil Defence Authority, or any
                        officer of the Sheffield City Council who is
                        authorised in writing.

The Certificate          The written General Safety Certificate issued by
                         the Council under the Act to the Holder of which
                         this interpretation document forms part.

The Council              The Sheffield City Council.

The Guide                The current edition of the "Guide to Safety at
                         Sports Grounds" published by HM Government or any
                         succeeding code or guidance produced by HM
                         Government.

The Holder               The person to whan the general safety certificate
                         has been issued.

Specified Activity       Any sporting event (including football matches) and
                         any any religious event and any public
                         entertainment for which a licence issued by the
                         Council is in force.

Spectator                Has the meaning assigned to it by the Act.

The Sports Ground        Sheffield United Sports Ground.
                                    SCHEDULE 2

                  Safety of Sports Grounds Certificate Conditions

 General Safety


l.The Holder shall appoint in writing at least one Safety Officer who has full
  authority to (a) take responsibility for safety at the ground and (b)
  implement and supervise safety measures. A Safety Officer shall (a) be in
  charge of the Sports Ground and the Holders Employees and (b) be in
  attendance at the Sports Ground and in direct personal canramication with a
  central control point during a specified activity.


2.The Holder (and the Safety Officer(s)) shall take all necessary precautions
  for the reasonable safety of spectators admitted to the Sports Ground and
  shall ensure that all responsible persons (as defined in Section 12(2) of
  the Act) are completely familiar with their duties under that Act and this
  certificate.


3.Where for reasons of safety the Council gives notice to the Holder that the
  Sports Ground or any section or sections of it must not be used for the
  accommodation of spectators the Holder shall not permit any areas so
  indicated to be used.


4.The Holder shall provide and maintain such signs or notices of such type,
  size and design as the Council may frcm time to time require for reasons of
  public safety. The Holder shall ensure that the signs or notices so
  required are clearly legible so that they can easily be read at all tines.


5.The Holder shall take all possible steps to ensure that no materials that
  are capable of being used as missiles are accessible to spectators.


6.Without prejudice to the provisions of Section 8 of the Act the Holder shall
  not cause or permit the Sports Ground or any of its installations to be
  altered (which term shall exclude minor remedial works which do not in any
  way affect the safety of the' Sports Ground) in any manner whatsoever without
  the prior written consent of the Council. In addition, no temporary
  structure shall be installed without the prior written consent of the
  Council. The Holder shall supply the Council with copies of such plans,
  specifications and calculations as the Council may reasonably require to
  enable any application for -such consent to be considered and shall comply
  with any conditions attached to that consent.


7. (a) The Holder shall provide and maintain at the Sports Ground to the
  satisfaction .of.the,Council a suitably, equipped first aid roam and shall
  arrange for attendance of such number of qualified first aid attendants as
  the Council may require but in any event there shall be in attendance at
  least one first aid attendant for every 1,000 spectators. The attendants
  duties shall only relate to the administering of first aid.

  (b) The first aid roan shall be capable of being lit by both the general
  lighting and the emergency lighting and shall be easily identified by means
  of signs.
         (c) the Holder shall <anploy at least one medical practitioner (in addition
       • to any medical practitioner onployed to treat players) to be present at each
         specified Activity and available to deal with any medical exigency at the
         Sports Ground. He/she shall be trained and competent in advanced first aid.
         He/she shall be present at the Sports Ground at least one hour before kick
         off and must remain until half an hour after the end of the Specified
         Activity. The medical practitioner must be immediately contactable and
         his/her whereabouts known to the Police Control Room,

        (d) The Holder shall arrange with South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance
        Service for the attendance of at least one fully equipped ambulance-atr a----
        Specified Activity where 5,000 or more spectators are expected to attend.

      8. All press personnel shall be capable of immediate identification by means of
         distinctive dress.


      9.In the event of a spectator being injured in the Sports Ground, the Holder
        shall (within 72 hours of the injury occuring) submit to the Council a full
        written report on the circumstances of the injury. The Holder shall also
        supply such additional information as the Council may require.


10. The Holder shall arrange for the attendance at every specified activity of a
    Chief Safety Steward and such number of Safety Stewards as are specified in
    Schedule 3.


11.     The Holder shall ensure that the Safety Stewards are:-
        (a) fit and capable to carry out their duties;

        (b) properly trained and instructed;

        (c) readily identifiable by dress;

        (d) provided with written instructions as to their tasks/duties.

        (e) aged between 18 and 65 years unless in the circumstances of a particular
        case the Council permit an older or younger person to be employed.

12.     The written instructions given to stewards must include the following tasks
        and duties. Stewards must:

        (a) Under the direction of the Safety Officer or the Chief Steward prevent
        overcrowding by ensuring the crowd limits in various parts of the Sports
        Ground are complied with.

        (b) Prevent spectators, as far as possible, from climbing fences and other
        structures (e.g. floodlight pylons), and from standing on seats. Where by
        virtue of the scale of the incident sts^ards are unable to prevent this,
        they must immediately report the matter to the nearest Authorised Officer or
        t o -ti»'Chief^Ste#ardsor“vth#*SSfity 'Officer;

        (c) Ensure that gangways and exits are kept clear,
V '

        (d) Identify and investigate any incident or occurrence among spectators
        which may affect spectator safety, reporting their findings to the Chief
        Steward or the Safety Officer.
      (e) Know the location of and be able to operate effectively the
      fire-fighting equipment at the Sports Ground.

      (f) Know the location of the first aid rocm and any first aid equipment kept
      elsewhere.                       <

      (g) Be fully conversant with any methods or signals used to alert staff that
      an anergency has arisen.

      (h) Be capable of recognising potential fire hazards and suspect packages,
      reporting such findings immediately to the nearest Authorised Officer or the
      Chief Steward or the Safety Officer.

      (i) Conply   promptly with any instruction given in an emergency by an
      Authorised   Officer, the Chief Steward or the Safety Officer.
      (j) Remain   at their allocated locations as instructed unless authorised or
      instructed   to do otherwise by an Authorised Officer, the Chief Steward or
      the Safety   Officer.

      (k) Report to the Safety Officer any damage or defect which is likely to
      pose a threat to spectator safety eg. a damaged crush barrier.

      (1) Open the exit doors/gates and secure then in the open position on the
      initiation of the emergency procedure or when instructed to do so by the
      Safety Officer, the Chief Steward or an Authorised Officer.


13. Training exercises organised by the Safety Officer relating to the duties of
    stewards shall be held at least once every three months. A written record
    of the exercises shall be kept.

14. All exit doors and gates for use by spectators in both ordinary evacuation
    and emergency evacuation situations shall be manned by Stewards in
    accordance with schedule 4. The other duties detailed in schedule 4 shall
    be carried out by stewards.


15.   The holder shall make arrangements with the Chief Constable of the South
      Yorkshire Police for the provision of special police services on the
      occasion of a specified event at the Sports Ground for the purposes of
      maintaining lawful and orderly behaviour amongst spectators, and the
      services shall be determined by the Chief Constable and he and his officers
      shall be allowed full access to all parts of the Sports Ground.


16.   The holder shall notify in writing the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
      Police at least 28 days before any specified activity takes place.


17.   The Council reserves the right to require any specified activity to be open
      only to spectators having purchased tickets in advance of the specified
      activity and to specify the .date .and time-of cattnencanent of the specified
      activity.

      Spectator Areas

18.   The Holder shall ensure that all doors, gates and turnstiles throughout- the
      Sports Ground are maintained in good working order at all tiroes. Particular
       •    ‘    --




       attention shall be paid to doors, gates and turnstiles in spectator ingress
       and egress routes and also to pitch perimeter gates. The Holder shall not
       cause or permit any exit doors or gates to be altered in type, design or
       method of operation without the prior consent of the Council in writing.


19.    The means of ingress and egress and the gangways in the Sports Ground shall
       at all tines be -kept unobstructed.


20.    All floor surfaces and steps throughout the Sports Ground which are
       available for use by spectators shall have even and non-slip surfaces and
       shall be kept unobstructed unrestricted and free fran trip hazards.
       Adequate drainage shall also be provided where necessary.


21.    The entrances to and exits fran the Sports Ground and the means of access to
       those entrances and exits shall be as specified in the plan which forms part
       of this certificate.


22.    The Holder shall provide and maintain suitable and sufficient cutting
       equipment to enable perimeter fencing to be removed quickly if necessary in
       the event of an emergency. The Holder shall ensure that stewards (a) are
       properly trained in the use of this cutting equipment and (b) use the
       equipment when directed to do so by the South Yorkshire Police.


23.    The Holder shall inspect each turnstile and measure its potential rate of
       flow and shall ensure that each turnstile is and rsnains capable of
       admitting spectators at the anticipated rate and shall provide a report to
       the Council of the results of such inspection by 16th August, 1989.

24.    The Holder shall enter into a written agreonent with the Chief Constable of
       the South Yorkshire Police setting out the respective responsibilities of
       the Club and the Police’for crowd safety and control. The agreement shall
       specify responsibilities for the filling of all terraced areas of the Sports
       Ground and the monitoring of spectators in such areas to avoid overcrowding.
       A copy of the agreement shall be supplied to the Council by 16th August,
       1989. Any variation of the agreement shall be agreed in writing in advance
       and the Council notified of the variation.


25.    All gates in radial or perimeter fencing shall be painted in a different
       colour from the rest of the fence and marked "anergency exit".


26.    All gates giving access fran the terraces to the pitch shall be kept fully
       open during a Specified Activity.


27-;   (         -          imtediately -visually .inspect' all crush barriers for
       signs of corrosion. Any barrier found to be affected by a significant
       degree of corrosion shall be repaired or replaced ty 16th August, 1989.

       (b) The Holder shall inrrediately review the layout of barriers in each
       terraced area to ensure that it conplies with the criteria contained in
       Chapter 9 of the Green Guide.
        (c) The Holder shall notify the Council in writing of the results of the
        inspection and review carried out pursuant to conditions 27(a) and (b) by
        16th August, 1989.'


28.     The Holder shall immediately review the signposting for spectators both
        inside and outside the Ground and any information printed on tickets. The
        Holder shall notify the Council of the results of this review and of its
        proposals in this regard by 16th August, 1989.

29.     Vehicles shall not be admitted to the Sports Ground except as authorised by
        the Council and specified on the plan.


        Fire Safety

30.     The Holder shall provide and maintain a public address system which shall be
- ■—    audible in all parts of the Sports Ground to the satisfaction of the
        Council.


31.     The Holder shall institute and maintain a fire warning system to the
        satisfaction of the Council.


32.     The Holder shall provide and maintain atileast such fire fighting equipment
        in such locations as the Council may frcm time to time specify.


33.     Except with the consent of the Council in writing the Holder shall not
        permit the storage in the Sports Ground of any flammable, explosive, .toxic
        or corrosive liquid or compressed substance (except fire extinguishing and
        drinks dispensing apparatus). The Holder shall canply with any conditions
        attached to such a consent.


34.      Except with the prior written consent of the Council the Holder shall at all
         times maintain the Sports Ground in a clean condition and shall not permit
       . any accumulations of rubbish or any other materials whether conbustible or
         not.


        Lighting and Electrical Installations

35.     The Holder shall ensure that all parts of the Sports Ground to which
        spectators are admitted are illuminated to a sufficient standard to enable
        such persons to enter or leave the Sports Ground safely.


36.     The Holder shall provide to the satisfaction of the Council a system of
        emergency lighting which shall, in the event of a failure of the general
        lighting be sufficient to enable spectators to leave the stadium, safely.



        The emergency lighting shall (a) be powered by a source independent of the
        mains electricity supply and (b) cane into operation imnediately on the
        failure of the mains lighting and (c) remain in pperation for at least three
        consecutive hours when activated.
37.   Use electrical installation for the Sports Ground shall be constructed and
      maintained in a safe and satisfactory condition. No alteration which
      significantly affects the installation shall take place without the prior
      written consent of .the Councils


38.   Throughout each specified activity the electrical installation shall be
      supervised by a competent electrician who shall investigate, rectify (if
      possible) and report to Safety Officer any defects which arise in the
      installation.


      Capacity

39.   The maximum number of spectators that may be admitted to each part of the
      stadium at any one time shall not exceed the number specified in schedule 5.


      Inspections, Tests, and Records

40.   Where any condition in this certificate requires written records to be kept
      such records shall be produced on demand to any authorised officer.


41.   The Council may at any time by notice in writing, for reasons of public
      safety, require the Holder to carry out such works and/or inspections as may
      be specified in the notice. The Holder shall comply with any requirement or
      conditions specified in that notice.


42.   If a significant defect is suspected or discovered pursuant to the normal
      use of the Sports Ground or any inspection or test carried out under the
      terms of this certificate the Holder shall iimediately notify the Council
      and take steps to correct the defect.


43.   The Holder shall arrange for the tests and inspections listed in Schedule m ,
      to be carried out and for records to be kept or reports to be supplied to
      the Council in accordance with the terms of the schedule. Where reports are
      required to be supplied to the Council, they shall be supplied as soon as
      possible on completion of the inspections/tests.


44.   Without prejudice to Section 6 of the Act or any regulations made thereunder
      the Holder shall maintain written records showing

      (a) the number of spectators admitted to each part of the Sports Ground for
      each specified activity;

      (b) the names and addresses of the stewards enployed by the holder;

      (                                     atieach specified activity and details
      of their duties;

      (d) details of the training exercises organised by the Holder for stewards
      in accordance with Condition 13 - the record shall show which stewards
      attended each exercise and the content of those exercises.
Guidance to Holders

The Council may fran time to time issue written guidance to holders on
safety matters. The holder must pay due regard to any such guidance.
                        SC H ED U LE   3 - CCMDITICN NO.IO

The number of Safety Stewards on duty at each specified activity shall not
be less than 69.

                        SCHEDULE 4 - qaOITICM NO.14

The Safety Stewards carry out the duties set out below:-

No. of Stewards          Duties
                         Manning of Final Exit Gates

     1                   ;,A' (Shoreham Street)

    11                   'B' to 'L' (John Street)

     2                   'M' and 'N' (Bramall Lane)

     2                   'O' (Braraall Lane)

     2                   'R' and 'S' (South Stand)

                          Control and Directions of Spectators

     6                   Bramall lane Stand

     3                   Bramall Lane Terrace

     9                   John Street Stand

     2                   John Street Terrace (TimberSection)

     2                   John Street Terrace (Concrete Section)

     4       .            Spion Kop Main Area

     1                    Spion Kop Disabled/Childrens Area

     9                   South Stand

                          Patrolling the Sports Ground and Dealing with
                          Emergencies■etc.

     2                   John Street Stand

      1                  Bramall Lane Stand

      1                  South Stand

                          Manning Internal Gates

      4                   Pitch -                             John,. Street
                          ierrace

      4                   Gates between John Street Timber Stand and Terrace
                          (Nos.2-5)

         1                 Gate between the two parts of the John Street
                           Timber Stand and Terrace (No.9)
                       SCHEDULE 5 - CCNDITICN NO.39


The number of spectators admitted to a specified activity shall not exceed
37,196.

Use number of spectators admitted to each of the sports ground, listed
below, shall not exceed the maximum numbers shown.

Area                     Maximum No. of Spectators

South-Stand (Seats)                7,948

Bramall Lane
   Seats                           2,958
   Terrace                         5,660

John Street
   Timber Section Seats            1,200
   Concrete Section Seats          1,490
   Bramall Lane End                1,340
   Kop End                         2,050

Spion Kop
   Southern End                    3,700
   Main Kop Area                  10,850

                                  37,196




HB7AAB/JS
                                                  SCHEDULE     $               Condition No. ^3


                                       INSPECTIONS AND TESTS REQUIRED


GENERAL   .”                                      INCIDENCE         WRITTEN      ■WRITTEN REPORT
REQUIREMENT                                                         RECORD        REQUIRED TO BE
                                                                    REQUIRED      SUPPLIED TO
                                                                                  COUNCIL



A competent person shall                          At least          No.           Yes.
inspect the structures which                      once every
form part of the Sports                           12 months.
Ground.            *


A competent person shall                          Before and        Yes.
carry out a general visual                        after each
inspection of the Sports                          specified
Ground to ensure compliance                       activity.
with the relevant Safety
Certificate Conditions.


A competent person shall                          At least                        Yes.
examine the electrical                            once every
installation of the Sports                        12 months.
Ground-


A competent person shall                          At least                        Yes.
test and inspect all fire                         once every
appliances (including                             12 months.
extinguishers, hydrants
and water supplies)


The emergency lighting and                        At least                        Yes.
fire warning (including                           once every
the Public Address) systems                       12 months.
shall be tested/inspected
by a competent person.


The emergency lighting                            Not less          Yes.
•; y      '}    :'T '.   r G ld'   b V '"- ' Z*   {*'
competent person.                                 hours not more
                                                  than six hours
                                                  prior to a
                                                  specified
                                                  activity taking
                                                  place
GENERAL                        INCIDENCE   '     WRITTEN -   WRITTEN REPORT
                                                 RECORD      REQUIRED TO BE
                                                 REQUIRED    SUPPLIED TO
                                                             COUNCIL



All the fire warning           Not less than     Yes.
detection public address       three hours nor
and other communication        more than six
systems shall be tested        hours prior to
by a competent person.         a specified
                               activity
                               taking place.


All lighting systems           Not more          Yes.
(excluding the emergency       than twenty
lighting) shall be tested      four hours
by a competent person.         prior to a
                               specified
                               activity
                               taking place.


All doors, gates and           Not more          Yes.
turnstiles throughout the      than twenty
Stadium shall be tested        four hours
by a competent person.         prior to a
                               specified
                               activity
                               taking place.



25% of the crush barriers      25% in each                   Y es.- report to
and handrails in the Stadium   period of 12                  include details
shall be tested by a           months. Once                  and results.
competent person in            a barrier or
accordance with the Guide.     handrail is
The Council shall be           tested it shall
notified in advance of the     not be tested
dates of testing.              again (unless
                               specifically
                               required by the
                               Council) within
                               three and a half
                               years after first
                               testing, but shall
                               be tested again
                               within four and a
                               half years of that
                               date.


DMS11L/5/JJJ
                                   I
                                 rJ .


                                            snriit   •   . •   r.   - S I




                            CD
                            CD




                        e
                        tv
                       JZ
                        o
                       -e
                       00




                                        x: ;
                                        o

                                        /xT ‘




C h e rr y   * « « '
City of Sheffield            Metropolitan District




Our reference                                            Chief Executive
                        5W/DMB                           Ian L Podmore

Your reference                                           Town Hall,
                        G H L /J B /D 3 4 /3 6 3 0
                                                         Sheffield S1 2HH

Date   •    *>                                           Telephone 7 3 4 0 0 0
                        1 1 th A u g u s t ,   1989




           URGENT

           Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Pic
           Hillsborough,
           SHEFFIELD.
           S6 1FW                                                 FIRST CLASS POST


           Dear Sirs,

           Re: Safety of Sports Grounds - Hillsborough

           I enclose, for your attention, Notice of Amendment of the Safety
           Certificate. The amendments are as enumerated in Appendix 1 and additional
           conditions are as enumerated in Appendix 2. The amendments and additions
           reflect the recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor which he required to be
           implemented before the commencement of the new Football Season.

           You will, therefore, appreciate that the issue of this Notice should be
           regarded merely as an interim temporary measure. It is likely that further
           amendments will be required shortly. In any event, the Council is in the
           process of drafting a completely new set of Conditions.  It is hoped that
           these will be in force in the near future.

           Please acknowledge receipt of this Notice.

           Yours faithfully,




           Chief' Executive

           Enc.




           HB6AAQ/JJJ
                           SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL


                     SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975

NOTICE OF AMENDMENT OF GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE ISSUED ON 21ST DECEMBER
1979


TAKE NOTICE THAT THE SAFETY CERTIFICATE ISSUED-TO- SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY
FOOTBALL CLUB LIMITED'IN RESPECT OF THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM, PENI STONE
ROAD, SHEFFIELD BY SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL ON 21 ST DECEMBER 197 9 IS
HEREBY AMENDED AND ADDED TO

The amendments are as specified in Appendix 1 and Appendix 2.

THESE AMENDMENTS AND ADDITIONS ARE ISSUED BY THE SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL IN
RESPECT OF THE PREMISES DESCRIBED ABOVE BEING A SPORT GROUND DESIGNATED BY
ORDER UNDER SECTION 1 OF THE SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 AS A SPORTS
GROUND REQUIRING A SAFETY CERTIFICATE.

The terms and conditions hereby imposed are those which Sheffield City
Council consider necessary or expedient is secure reasonable safety at the
Sports Ground when it is in use for an activity in respect of which this
Certificate is issued.


The amendments and additional conditions shall come into operation on the
12th day of August, 1989.



Dated the 11th day of August 1989.




                             Signed .

                                     Mr. Ian Podmore,
                                     Chief Executive on behalf of
                                     and duly authorised by the
                                     Sheffield City Council



TO:-   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Limited
APPENDIX 1 - AMENDMENTS


Current Provision                    Atoended Provision

1.   Schedule 1 - Interpretation Provisions

(a) The- Act - means the Safety      (a) The Act - means the Safety of
of Sports Ground Act 1985            Sports Grounds Act 1985 including any
                                     modification or re-enactment thereof
                                     and any subordinate legislation made
                                     thereunder

(b) The County Council - means       (b) The Council or the County Council -
the South Yorkshire County           means the Sheffield City Council
Council

(c) The Stadium - means the          (c) The Stadium or Sports Ground - means
Hillsborough Stadium,                the Hillsborough Sports Ground, Penistone
Penistone Road, Sheffield            Road, Sheffield


2.   Schedule 2 - General Terms and Conditions

(a) Condition 8(2).                  (a) Condition 8(2).
The Holder shall ensure that         The Holder shall employ at least one
during every specified activity      medical practitioner (in addition to any
a physician employed or retained     medical practitioner employed to treat
by the Holder is available to        the Holders employees) to be present at
attend at the First Aid Room if      each Specified Activity and available to
requested and that his               deal with any medical exigency at the
whereabouts are known to those       Sports Ground. He/she shall be trained
in the Police Central Control        and competent in advanced first aid.
Room at the Sports Ground.           He/she shall be present at the Sports
                                     Ground at least one hour before kick off
                                     and must remain until half an hour after
                                     the end of the Specified Activity. The
                                     medical practitioner must be immediately
                                     contactable and his/her whereabouts known
                                      to the Police Control Room.

(b) Condition 8(3)                   (b) Condition 8(3)
The Holder shall arrange for         The Holder shall arrange for
the attendance at every              the attendance at every
Specified Activity of such           Specified Activity of such
numbers of qualified First Aid       numbers of qualified First Aid
assistants as the County Council     assistants as the County Council
shall require but without            shall require but without
prejudice to the foregoing the       prejudice to the foregoing the
Holder' shall ensure that at every   Holder shall ensure that at every
specified activity there is at       specified activity there is at
least one First Aid assistant        least one First Aid assistant
for every 2,000 spectators.          for every 1,000 spectators.




                                     -2-
       Curren-t Provision                    Amended Provision

      3.   Schedule 3.

The number of spectators admitted to the     The number of spectators admitted to the
Sports Ground and to the various areas of    Sports Ground and to the various areas of
spectator accommodation within the Sports    spectator accommodation within the Sports
Ground shall not exceed the following        Ground shall not exceed the following
figures:-                                    figures:-

Spion Kop                   16,850
South Stand Upper            5,567           South Stand Upper                     5,567
South Stand Lower            3,310           South Stand Lower                   * 3,310-
West !
     Stand                   4,465           West Stand                            4,465
North West Terrace                           North West Terrace                    1 q $ c ■¥"
North Stand                 9,882            North Stand                           9,882

Total Crowd Capacity        50,174           Total Crowd Capacity                kii



                                                                                          U     \   > £ > ■>

                                                  fi/O R m   w e   <>t   re.e./LAcn     [u itn t)      z ,lo o

                                                  N O lr*                             (yo ^ h a )          b fo




                                            -3-
                                APPENDIX 2 - ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS


   1.    The Solder shall arrange with Sooth Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service
          for the attendance of at least one ‘fully equipped ambulance at a Specified
         Activity where 5,000 or mots spectators are expected to attend.


   2.     The Haider shall provide and maintain suitable and sufficient cutting
         ^equipment to enable perimeter fencing to be removed quickly if necessary in
          the event of an emergency. The Holder shall ensure that stewards (a) are
          properly trained in the use of this cutting equipment and (b) use the
          equipment when directed to do so by the South Yorkshire Police.


   3.    The Holder shall inspect each turnstile and measure its potential rate of
          flow and shall ensure that each turnstile is and remains capable of
         admitting spectators at    the anticipated rate and shall provide a report to
          the Council of the results of such inspection by 16th August, 1989.

   4.    The Holder shall enter into a written agreement with the Chief Constable of
         the South Yorkshire Police setting out the respective responsibilities of
         the Club and the Police for crowd safety and control. The agreement shall
         specify responsibilities for the filling of all terraced areas of the_ Sports
         Ground and the monitoring of spectators in such areas to avoid overcrowding.
         A copy of the agreement shall be supplied to the Council by 1'6th August,
         1989. Any variation of the agreement shall be agreed in writing in advance
         and the Council notified of the variation.

   5.    All gates in radial or perimeter fencing shall be painted in a different
         colour from the rest of   the fence and marked "emergency exit".

   6.    All gates giving access   from the terraces to the   pitch shall be    keptfully
         open during a Specified Activity.

   7.    (a) The Holder shall immmediately visually inspect all crush barriers for
          signs of corrosion. Any barrier found to be affected by a significant
          degree of corrosion shall be repaired or replaced by 16th August, 1989.

          (b) The Holder shall immediately review the layout of barriers in each
          terraced area to ensure that it complies with the criteria contained in
          Chapter 9 of the Green Guide.

            (c) The Holder shall notify the Council in writing of the results of the
            inspection and review carried out pursuant to conditions 27(a) and (b) by
            16th August, 1989 .

   8.    The Holder shall immediately review the signposting for spectators both
          inside and outside the Ground and any information printed on tickets.  The
          Holder shall notify the Council of the results of this review and of its
          proposals in this regard by the 16th August, 1989.

   9.    The Council may at any time by notice in writing, for reasons of public
          safety, require the Holder to carry out such works and/or inspections as may
          be specified in the notice. The Holder shall comply with any requirement or
          conditions specified in that notice.

   10.      No spectator shall be allowed access to that part of the Sports Ground known
            as The West Terrace.

HB7AAC/JS                                       -4-
                                           South Yorkshire County Council



SmhmS


                           SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT. 1975
                               GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE

 A ddress of p re m is e s for which                                The H illsborough. Stadium,
 th is C ertificate is issued                                       Penistone Road, Sheffield.

 O ccupier of the p re m ise s                                      Sheffield W ednesday Football
            and                                                     Club Ltd.
 H older of th is C ertificate

 U se of the p re m ise s in resp ect                               Football m atches.
 of which th is C ertificate is issued                              Religious Conventions.

  1.       This C ertificate is issued by South Y orkshire County Council in re sp ec t of
           the p re m ise s described above, being a Sports Stadium designated by O rd er
           under Section 1 of the Safety of Sports Grounds A ct, 1975 as a stadium
           re q u irin g a Safety C ertificate.

  2.       The te rm s and conditions se t out in the Schedules attached hereto    a re hereby
           im posed.

  3.       The te rm s and conditions hereby imposed a re those which the South Y orkshire
           County Council consider n e c e ssa ry o r expedient to secu re reasonable safety at
           the Stadium when it is in use for an activity in re sp ec t of which this
           C ertificate is issued.

  4.       The words used in th is C ertificate and the Schedules attached hereto     have
           the m eaning assigned to them by Schedule 1 to th is C ertificate and
           Section 17 of the Act.

  5.       The Schedules and P lans attached hereto all form p a rt of th is C ertificate.

  6.       This C ertificate commences on the twenty first day.of D ecem ber, One
           thousand nine hundred and seventy nine for an indefinite period.


            Q ate     21st D ecem ber, 1979                   Signed
                                                                        Chief Executive on behalf
                                                                       of and duly authorised by
                                                                       the SSuth Y2frkshire County
                           SCHEDULE         1

                           Interpretation

The Act                           m eans the Safety of Sports Ground Act, 1975.
A uthorised P erso n              means a person authorised in accordance with
                                  Section 11 of the Act.
The Building A uthority           means the Sheffield City Council.
The Chief Constable               means the Chief Constable fo r the tim e being
                                  of the South Y orkshire Police o r, as the case
                                  may re q u ire , the Police O fficer having charge
                                  of the Stadium on the occasion of a Specified
                                  A ctiv ity .
The Chief F ire Officer    **--   m eans the Chief F ire O fficer for the tim e being
                                  of the South Y orkshire County F ire Service o r
                                  his designated re p re se n ta tiv e .
The C ertificate                  means the w ritten G eneral Safety C ertificate of
                                  which the Schedules and Plans form p a rt.
The County Council                 m eans the South Y orkshire County Council.
The Guide                          m eans the "Guide to Safety a t Sports Grounds "
                                   as fro m tim e to tim e amended, issu ed by the
                                   Home Office, o r such o th er code of p ra c tic e as
                                   may be so issued.
The Holder                         means the applicant fo r and perso n to whom the
                                   G eneral Safety C ertificate has been issued and who
                                   is a 'qualified p erso n ' for the purposes of the Act.
Invalid C arriag e                 means a vehicle, whether m echanically propelled
                                   o r not, constructed o r adapted fo r use for the
                                   c a rria g e of one person, being a p erso n suffering
                                   from some physical defect o r disability.
 The Plans                         means the document o r documents attached to and
                                   form ing p a rt of the General Safety C ertificate and
                                   signed by the person signing the C ertificate a n d /
                                   o r any o th er document o r documents which may
                                   be added to o r substituted fo r such document o r
                                   documents and signed on behalf of the County
                                   Council.
 Specified Activity                 means a football match o r a Beligious Convention.



                                  "p ro v id e d fo r spectators a t the stadium .
 T he Stadium                       means the Hillsborough Stadium, Penistone Road,
                                    Sheffield.
 S tru c tu ra l P a rts            includes stru c tu re s, components, installations,
                                    fabric and asso ciated p arts of the Stadium.
 V ehicles                          includes invalid c a rria g e s .
                            SCHEDULE 2

                   General T e rm s and Conditions

(1)    The H older’s nominee fo r the tim e being approved in w riting by the
        County Cornell sh all be p re se n t w henever the Stadium is used fo r a
        Specified Activity and he shall on behalf of the H older ensure that
       the te rm s and conditions of the C ertificate a re com plied with at
       the Specified A ctivity.

(2)    The appointment by the H older of a nominee to attend each Specified
        Activity shall not absolve the H older and any responsible p erso n (as
        defined in section 12(2) of the Act) fro m th e ir obligation to take all
        reasonable precautions and e x ercise all due diligence to avoid the
        contravention of any te rm o r condition of the C ertificate.

The Holder shall not allow sp ectato rs to be adm itted to the Stadium unless a
Specified Activity is taking p la c e .

The num ber of spectato rs adm itted to the Stadium and to the sev eral a re a s of
sp ectato r accommodation within the Stadium shall not exceed the figures
specified in P a r t i of Schedule 3.

Subject to the te rm s and conditions hereof and to the statu to ry controls relating
thereto, the Stadium may be used an cillary to a Specified Activity fo r one o r
m ore of the following

(a)     the playing of music o r singing;

(b)     the provision of news o r com m ent associated with football;

 (c)    the sale of tickets fo r forthcom ing activities, pro g ram m es, new -sheets
         and souvenirs;

 (d)    the sale and consumption of refresh m en ts;

 (e)    any o ther use ancillary to a Specified Activity which has the p r io r approval
         in w riting of the County Council.

 (1)    W here the p rio r w ritten approval of the County Council is required under
        the te rm s and conditions hereof, an application fo r that approval shall
        be made by the H older to the County Council a t le a s t 21 days before the
        occurrence in re sp ec t of which it is req u ired .

 (2)    If w hilst the C ertificate is in operation it is proposed to a lte r o r extend the
         Stadium o r any of its installations in a m anner mentioned in Section 8
         of the Act the Holder shall at le a st 21 days before the carry in g out of the
         proposal is begun give notice in w riting of the proposal to the County
          Council.
(1)    The Holder shall ag ree with the Chief Constable a t le a s t 21 days
       (or such s h o rte r tim e to which the Chief Constable may consent)
       p rio r to every Specified Activity the methods of adm ission to be
       employed in connection wife the Specified A ctivity and (la relation
       to a Football Match) the methods to be used for the segregation of
       home and visiting su p p o rte rs,
(2)    The H older shall refuse adm ission to, o r evacuate sp ec ta to rs from ,
       the Stadium o r any p a rt thereof at any tim e before o r during a
       Specified Activity upon receiving in structio n s so to do fro m the
        Chief Constable.

The H older shall at his own expense a rra n g e fo r the attendance a t every
Specified Activity of an adequate num ber of police officers to se c u re the
o rd e rly and lawful behaviour of the sp ectato rs and the num ber of police
o fficers req u ired a t each Specified Activity shall be agreed between the
Chief Constable and the H older a t le a s t 21 days (or such s h o rte r tim e to
which the Chief Constable may consent) before a Specified Activity takes
p lace.                                                                             V
(1)       Subject to such in terim arran g em en ts as may be agreed by the County Council,
          the H older shall provide and m aintain at the Stadium to the satisfaction
          of the County Council a suitably equipped F ir s t Aid Room. The f ir s t
          aid room shall be adequately signed and shall be capable of being lit
           by the em ergency pow er supply re fe rre d to in parag rap h 12 of this
          Schedule.

(2)     The Holder shall en su re that during ev ery Specified Activity a
        physician employed o r retained by the H older is available to attend
        a t the F ir s t Aid Room if req u ired and th at his w hereabouts a re known
        to those in the P olice Central Control Room at the Stadium.

 (3)    The H older shall arra n g e fo r the attendance at every Specified Activity
        of such num bers of qualified F ir s t Aid a ss is ta n ts as the County Council
        sh all req u ire but without prejudice to the foregoing the H older shall
         ensure that a t every specified activity th e re is at le a s t one F ir s t Aid     ^
         a ss is ta n t fo r every 2, 000 sp e c ta to rs.

 The H older shall a rra n g e fo r the attendance at every Specified Activity of such
 num ber of Safety Stewards as may be re q u ired by P a r t 2 of Schedule 3, and
 shall ensure that the Safety Stewards shall be (a) fit and capable to c a rry out
 th e ir duties (b) p roperly train ed and in stru cted (c) identifiable by d re s s (d)
 provided with w ritten in stru ction s as to th e ir general duties in o rd e r to c a rry
 out the following:-

 (1)     Manning of exits as indicated on the plans

 (2)     Control and direction of sp ectato rs entering using o r leaving       the
         Stadium

 (3)     P atro llin g the Stadium and dealing with any em ergency including
          ra isin g an a la rm and extinguishing any sm all fire .
T raining e x ercise s relating to the action to be taken in the event of an
em ergency shall be held fo r Safety Stew ards and Staff, em ployed at the
Stadium at le a s t once every th re e m onths.

The H older sh all en su re that, except w here otherw ise m arked on the P lans,
all doors and gates which form an e g re s s route between any sp ec ta to r
accommodation and the public highway, o r oth er open space outside the
stadium , shall be so secured as to open im m ediately and easily from the inside
and shall be manned at all tim es by at le a s t the num ber of stew ard s required
by P a r t 2 of Schedule 3. All such doors o r gates shall be opened by the
stew ards responsible and secu red in the fully open position at a tim e before
the end of a Specified Activity ag reed between the H older and the Chief
Constable and at any oth er tim e on evacuation of the Stadium o r a p a rt
th ereof on being o rd ered so to do by a police officer in uniform o r by the
sounding of the a la rm .

(1)     The H older shall provide and m aintain to the satisfactio n of the Chief
         F ire O fficer exit signs com prising white le tte rs on a green background
         o v er all exits from the Stadium and all exits from sp ectato r
         accommodation therein and shall ensure that such exit signs may be
         illum inated by both the main and em ergency lighting sy ste m s. Such
       - supplem entary illum inated signs in such locations as the Chief F ire
         O fficer may req u ire shall also be provided by the H older.

(2)     The H older shall en su re that the c o rrid o rs, gangways and s ta irc a s e s
        indicated on the P lan s may be illum inated when req u ired during a
        Specified Activity by both the m ain and em ergency lighting sy ste m s.

 (3)    The signs mentioned in su b -p arag rap h (1) of this p arag rap h shall be
         illum inated whenever adequate n atu ral lig h t is deficient during a
         Specified Activity o r as d irected by the Chief Constable.

 (4)    All m eans of in gress to and e g re ss from the Stadium and to and from
         any Spectator Accommodation th e re in shall be m aintained free from
         obstruction and with non-slip and even su rfaces and in p a rtic u la r
         s ta ir coverings shall be secu red and maintained so th at they do not
         constitute a source of danger.
 (1)    Subject to such interim arran g em en ts as may be agreed by the Chief F ire O fficer,
         the H older shall provide and m aintain to the satisfactio n of the Chief
         F ire Officer a sep a ra te em ergency power supply fo r providing
         e le ctricity sufficient to light all em ergency lighting throughout the
         Stadium, all exit signs and powering all the .communication system s
         within the Stadium, such em ergency power supply to be operable
         independently of the main pow er supply and to come into automatic
         operation within ten seconds of the failure of the la tte r and to be
         ca^&fele-of maintaining' -the neeessaTy power*,outp;Qt'' fo r-a minimum of
         th ree hours from the failu re of the main power supply.

 (2)    At le a st once in each period of 12 months the Holder shall supply to
        the Chief F ire Officer a re p o rt as to the condition of the emergency
          Pow er Supply c e rtifie d by an independent E lectrical E ngineer.

 (3)    * On the day of a Specified Activity and not le s s than 3 hours p rio r to
           Its commencement the em ergency pow er supply shall be te ste d fo r
         . a period of 30 m inutes. Any defect revealed In this te s t shall be
           rectified before the com m encem ent of the Specified A ctivity.

 (4)      A com petent ele ctrician employed o r retained by the H older shall be
          p re se n t during a Specified A ctivity.

 (1)     The H older shall provide and m aintain at the Stadium to the satisfactio n
         of the Chief F ire O fficer a fire w arning sy stem .

 (2)   The fire w arning system shall be tested periodically to the satisfactio n
        of the Chief F ire O fficer.
 Subject to such interim arrangem ents as may be agreed by the Chief Constable,
 the H older shall.provide and m aintain “at the Stadium to the satisfaction of the
 Chief Constable

 (1)     A P olice Central Control Room which shall be provided with such
          an cillary equipment as the Chief Constable may re q u ire .

 (2)     Accommodation fo r the exclusive use of the police as a detention room
         and fo r adm inistrative p u rp o se s.

 (3)     A public address system audible in all p a rts of the Stadium . The P olice
          sLall have the right to use the public ad d ress system fo r police purposes
          in p rio rity to its use fo r any o th er purpose.

• (1)    The H older shall at all tim es m aintain all stru c tu ra l p a rts of the stadium
          in sound o rd e r and to the app ro p riate and relevant stan d ard s in the Guide
          and in all cases to the satisfaction of the Council.

  (2)     The Holder shall c a rry out such works of m aintenance, re p a ir and
          renew al to the Stadium as may be req u ired from tim e to tim e by the
           County Council.

  The H older shall at all tim es m aintain all operational p arts of the Stadium
  (including the e le ctrica l and communications installations) and all em ergency
  equipment in good and efficient working o rd e r to the satisfactio n of the County
  Council and shall undertake such maintenance re p a ir o r renew al as may from
  tim e to tim e be n e c e ssa ry to m aintain reasonable safety within the Stadium.

  T he'H older shall-place within the Stadium, at such positions as may be specified
  by the Chief F ire O fficer, 6iHergency’p ro e e d u rs<-notices?which shall be
  maintained legible and unobstructed in those positions.

  (1)     The parking of vehicles within the boundary of the Stadium shall be
           re s tric te d to those a reas indicated on the Plans unless otherw ise
           approved fo r em ergency purposes by a P olice O fficer in uniform .
(2)        The Holder shall provide and m aintain within the Stadium to the
           satisfactio n of the County Council the access routes fo r em ergency
           vehicles shown on the plans.

The Holder shall en su re that m em bers of the Press., T . V. and radio se rv ic e s
having access to the public and playing a re a s of the Stadium a re identifiable
as such.

Television c am eras and portable equipment shall be placed only in such
positions as may be agreed between the H older and the Chief Constable.

(1)        Liquid refreshm ents may be sold o r distributed at the Stadium only in
           containers constructed from soft p lastic o r oth er soft m a te ria l, o r as
           allowed by the’ Licensing J u stic e s.

(2)        No accumulation of rubbish, bricks, stones o r oth er m a te ria ls which
           in the opinion of the Chief Constable a re capable of use as m issile s
           shall be perm itted to rem ain in any p a rt of the Stadium to which
           sp ectato rs have a cc e ss.

No accum ulation of flam m able rubbish, d irt, surplus m a te ria l o r goods shall
be p erm itted to rem ain in any p a rt of the Stadium except in a place and quantity
approved in w riting by the Chief F ire O fficer.

No flam m able gases or liquids shall be sto red o r used in any p a rt of the
Stadium without the p rio r w ritten approval of the Chief F ire O fficer.

The H older shall a rran g e fo r the Stadium to be inspected by a suitably qualified
C hartered Engineer (Structural o r Civil) in the presen ce of a rep resen tativ e of the
County Council within 7 months of the date of the C ertificate and a t le a st once in each
period of 12 months th e re a fte r and the H older shall a s soon as possible afte r
each inspection supply to the County Council a C ertificate by the said
C hartered Engineer as to the c u rre n t compliance o r non-com pliance with good
engineering and building p ractices and with the relevant B ritish Standard
Specifications and Codes of P ra c tic e and with the appropriate provisions and
 recom m endations of the Guide of all s tru c tu ra l p a rts of the Stadium excluding the
cru sh b a rrie rs and h an d rails.

 (1)        The Holder shall arran g e fo r all crush b a rrie rs and handrails within the
            Stadium to be tested in accordance with the appropriate provisions of the
            Guide by a suitably qualified C hartered E ngineer (Structural o r Civil)
            in the presen ce of a rep resen tativ e of the County Council within 2 months
            of the date of this C ertificate and fo r the re su lts th ereo f to be notified
            in w riting to the County Council as soon as possible th e re afte r.

  (2)(i)    The Holder shall ensure that not m ore than 7 months a fte r the date of th is
            C ertificate and th e re a fte r not le s s than once in each period of 12 m onths
            a represen tativ e sam ple of cru sh b a rrie rs and handrails amounting to not
            le s s than 20% of the total num ber of such b a rrie rs and ra ils is tested in
        accordance with the Guide by a suitably qualified C hartered E ngineer
        (Structural o r Civil) in the p resen ce of a re p resen tativ e of the County
        Council and the resu lts' th e re o f notified in w iltin g to the County Council
        as soon as p o ssib le th e re a fte r.
(li)   a re c o rd sh all be kept of those cru sh b a rrie rs and handrails tested in
        accordance with sub-paragraph (2)(1) alone and a b a r r ie r so te sted shall
        not be te sted again within a period of 4^ y e ars th e re a fte r.

The H older shall within 7 months of the date of this c ertific a te and th e re a fte r
not le s s than once in each period of 12 months supply to the Chief F ire O fficer
the c ertific a te of an independent E lec trica l E ngineer as to the c u rre n t
 com pliance o r non-com pliance of the e le c tric a l installation within the Stadium
'with Section E of the I . E . E . Regulations o r o th er sections o r Regulations fo r
the tim e being in fo rce relating to the E le c tric a l Equipment of B uildings.

(i)     The H older shall provide and m aintain at the Stadium fire fighting
        equipment of such type and in such positions as may be required by the
        Chief F ire O fficer.

(li)   The H older shall arra n g e fo r all fire extinguishers, fire hydrants and
        o th er w ater supply within the Stadium to be inspected and te sted as
        ap p ro priate a t le a st once in each period of 12 months by a competent
        p erso n to the satisfaction of the Chief F ire O fficer.

The H older shall make and keep the following re c o rd s which shall be made
available fo r inspection at all reasonable tim e to A uthorised P e rso n s:

(1)     A re c o rd of the num bers of sp ectato rs adm itted to the Stadium during
        a Specified Activity and to each a re a of Spectator Accommodation
        th e re in mentioned in P a r t 1 of Schedule 3.

(2)     A re c o rd of any accident o r incident o ccu rrin g w hilst the Stadium is in
        use fo r a Specified Activity which causes injury to a sp ectato r, such
        re c o rd to include the nam e, ad d ress, and age of the spectator
        injured, the nature of the injury and how it was caused, as fa r as can
        be asc e rta in e d by diligent inquiry, and the location of the incident.
        The Holder shall provide a w ritten re p o rt to the County Council within
        48 hours of all such accidents o r incidents.

(3)     A re c o rd of the training and instruction given and the e x ercise s held in
        accordance with the requirem ents of P a ra g ra p h 9 of th is Schedule such
        re c o rd to include the date and tim e and duration of the instruction o r
        ex ercise , the name of the person giving instruction, the nature of the
        instruction o r ex ercise, and the nam e(s) of the person(s) in structed.

(4)     A re c o rd of all inspections, te s ts , m aintenance, re p a irs and renewals
        c a rrie d out at the Stadium.
The Stadium shall be maintained with the facilities and structures including
all c ru s h 'b a rrie rs , e n tra n ce s, exits and m eans of access to the en tran ces
and exits in the num ber, size , position and strength existing at the date
of the C ertificate and indicated on the plans and no alteratio n shall be m ade
th ereto unless p rio r notice in w riting is given to the County Council in
accordance'w ith paragraph 5(2) of th is Schedule. -

No sp ectato rs shall be allowed to use th e Stadium in conditions of extrem e
wind an d /o r snow loadings acting singular o r in combination and in
particular-.-

(1)     No sp ectato rs shall be allowed to use the stadium in wind
        speeds in excess of 100 K m .p .h . at 10m above ground level
        and th is prohibition shall be effective when m o re than one gust of
        th is speed of at le a st 3 seconds duration is recorded in the a rea of
        the stadium in the 30 m inutes im m ediately p rio r to the tim e of the
        enquiry mentioned in (2) to the locaLm eteorological office.

(2)     The wind speed in (1) shall be ascertained by the Holder by enquiry
        to the local m eteorological office by telephone not m ore than 30
        m inutes before the adm ission of sp ectato rs to the stadium and
        the wind speed given shall be recorded at once in a book kept
        fo r the purpose.

Notwithstanding the provisions of this Schedule the County Council shall
have the right at any tim e to req u ire the Holder at his own expense to arran g e
for the conduct of any inspection o r te s t which the County Council m ay consider
to be n e c e ssa ry in the in te re sts of securing reasonable safety at the
Stadium when it is in use for a Specified A ctivity.
                             SCHEDULE 3

                               PART 1
                             Crowd Capacity

T h e num ber of sp ectators admitted to the stadium and to the various a re as
o f sp ectato r accommodation within the stadium shall not exceed the followini
fig u res:-

Spion Kop                                 16,850
South Stand Upper                          5*567
South Stand Lower                          3,310
 W est Stand                               4,465
W est T errace                             7,200
North W est T e rrac e                     2, S00
North Stand                                9,882

         Total Crowd Capacity             50,174


                                PART 2

                             Safety Stewards

 The minimum num ber of Safety Stewards required for each function shall
 be as follows:-
                                                             n^
 (1)         Manning of exists                                   °   Stewards U p er main
 (2)         Control and direction of sp ectato rs                                 exit)
                entering o r leaving the Stadium             u       Stewards   per vomitory)
 (3)         P atro lling the Stadium and dealing
                with any em ergency including ra isin g          2
                an alarm and extinguishing any sm all fire           Stewards     v'l'ir South
                                                                                   .•tand)
 The Stewards shall be distributed as i'ollows:-

 Section of Stadium                         Number required for each function
                                                    1        2         3

   Each :>:aia L;:tt (1’-)
  •South Stand                                               12

   V e st Stand                                                  3
   North itnnd                                               13
       CiCGi' OOwltl* EL'-
                                                                                        /
                     S H E F F I E L D   C I T Y   C O U N C I L

                                GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL
                (MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL PURPOSES PROGRAMME)

            Meeting to be held on Thursday, 17th August, 1989 at 2.00 p.m.
                                   in the Town Hall


                 PUBLIC INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS AND ACCESS TO MEETING

    (a)     The documentation and items to be discussed in public at the meeting may,
            in the first instance, be inspected at the Local Government Information
            Service, 67 Surrey Street, Sheffield 1. The Service is open between 11.30
            a.m. to 1.00 p.m. and 2.00 p.m. to 4.00 p.m. - Monday to Friday. For
            further details telephone 734750.

            Certain information may not be available for public inspection.

    (b)     For items (if any) marked * it is anticipated that the press and public
            may be excluded from the meeting.

    (c)     If indicated in the agenda, reports are either not available to the press
            and public or not available until the start of the meeting for the reasons
            shown.




    1.      EXCLUSION OF PRESS AND PUBLIC
            To identify items where resolutions may be moved to exclude the press and
            public.

    2   .   SAFETY '             NDS
            Report                Administration and Legal Department on the
            issue and amendment of General Safety Certificates.
                                                            (Copy to follow)




I
                                                                                                            M ain    Police             Access


Sheffield Wednesday F. C,                                                                        P o lice

                                                                                                 \R0(?mi^
                                                                                                      /v / A y   /            Ov    ^ ^ siiJ
       Hillsborough Ground                                                                Room                                              [          s




                                                                              Gymnasium                                s    tf';v   s
                                                                                                                        \ -A            \




                                                                        NO RTH STAND                                                            \• V




                                                                                                            16


                                                                                                            15

                                                                                                                       0)
                                                                                                            U         ■V
                                                                                                                      o
                                                                                                                      2:
                                                                                                                      :*
                                                                                                            13        O
                                                                                                                      tj



                                                                        P la y e r s                        12
                                                                        Tunnel



'a n d E n c l o s u r e s


                                         3
            Po lic e C o n t r o l   19-22                            SO UT H S T A N D



                                             Official
                                                                                                 2 9 - 32   3 3 - 3 ^ , ^ ^ -

                                                                              S q

                                                        D ire c to rs En tra n c e
            GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL, THURSDAY, 17TH AUGUST, 1989

                          Safety of Sports Grounds


 Once the. interim recommendationi of: Lord Justice Taylor had been
‘■assimilated, letters were written to Sheffield United Football Club,
 Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and Owlerton Sports Stadium asking for
 details of how they proposed to ensure that the recommendations were
 complied with. Memos and letters were also immediately sent to members of
 the Advisory Group asking for their comments. As you are aware, some
 responses have been received.

Sheffield Wednesday Football Club invited members of the Advisory Group to
a meeting at the Club on thet §?fcfe August , 1989 . As far as the Council were
concerned, this was treated as an information gathering exercise. We were
principally seeking the views of the Club upon the interim recommendations
and the means they had intended to use to implement them. There is a
.detailed note on the file taken by David Bownes of the items which were
discussed.   The interim recommendations which require immediate
implementation by Lord Justice Taylor were effectively taken as the #j*enda
for the meeting.   It was clear from the meeting that some of the responses
of the Club were not satisfactory. One particular area was that relating
to the calculation for capacity on the terraces. The Club indicated,
through Dr. Eastwood, that they simply intended to effect a reduction of
15% on the current capacity levels without making the calculation in
accordance with the Green Guide and as specified in the interim
recommendation. David Bownes expressed his disquiet at this approach. It
has been made clear to the Club in all the recent correspondence that this
calculation must be made.

Originally, it was intended to draft a committee report following the
meeting of the Advisory Group on the 11th August. However, as you are
aware this was somewhat overtaken by events in that David Bownes became
aware on the 9th August, 1989 that a pre-season match was due to take
place at Sheffield United Football Club. At this point, the Leader of the
Council, Clive Betts, expressed concern about the role of the City Council
and felt that we should either be issuing a Safety Certificate or,
alternatively consider issuing a Prohibition Notice against the Club. It
was not felt that there was sufficient evidence to issue a Prohibition
Notice, but that there would be no harm in issuing an interim Safety
Certificate to the Club. The only effect of this would be to bring events
forward by a few days since this was one of the matters it was anticipated
would be referred to members.

Additionally, in the light of the concerns there were about the response
of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to the interim recommendations of
Lord Justice Taylor, it was felt that it may be of assistance to issue a
Notice of Amendment of their Certificate at this stage. This will enable
the Council to take enforcement action should it be necessary prior to the
first match of   the season on the 19th August.

I refer you to   the committee report which is largely self-explanatoryand
gives the details of the amendments to the Sheffield Wednesday Certificate
and the provisions in the interim Certificate for Sheffield United
Football Club.    As far as the interim Certificate for Sheffield United is
concerned, we have used as the basis, the new draft conditions which will
hopefully form the basis of new Safety Certificates to be used for all the
stadia in the future. These draft conditions have been circulated amongst
members of the Advisory Group and have been, largely, agreed.

You will note from the new Certificate conditions installed in response to
the Taylor report that where positive action is required on the part of
the Clubs, we have required a response by the 16th August. I, therefore,
anticipate that there will be a need for inspection at the ground on or
immediately after that day. There may also be a need to consider
enforcement, perhaps by means of a Prohibition Notice.  I think that the
important thing to emphasise to members is that the Council does have the
iipper hand and is in control of matters.

I note that you are aware of the problems that there have been with the
Building Surveyors, particularly relating to the calculations for capacity
at the ground. Recent memos I have sent to them clearly indicate what is
required of them and by when.

One other major matter which is being dealt with is the question of works
at the ground pursuant to the annual inspections;. David Bownes has
collated a schedule of items from the detailed memoranda he has received
from the various members of the Advisory Group. At the suggestion of
Mr. Podmore, this matter has been passed to the Club for their comments.
This was suggested in view of the fact that the Club may well have
completed some of the works during the close'd. season. Once we have a
response indicating which works are still outstanding, the matter will
then need to be referred to members for them to take further action.

You are probably also already aware of the fact that Lord Justice Taylor
has recommended that the Ambulance Service are now part of the Advisory
Group. Meetings have taken place with the Ambulance Service and indeed,
they attended the meeting of the Advisory Group on the 11th August. It
should be noted that we did. not receive a response from the Fire Authority
pursuant to their annual inspection until the 3-l.st July. This meant that
the matter could not be considered at an earlier stage.

One issue which members may raise may be that of pacaeeedings which have
been issued against the Council. It may be necessary to explain to
members the effect of these proceedings, the nature of them, etc.

You will appreciate that this is an overview.   I have attempted to pick
out what appear to be the important issues. I am happy to discuss matters
in more detail i£ you wish.   I am conscious of the fact that you have, to
date , had a substantial involvement in the matter personally and that the
only issues you may be unaware of are those matters which have taken place
during the last week. I have, therefore, concentrated upon those issues.

I have not referred to matters in the early 'history1 of this incident
such as the difficulties encountered by members of the Advisory Group in
conducting inspections at Sheffield United, the unsatisfactory approach of
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club in relation to barrier inspections, the
involvement of the Building Surveyor in the issue of the wall which was
falling down at Sheffield Wednesday.




HB7AAE/JJJ
                    GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL
    (MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL PURPOSES PROGRAMME)

Meeting to be held on Monday, 7th August", 1989 at 2.30 p.m.
                      in the Town Hall


     PUBLIC INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS AND ACCESS TO MEETING

The documentation and items to be discussed in public at the meeting may,
in the first instance, be inspected at the Local Government Information
Service, 67 Surrey Street, Sheffield 1. The Service is open between 11.30
a.m. to 1.00 p.m. and 2.00 p.m. to 4.00 p.m. - Monday to Friday. For
further details telephone 734750.

Certain information may not be available for public inspection.

For items (if any) marked * it is anticipated that the press and public
may be excluded from the,meeting.

If indicated in the agenda, reports are either not available to the press
and public or not available until the start of the meeting for the reasons
shown.

                           A G E N D A

EXCLUSION OF PRESS AND PUBLIC
To identify items where resolutions may be moved to exclude the press and
public.

SHEFFIELD COMMUNITY HEALTH COUNCIL

(a) To report that, under the authority given by this Panel at its
meeting held on 3rd April, 1989,' Councillor Lamb has been appointed
as a member of the Sheffield Community Health Council to serve for
the period ending 31st August, 1990, in place of Ms. J. Smailes.

(b) To appoint a person to serve on the Sheffield Community Health
Council for the period ending 31st August, 1992, to fill a vacancy
arising from the resignation of Ms. J. Duggleby.

FILM CERTIFICATION
Requests of the Senior Film Officer for permission to exhibit

(a) Films not certificated by the British Board of Film
Classification;-

      "A Page of Madness"
      "Aelita"
      "Mechanisms of the Brain"

(b) As a film in category "PG", the following film which is
currrently classified in category "A"

      "The Animals Film"                   (Copies herewith - "A")

PROVISION OF INFORMATION FROM LICENSING RECORDS
The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department to report
verbally.
SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
The Acting Head of Administration and legal Department to report
verbally.

AMUSEMENT CENTRE
The Acting Head .of Administration and Legal Department to report
verbally on an individual case.

LOCAL GOVERNMENT (MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) ACT 1972
The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department to report
verbally on court proceedings.

HACKNEY CARRIAGES AND PRIVATE HIRE LICENSING
(a) To consider applications for the grant of hackney carriage
vehicle licences.

(NOTE: Copies of the minute of the General Purposes Panel of 2nd
May, 1989, relating to a Study on Taxi Quality in Sheffield and the
relevant report’are attached.        (Copy herewith - "B")).


(b) The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department to report
verbally on individual cases.




(NOTE: It is expected that the public and press will be excluded
from the meeting during the consideration of items 6, 7 and 8 as the
relevant reports will contain exempt information as described in
Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act 1972, as amended by the
Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985, as follows

Item             Paragraph           Reason

6 and 7          12                    Relating to legal matters and
                                      advice.

8                7 and 12             Relating to the financial and
                                     business affairs of other
                                     persons and legal matters and
                                     advice).
                                    City of Sheffield
                           Administration and Legal Department


                              C O M M I T T E E        R E P O R T
                                    F R O N T      S H E E T




RE POP"' TO : GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL (MEGS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE)                      j
— — — —                           — '"               . ..      .                n   ij

)ATE OF COMMITTEE:       7th August, 1989


                         FILM CERTIFICATION        .




LIST OF                          (As applicable an:         .ess :on* iaer.na_ 1exer.p:




   Copies of background papers attached.
                                  C ITY OF SHEFFIELD — M E M O R A N D U M

     From                   Senior Film Officer        To
i                Anvil Civic Cinema/Arts Dept.                 Legal & Admin
3
'    Date        June 28th 1989
i    Ref.        DG/dg
     Tel. Ext.   701920                                 Ref.



•                Request to exhibit film not certificated by the British Board
                 of Film Classification.
"!               -------------------------------------------
                 A PAGE OF MADNESS
                 Japan/1926/Directed by Teinosuke Kinugasa

i                The above named film was only "rediscovered" in Japan a few
i                years ago, and was never submitted to the BBFC for examination.
■
;                It is of great historic interest and value since it employs
'                avant-garde techniques, and in order to try and reach an
•                international market, was so constructed as to eliminate
;                language inter-titles altogether.
;                I would request that permission be granted to exhibit this
J                film in the "15" category.

                 (Photo-copy of British Film Insitute Library Catalogue entry
                 enclosed). (Photo-copy of entry in 'Foreign Film Guide enclosed).


                 Dave Godin
                 Senior Film Officer.
                                e
   R 3 7 1 9                                                                                                       S cb 9 :,60
                                     C ITY OF SHEFFIELD — M E M O R A N D U M

From                                                                To       General Purposes Sub-Committee
               Senior Film Officer

Date      June 29th 1989
Ref.      DG/dg
Tel. Ext. 701920                                                    Ref.



               -Supporting document:
               A PAGE OF MADNESS

               ("Foreign Film Guide" Ronald Bergan & Robyn Karney - London 1988)



                                          A Page Of Madness
                                          Kurutta Ippeiji
                                          Japan 1926 60 mins bw
                                          Shin Kankaku-ha Eiga Renmei
                                          d Teinosuke Kinugasa
                                          sc Yasunari Kawabaia
                                          ph Kohei Sugiyama
                                          m Minoru Muraoka, Toru Kurashima
                                          Masao Inoue, Yoshie Nakagawa, Ayako lijima,
                                          Hiroshi Nemoto, Misao Seki, Eiko Minami

                                          An elderly man (Inoue) works voluntarily at
                                          odd jobs in the lunatic asylum where his wife
                                          (Nakagawa) is confined (having attempted to
                                          drown her baby son in a fit of madness many
                                          years earlier), and hopes to set her free.
                                          Kinugasa rediscovered this film in his
                                          storeroom during the early 1970s, and made it
                                          available for release with a musical sound­
                                          track added. It is a remarkable work of
                                          concentrated emotional power, seeking to
                                          understand the nature of insanity while
                                          offering a straight narrative (the wife's story)
                                          in flashback. Relying on its images, the film
                                          uses no inter-titles, displaying breathtaking
                                          technical virtuosity: the director employs
                                          every available camera device, in the style of
                                          German Expressionism which was unknown
                                          to him at the time. A masterpiece of
                                          imagination and control, it has not dated in
                                          60-odd years.




                  Supporting document:
                  A PAGE OF MADNESS

                  (British Film Institute Video & Film Library Catalogue)

                                          A PAGE OF MADNESS                                        Dir: Teinosuke Ki n u gasa
                                          Japan 1926                                               L/P: M. Inoue
                                          16mm bw music track        58 mins £20                         Y. Nagakawa
                                          A n old man's vain attempts to rescue his wife f r o m an asylum.                       Only
                                          recently   re-discovered,       this        f ilm        reveals    a  degree     of  formal
                                          sophistication and experiment e x t r a o rdinary by any standards.                     At a
                                          time when Japanese cinema still seemed to be dominated by theatrical
                                          conventions and the bravura acting of the silent screen, Kinugasa and
                                          his fellow workers produced a f ilm w h i c h bears comparison w ith the best
                                          of the Twenties' Eu r o p e a n a v a n t - g a r d e .    Its exploration of dreams and
                                          madness  was   a   thematic       trait         it       shared   with  the     contemporary
                                          avant-garde almost everywhere.            K i n u g a s a utilises an incredible battery
                                          of experimental formal devices in order to present the w orld through
                                          the eyes of his disturbed characters, to make the spectator experience
                                          the world through their eyes.              Titles are dispensed w ith altogether,
                                          and Kinugasa uses a fantastically mobile camera.
           R 3 7 1 9           S ch 9 16 0
                                             CITY OF SHEFFIELD — M E M O R A N D U M

        From           |          |/Senior Film Officer           To
                        Anvil Civic Cinema/Arts Dept.                    Legal & Admin.

    Date               June 28th     1989
    Ref.               DG/dg
    Tel. Ext.          701920                                     Ref.


                       Request to exhibit films uncertificated by the British Board
                       of Film Classification.

                       To coincide with the Annual conference of the British Association's
                       Science '89 event at Sheffield University, I am planning a week of
                       science-themed films which it is hoped, will attract delegates and
                       visitors.
                       As well as contemporary material, I want to include rare archive
                       films which show early attempts at 'science fiction' in films, as
                       well as film used as a medium to promulgate scientific concepts,
                       and wish to include the following items:

                       AELITA
                       USSR/1924/Directed by Yakov Protazanov
                       A Russian silent film of great historic interest, depicting
                       a time in the future when Russian scientists visit Mars and
                       attempt to persuade the inhabitants to launch their own
                       Bolshevik revolution. Based (very loosely) on a novel by Alexei
                       Tolstoy.
                       Throughout the 20s and 30s, the BBFC had a policy of rejecting
                       all films from the USSR if they dealt in any way with Socialist
                       politics. Although the records dealing with this film were
                       destroyed in the war, this could have been the only possible grounds
                       on which it was rejected, and it could quite easily now be passed
                       in the "PG" category.

                       MEKANIKA GOLOVNOVO MOZGA (MECHANISMS OF THE BRAIN)
                       USSR/1925/Directed by Vsevolod Pudovkin ,
                        This 64 minute documentary covers the pioneering work performed
                        by Pavlov and his associates. Again, records for its rejection
                        were destroyed during the war, but I feel in this case the Board
    '                  would have felt it was simply not suitable material for general
|                      audiences. It might also have been felt that Pavlov's experiments
|                      of dogs (seen by many as barbaric in the extreme) would have
I                      provoked controversy and distress amongst general audiences.
                        I would request that this particular film be assigned an
i                      "18" category.



                        Senior Film Officer.
        R 3 7 1 9                                                                    *Sch 9 16 0
                                     C ITY OF SHEFFIELD — M E M O R A N D U M

    From                         Senior Film Officer      To
                    juivxj. oxvic Cinema/Arts Dept.               Legal & Admin

    Date            June 28th 1989
    Ref.            DG/dg
    Tel. Ext.       701920                                 Ref.


                    Request to exhibit a film in a different category to that
                    assigned by the British Board of Film Classification.

                    THE ANIMALS FILM
                    UK-US/1981/Directed by Victor Schonfeld & Myriam Alaux

                    The above film was passed uncut by the BBFC in 1981 in the
                    "AA" category (persons under 14 years not admitted), and deals
                    through documentary and sympathetic commentary with the whole
                    question of mankind's treatment of the animal kingdom.
                    Although the film through following the work of various
                    relief agencies does show animal neglect, the film does not
                    contain any material which is "shocking" or "distressing",
                    and the whole tone of the film is compassionate and caring.
                    It is in my view an excellent educative film which would be
                    of great value in encouraging young people to care both for
                    animals and other aspects of the environment, and the film
                    contains nothing with is not true about our present world.
                    I have also been encouraged in this application by several
                    patrons who have seen the film here on previous occasions who
                    have expressed their view that they would very much like to
                    bring their children to see it, but are unable to do so
                    on account of its restrictive category. The film has been
                    shown on television on Channel 4.
                    I would therefore requested that THE ANIMALS FILM be allowed
                    to be shown- under the conditions relating to a local "PG"
4
                    category.

                    (Photo-copy of London Film Festival entry (1981) enclosed)


                    Senior Film Officer.
                R 3 7 1 9                                                                                                                                          S ch 9 1 6 0
                                                                        C ITY OF SHEFFIELD — M E M O R A N D U M

        From                                                                                                                     To     General Purposes Sub-Committee
                                  Senior Film Officer

        Date                     June 28th 1989
        Ref.                     DG/dg
        Tel. Ext.                 701920                                                                                         Ref.

i                                Supporting document
i                                THE ANIMALS FILM
i
                                  (London Film Festival Programme entry 1981
i




                                                                             G R E A T BRITAIN/USA 1981

                                                                             T he Animals Film
                                                                             Sun 8 Nov 6.15
                                                                             Director: V ictor Schonfeld
                                                                             Production Company: Slick Pics International Inc
                                                                             Executive Producer. Pegeen Fitzgerald
                                                                             ProducerlScreenplaylEdkor Victor Schonfeld
                                                                             Photography {ColourJ: Kevin Keating, Chris M orphet, Nic Knowland.
                                                                             Jeff Baynes, Roger Deakins
                                                                             Sound Recordists: Victor Schonfeld, Myriam Alaux
                                                                             Archival Research Philip W indeatt, Victor Schonfeld
                                                                             Research and Production Asststance: PhilipWindeatt, Russell Crockett
                                                                             Music; Robert W yatt
                                                                             Export Agent: Slick Pics International Inc, 331 Goswell Road, London
                                                                             E C l and 1175 G reacen Point Road, Mamaroneck, New York 10543.
                                                                             Narrator: Julie Christie
                                                                              Running Timet 136 mins
                                                                              London Film Festival Choke

                                                                             ‘For animals,’ wrote Isaac Bashevis Singer, ‘every day is
                                                                             Treblinka.' The Animals Film is the first film o f the
                                                                             Animals Liberation movement, a comprehensive survey
                                                                             of the injustices comm itted against animals in W estern
                                                                             society, from the casual m istreatment of household pets
                                                                             to the systematic abuse o f animals in factory fanning and
                                                                             research. Made over a period o f two years in Britain and
                                                                             the United States, the film includes interviews, clandes­
                                                                             tinely shot footage of stag hunting and pharmaceutical
                                                                              research, and rarely seen material o f the military use o f
                                                                              animals for training, weapons testing and nuclear
                                                                              research. Schonfeld’s film presents the case for the ani­
                                                                              mals with clarity and integrity, carefully avoiding the
                                                                              obvious pitfalls of sensationalism or heavy-handedness
                                                                              which such a subject offers. It is, in the best sense,
                                                                              provocative, a genuine challenge to our assumptions and
                                                                              our complacency. W ithout being patronising, it speaks
                                                                              eloquently for those who cannot speak for them -
                                                                              selves.-Ciiie Hodgson,




    _   _   _      _        _   — ................................................................................ s . , , . -
                    S H E F F I E L D    CITY         C O U N C I L


                         MEETING OF THE GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL
                 (MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME)

                                 held 2nd May, 1989

      PRESENT:          Councillors Butler (Chair), |     ~'




(3)   TAXI SERVICE QUALITY IN SHEFFIELD
                 The Panel received a report on a study commissioned by the
      Sheffield Taxi Trade Association into the quality of the taxi
      service in Sheffield.
      RESOLVED: That, on the basis of the report now submitted and without
      prejudice to any future decisions to be made by this Panel, the City
      Council (a) remains of the opinion that there is no significant
      unmet demand for taxi services in Sheffield and (b) holds the view
      that, subject to legal requirements, it is unlikely that any
      applications""for additional hackney carriage vehicle licences
      submitted to the Council within the next 12 months will be
      successful.




      i-7   -r
      V _.'
                 TAXI SERVICE QUALITY I N SH E FFIE L D

                            F IN A L REPORT


                                SR PELLS




CONTENTS

1.         TERMS OF REFERENCE   AND STUDY DESIGN

2.         RANK OBSERVATIONS

3.         CAB LOGS

4.         SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
1.   TERMS OF REFERENCE AND STUDY DESIGN
     T he s tu d y w as c o m m is s io n e d by t h e            S h e ffie ld     Taxi     T rade
     A s s o c i a t i o n on 1 J a n u a r y 1 9 8 9 .

     The s tu d y          a im s to      p r o v id e   f o l l o w —u p in fo r m a tio n    to    a
     c o m p r e h e n siv e q u a l i t y o f s e r v i c e s tu d y c a r r i e d o u t b e tw e e n
     J a n u a r y and m arch 1 9 8 8 . The te r m s o f r e f e r e n c e a r e i n p a r t
     d e f i n e d b y t h e r e s u l t s o f t h a t s t u d y w h ic h c a n b e su m m a rise d
     as fo llo w s:—

     1) P a s s e n g e r d e l a y s a t r a n k s o c c u r r e d p r e d o m in a n t ly on   the
     F it z a la n sq u a r e and B a rk ers p o o l ra n k s l a t e a t n ig h t                 on
     F r id a y s and S a tu r d a y s.

     2) O v er        9 o u t o f 10 m em bers o f t h e p u b l i c i n t e r v i e w e d a t
     random         who h ad m ade a t r i p b y t a x i i n t h e p r e v i o u s y e a r
     th o u g h t   t a x i s w e r e e a s y t o o b t a i n . W h en a s k e d w h y t h e y d i d
     n ot u se       t a x i s m ore o f t e n , l e s s th a n 1 in 200 c i t e d f a c t o r s
     r e la te d    to th e a v a ila b ility o f ta x is .

     3) P a s s e n g e r d e l a y s i n S h e f f i e l d w e r e am ong t h e l o w e s t we
     had o b se r v e d in th e c o u n tr y , and cab w a it in g tim e s w ere
     am ong t h e h i g h e s t .

     G iv en t h e s e f i n d i n g s we ju d g e d i t a c c e p t a b l e t o c o n f i n e t h e
     s c o p e o f th e p r e s e n t stu d y t o an a n a ly s i s o f o b se r v e d d e la y s
     a t r a n k s b u t t o su p p le m e n t t h i s w ith in f o r m a t io n on d r iv e r
     m o v e m e n t s . Two c h a n g e s i n o b s e r v e d w a i t i n g t i m e s w o u l d ,
     o th e r f a c t o r s b e in g e q u a l,         in d ic a t e a d e t e r io r a t io n in
     s e r v ic e   q u a lity ;   th e     em ergence o f p a s se n g e r d e la y s w here
     p r e v io u s ly th e r e w ere n on e; and th e w o r se n in g o f d e la y s
     w h ic h     w ere p r e v io u sly       ob s-erv ed ^ T he r a n k s       o b s e r v a tio n
     s c h e d u le w as d e v is e d to id e n t if y b o th t h e s e a s p e c t s o f
     d e a l y s w it h o b s e r v a t io n s t a k i n g p la c e a t b o th p ea k and o f f
     p e a k t i m e s a t e a c h o f t h e 3 m a in r a n k s .




                                           1
1 .1   Rank O b s e r v a t io n

       The ra n k s w        e r e o b se r v e d ' f o r 136 h o u r s , d u r in g w h ic h we
       observed th e          m ovem ent o f f ra n k o f 6977 p a s s e n g e r s and 4 7 6 4
       cab s.     T h is      p r o g r a m me o f r a n k o b s e r v a t i o n c o n c e n t r a t e d o n
       th e F itz a la n     S q u a re, B a rk ers P o o l and r a ilw a y s t a t i o n r a n k s.

       The d a ta r e c o r d e d w as th e d e p a r tu r e o f c a b s                 ( em p ty o r
       l o a d e d ) , t h e d e p a r tu r e o f p a s s e n g e r s in c a b s ; p l a t e num ber
       o f c a b s on ra n k ;           p a sse n g e r queue le n g th         and cab queue
       le n g th .         T h is d a ta w as s u f f i c i e n t t o g iv e e s t im a t e s o f th e
       num ber o f t r i p s and t h e a v e r a g e w a i t i n g tim e a t r a n k o f b o th
       p a s s e n g e r s and c a b s . I t sh o u ld b e n o te d t h a t d u r in g t h e
       p e r io d o f th e stu d y cab s w ere r e q u ir e d to h a v e t h e i r m e ter s
       tested         f o r new f a r e l e v e l s . A l t h o u g h t h i s m ay h a v e h a d a
       s m a ll e f f e c t on cab s u p p ly d u r in g t h e d a y tim e i t i s u n l i k e l y
       th a t our r e s u lts have been a ffe c te d .

1 .2   C ab l o g s    ~ ;

       D r iv e r s w ere a sk ed t o k eep a lo g o f t h e i r a c t i v i t i e s f o r a 3
       d a y p e r i o d f r o m t i m e —o n o n T h u r s d a y 2 F e b r u a r y t o t i m e —o f f
       on S a tu r d a y n ig h t /S u n d a y m o r n in g o f 4 /5 F e b r u a r y . A c o p y o f
       t h e r e c o r d i n g s h e e t i s i n c l u d e d i n t h e a p p e n d i x . From t h e 19
       u s e a b le     retu rn s       we w e r e a b le .to          d e r iv e      a num ber o f
       in fo r m a tiv e in d ic a to r s o f th e c u r r e n t s t a t e o f th e m arket
       in c lu d in g a v e r a g e jo u r n e y tim e p e r h ir in g , a v e r a g e cab w a it
       tim e p e r ra n k h i r i n g , and t h e u t i l i s a t i o n r a t e .
2.      RANK OBSERVATIONS

2 .1    D e la y    c a lc u la tio n     m eth o d .

         I d e n tify in g        th e     w a itin g     tim e    a t rank        of a s p e c ific
         p a s s e n g e r , o r a s p e c i f i c c a b , w o u ld h a v e r e q u i r e d t h e t i m i n g
         on an d o f f t h e ra n k o f e v e r y u n i t . T h is w o u ld h a v e b e e n v e r y
         e x p e n s iv e i n s u r v e y s t a f f . I n s t e a d an e s t im a t e w as o b ta in e d
         b y u s in g t h e f o l l o w i n g p r o c e d u r e . F or e v e r y f i v e m in u te
       ■ p e r io d ,      t h e n u m b e r o f --c a b s d e p a r t i n g a n d t h e num ber- o f
         p a s s e n g e r s d e p a r tin g w as o b se r v e d and r e c o r d e d . A t t h e end
         o f e a c h f i v e —m i n u t e p e r i o d , t h e q u e u e l e n g t h s o f c a b s a n d
         p a s s e n g e r s w e r e a l s o r e c o r d e d . W i t h i n e a c h h o u r , t h e m ean
         d e l a y w a s t h e n e s t im a t e d a s b e in g t h e m ean q u e u e l e n g t h
         d i v i d e d b y t h e m ean t h r o u g h p u t p e r f i v e m in u t e p e r i o d ,
         m u l t ip li e d by f i v e m in u te s . Thus

                                           MEAN QUEUE LENGTH
        MEAN DELAY                =                     :-------- ----- X            RECORDING PERIOD



                                                                 -
                                           MEAN THROUGHPUT

        T he d e t a i l e d r e s u l t s , w h ic h ca n              b e m ade a v a i l a b l e , show
        p a s se n g e r and cab queue le n g th s                       and num ber o f c a b s and
        p assen gers          d esp a tch ed     every     fiv         e    m in u te s.  T h e sum m ary
        s t a t i s t i c s b e lo w a tte m p t t o e n c a p         s u la te t h a t d e t a i l . T here
        a r e s e v e r a l c a v e a ts t h a t sh o u ld b e          s ta te d how ever.

        (a )      N o t a l l s i t e s w e r e s u r v e y e d o v e r t h e sam e t im e p e r i o d ,
        n o r a t t h e sam e tim e o f w eek , so c a r e m u st b e ta k e n in
        m a k in g c o m p a r is o n s b e t w e e n r a n k s — p a r t i c u l a r l y o f t h e
        o v e r a l l _a v e r a g e s .

        (b ) T h e h o u r l y a v e r a g e d e l a y s may h i d e so m e i n d i v i d u a l ^
        p a s s e n g e r o r c a b d e l a y s d i f f e r i n g s u s t a n t i a l l y fro m         th e
        m ean.

        2 .2       D e ta ile d       account o f       rank o b s e r v a tio n s

        In      th is       se c tio n      we   p resen t     a   sum m ary         of     th e    rank
        o b s e r v a t io n s in c lu d in g p a s se n g e r and cab flo w s and a v e r a g e
        w a it in g tim e s f o r b o th e a c h h o u r and t h e w h o le o b s e r v a t io n
         ( s e e t a b l e 1) . C o lu m n s 1 - 7 o f t h e t a b l e , c o r r e s p o n d w ith , t h e
        in f o r m a t io n in c lu d e d in t h e a p p e n d ix t o o u r p r e v io u s r e p o r t .
        C o lu m n s 8 a n d 9 p r o v i d e i n f o r m a t i o n on t h e a b i l i t y o f t h e
        t r a d e t o s e r v e t h e d e m a n d i n e a c h h o u r ; w h e r e t h e m in im u m
        c a b q u e u e i s h i g h a n d p a s s e n g e r d e l a y s a r e z e r o t h e n fr o m
        th e     p o in t      o f v ie w    o f m e e t in g dem and t h e t r a d e            can be
        regarded            as     d o in g  w e ll.   W here t h e       m in im u m      cab    queue
        a p p r o a c h e s z e r o ( s a y 2 o r l e s s ) and p a s s e n g e r q u e u e s re m a in
        z e r o o r v e r y lo w , t h e t r a d e can b e c o n s id e r e d t o b e ' 'j u s t
        c o p i n g ” . On t h e o t h e r h a n d w h e r e p a s s e n g e r q u e u e s o c c u r f o r
        s u c c e s s i v e h o u r s and cab q u e u e s a r e z e r o , t h e t r a d e c a n n o t
        be      c o n s id e r e d t o b e d o in g w e ll .




                                                  3
TA B LE 1 :       SUMMARY OF RANK OBSERVATIONS


RAILWAY STATION

Day      D a t a T im e              N o. o f    A verag e   No- o f        A v e r a g e M ax—p a s s — M i n c a b
                                     p ssn grs   w a it,     cabs           w a it.       queue          queue

Sat      2 8 .1   1 9 -2 0               66       0            27            5 6.66          0               7
                  2 0 -2 1               74       0            35            3 1 .1 4        0               2
                  2 1 -2 2               63       0            35            4 3 .4 2        0              10

T o ta l/A v e r a g e                 203        0           131            2 2 .6 3        0            6'. 3


Sun      2 9 ..1 1 5 - 1 6              40        0            26            2 3 .6 5        0               7
                 1 6 —1 7               39        0            25            2 7 .0 0        0               7
                 1 7 -1 8               55        0. 36        43            1 9 .1 4        4               1
                 1 8 -1 9               96        2 . 60       71            1 0 .9 9       20               0.
                 1 9 -2 0               72        0 . 51       44            2 6 .1 4        0              10
                 2 0 -2 1              115        0            80            13 „4 4        24               0

T o ta l/A v e r a g e                 417        0 . 98      289            1 7 .5 6        8            4 .2

Mon 3 0 . 1         9 -1 0              52        0. 96        44            1 1 .5 9        8                0
                  1 0 -1 1              71        0            48            2 3 .5 4        0               2
                  1 1 -1 2              62        0            50            1 9 .8 0        0            • 3
                  1 2 —1 3              24        0            22            7 3 .1 8        0             20
                  1 4 —1 5              39        0            41            2 2 .3 2        0             11
                  1 5 —1 6              17        0            15       "    4 7 .3 3        0              7
                  1 6 -1 7              51        0 . 20       37            1 5 .4 1        2              0
                  1 7 -1 8              25        0            19            7 3 .9 5        0             20

T o ta l/A v e r a g e                 341        0 . 18      276            28.41      0.25              7.9

Thur 2 .2           9 -1 0              58        0            42            29.17           0               7
                  1 0 -1 1              80        0            56            14.73           0               5
                  1 1 -1 2   .          42        0            33            24.09           0               2
                  1 2 -1 3       *      19        0            16            62.50           0              12!
                  1 4 -1 5              30        0.           25            40.20           0              11
                  1 5 -1 6              25        0            19            42.89           0               6
                  1 6 -1 7              35        0            30            35.17           0               7
                  1 7 -1 8              61        0            49            24.49           0               9

T o ta l/A v e r a g e                 350        0          270             24.89           0            7.4

Sat     4.2       1 0 -1 1              23        0            18            34.44           0               6
                  1 1 -1 2              31        0            21            22.62           0               0
                  1 2 -1 3              35        0            21            34.05           0               5
                  1 4 -1 5              57        0            41            14.63           0               5
                  1 5 -1 6              42        0            30            38.17           0              13
                  1 6 -1 7              51        0            35            33.57           0              14
                  1 7 -1 8              68        0            43            11.28           0               3

T o ta l/A v e r a g e                 307        0          203,            24.95           0            6.6
                                                                    *




                                                 4
Day      D a te   T im e       N o. o f           A v e ra g e   No. o f   A v e ra g e M ax p a s s    M in c a b
                               p s s n g rs       w a it         cah?s     w a it       queue           queue

Thur       9 .2     9—1 0           47             0               33        2 2.63           0              8
                  1 0 -1 1          86             0               59        17.88            0              1
                  1 1 -1 2          50             0               41        23.90            0              3
                  1 2 -1 3          30             0               24        43.75            0             11
                  14 -1 5           54             0               35        22.71            0             11
                  15 -1 6           36             0               23        50.21            0             16
                  16 -1 7           29             0               22        59.77            0             15
                  1 7 -1 8          60             0               47        23.09            0              4

T o ta l/A v e r a g e            392              0              289        28.70            0           8. 6

Fri    10.2       1 0 -1 1          55             0               42        22.62           0              0
                  1 1 -1 2          55             0               45        16.11           0              2
                  1 2 -1 3          31             0               24        28.96           0              6
                  1 4 -1 5          53             0               44        19.55           0              5
                  1 5 -1 6          19             0               20        48.50           0             13
                  1 6 -1 7          63        .    0               37        10.95           0              0
                  1 7 -1 8          28             0               25        37.40           0             12

T o ta l/A v e r a g e            304              0              237        23 .3 8         0            3 .2

Wed       8 .2    1 0 -1 1          35             0               26       32.41            0             23
                  1 1 -1 2          65             0               47       18.62            0              0
                  1 2 -1 3          16             0               15       74.00            0             15
                  1 3 -1 4          74             0               62       14.35            0              a
                  1 4 -1 5          26             0               18       46.67            0              s
                  1 5 -1 6          34             0               27       35.56            0              9
                  1 6 -1 7          50             0               34 '     27.79            0             11
                  1 7 -1 8          66             0.23            49       14.59            0              4

T o ta l/A v e r a g e            366              0 . 04         278       25.82            0           9.9

BARKERS POO.’j

Day     D a t e T im e         No. o f            A verage       No. o f   A v e r a g e M ax p a s s   M in c;
                             * p ssn grs          w a it         cabs      w a it        queue          queue

Sat      28.1     2 3 -2 4         27         ‘ 64.44              13         0            42                0
                  2 4 -0 1         40           53.13              22         0            46                0
                  01 -0 2         102           15.29              53         0            37                0
                  0 2 -0 3         77           16.43              37         0            27                0

T o ta l/A v e r a g e            246             27.19           125         0            38                0

Mon     30.1      1 0 -1 1         15            0                 12       23.75            0              2
                  1 1 -1 2          6            0                  5       88.00            0              4
                  12 -1 3          17            0                 15       33.67            0              6
                  1 4 -1 5         33          . o                 26       19.62            0              1
                  1 5 -1 6         26            0                 20       26.75            0              2
                  1 6 -1 7         32            0                 23       16.96            0              2
                  1 7 -1 8         42            2.71              29        2.48            7              0 .

T o ta l/A v e r a g e            171              0.67           130       21.06            1           2.4
Fri        3.2    1 9 -2 0            30        0             27          11.30           0             2
                  20-21              ,52        0             40            9.00          0 •           3
                  21-22               43        0             27          1 9 .2 6        0 1   ;       6
                  23—24              51       2 9 .4 0        29            0.36         38             0
                  24-01             127         8 .2 3        78           1.22          38             0
                  01-02             129            1 .6 6     87           4*31           —             — •
                  02-03             152            9 o il     89           0 .5 1        53             0

T o ta l/A v e r a g e              5*4            7 .0 9    377           4.58      21.5             1.8

Day      D a t e T im e           N o. o f    A verage      NO. o f     A v e r a g e Max p a s s   Min cai
                                  p ssn grs   w a it.       cabs        w a it        queue         queue

W ed 8 . 2        1 5 -1 6            29           0          22          26.10           0             7
                  1 6 -1 7            40           0          30          20.50           0             6
                  1 7 -1 8            44       t              29           8.28           0             2

T o ta l/A v e r a g e              113            0          81          1 7 .6 5        0             5

Thur 9 .2         1 0 -1 1             9           0          10         28 .5 0          0             3
                  11-12               25           0          18         32.20            0             8“
                  1 2 -1 3            42           0          30          11. 67          0             2

T o ta l/A v e r a g e                76           0          58         20.94            0          4.3


Sat      1 1 .2   1 0 -1 1            12       0              10         39.50       v    0             5
                  11-12              23        0              15         30.33            0             6
                  1 2 -1 3           39        0.38           27          7.59            2             0
                  1 4 -1 5           43        0-93           28          2 .50           5             0
                  1 5 -1 6           75        0 20           44         11.47            3             0
                  1 6 -1 7          100        1.20           60          1.92           10             0
                  1 7 -1 8           68        3.24           43          2.79            8             0

T o ta l/A v e r a g e              360        1.14          227           8.21           4          1. 6


FITZALAN SQUARE
                             r.                        •                                                    !   -

D ay    D a t e T im e         No. o f        A verage      No.    of   A v e r a g e Max p a s s   Min c a l
                             ' p ssn grs      w a it        cabs        w a it        queue         queue

Sat     28.1 19-20                  100        0              60          5.67            0             0
           ' 20-21                   96        0              57          8.77            0             7
             21-22                   72        0              35         30.86            0            11
             23-24                   49       53.27           25          0              59             0
             24-01                  118       15.97           57          0              46             0
             01-02                  121        8.27           60          0.08           30             0
                  0 2 -0 3          104        4.13           54           1.20          22             0

Total/Average                       660        8.98          348           5.72      22.4            2.6




                                               6
D ay     D a te   T im e     N o. o f        A v e ra g e N o. o f   A v e r a g e M ax p a s s    M in c a b
                             p s s n g rs    w a it       cabs       w a it        queue           queue


W ed     31.1     1 0 -1 1        20         0               16        47.19              0            11
                  1 1 -1 2        25,        0               20        52.00              0            15
                  1 2 -1 3        35         0               27        39.63              0            15
                  1 3 -1 4        46         0               35        36.29              0            17
                  1 4 -1 5        38         0               25        59.20              0            22
                  15 -1 6         52         0               31        39.52              0            15
                  16 -1 7         60         0               31        37.58              0            11
                  1 7 -1 8        57         0              ‘4 4       13.86              0             4

T o ta l/A v e r a g e          333          0             229         37.62              0         13.8

Thur       2 .2   1 0 -1 1       21          0              14         71.07             0            15
                  1 1 -1 2       34          0              25         47.60             0            17
                  1 2 -1 3       35          0              26         52.12             0             9
                  1 4 -1 5     _ 59          0              35         39.57             0    -       15
                  1 5 -1 6       48          0              33         33.48             4             0
                  1 6 -1 7       46          0              36         20.97             0             4
                  1 7 -1 8       58          0              39         11.41             0             0

T o ta l/A v e r a g e          301          0             208         34.76        0.6              8.6

Thur       2 .2   1 9 —2 0       45          0              28        36.25            0              14
                  2 0 -2 1       38          0              29        39.48            0              17
                  2 1 -2 2       67          0              44        23.64            0              20
                  2 2 -2 3       46          0              36        28.33            0              19
                  2 3 -2 4      134          0.11           77          5.85           0              16
                  0 1 -0 2       54          0              30        1 3 . 0C         0               8
                  0 2 -0 3       80          0^ 5 0         39          6.28           0               4

T o ta l/A v e r a g e          464          0.12          283        18.75            0              14

Mon      13.2     1 0 -1 1       57          1.32           44         3 .52           8                0
                  1 1 -1 2       43          0              35        16.29            0                5
                  1 2 -1 3       59          0              44        18.30            0               10
                  1 4 -1 5       52          0              33        33 .7 S          0               16
                  1 5 -1 6       65          0              41        22.07            0               10
                  1 6 -1 7       42          0              34        23.82            0 -            , 8
                  1 7 -1 8       37          0              26        21.35            0          ' '   6

T o ta l/A v e r a g e          355          0.21         257         19.13         1.1             7.9

F ri      3.2     1 9 —2 0      44           0              30        23.12           0                9
                  2 0 -2 1      51           0              36        25.55           0               10
                  2 1 -2 2      60           0              39        28.85           0               13
                  2 3 -2 4      37          35.14           23-        0.65          51                0
                  2 4 -0 1      69           5.22           47         0.74          19                0
                  0 1 -0 2      27           0.74           22         4.32           2                0
                  0 2 -0 3     132           1.53           61         2.13          15                0

T o ta l/A v e r a g e         421           4.47         258         11.68       12.4              4.6
Day      D a t e T im e       No. o f         A verage    No. o f      A verage         Max p a s s         M in c a b
                              p ssn grs       w a it      cabs-        w a it           queue               queue

Sat       4 .2   1 0 -1 1        27            0             20         39.00                   0               9
                 1 1 -1 2        25            0             17         31.18                   0               4
                                                                                        ...     Q
                 1 2 —1 3        37            0             24         I I . 2 5 ...                           0
                 1 3 -1 4        42            0             31         36.77                   0               7
                 1 5 -1 6       157            0             82         18.29                   0              23
                 1 6 -1 7       125            0 .1          67         1 9 .5 5                2              13
                 1 7 -1 8       100       .    0             63           4.13                  0               0

T o ta l/A v e r a g e          513            0.02        304          19.05                 0.3               8


        The f i r s t p o in t t o n o t e i s t h a t o f t h e 7 , 2 7 7 p a s s e n g e r s we
        o b s e r v e d b o a r d in g t a x i s 4 , 7 6 0 , n e a r l y tw o t h i r d s , d i d n o t
        h a v e t o w a i t a t a l l . For- t h e r e m a i n i n g t h i r d a v e r a g e w a i t
        t i m e w a s 7 . 7 m i n u t e s . As, w e w i l l s e e b e l o w h o w e v e r , m o s t o f
        t h e s e w ere t r a v e l l i n g d u r in g t h e l a t e n ig h t w eek en d p e r io d
        w here d e la y s a re t r a d it io n a lly          to be ex p ected .          For th o se
        tr a v e llin g       b etw een     1000        and  18 00 b e t w e e n    M onday        and
        T h u r s d a y i n c l u s i v e l e s s t h a n 10% h a d t o w a i t ?          of th ese
        p a s s e n g e r s , t h o s e t r a v e l l i n g in an h o u r w ith an a v e r a g e
        w a i t i n g t i m e o f ’ o v e r a m i n u t e a c c o u n t f o r l e s s t h a n 4% o f
        th e to t a l.

        At th e           railw ay      s ta tio n      p assen ger d ela y s         are    alm ost
        c o m p l e t e l y a b s e n t e x c e p t f o r a p e r i o d o f h i g h e r dem and on
        Sunday e v e n in g s . At B arkers P o o l p a sse n g e r d e la y s                     are
        la r g e ly c o n fin e d to w eek en ds. S im ila r ly , a t F itz a la n sq u are
        d u r in g t h e o f f - p e a k h o u r s d e l a y s a r e a b s e n t o r m in o r w it h
        h ig h cab d e la y s- a p p a r e n t d u r in g w e e k d a y s. A t b o th t h e s e
        l a t t e r t w o r a n k s , h o w e v e r , n o n —t r i v i a l p a s s e n g e r d e l a y s
        o c c u r a t peak tim e s.

        U sin g th e g e n e r a l in d e x o f a b i l i t y t o s u p p ly d e f in e d a b ove
        we can g a in a f i r s t im p r e ssio n o f th e s t a t u s o f th e tr a d e
        f o r d i f f e r e n t p e r io d o f tim e . In t a b l e 2 b e lo w we s e e t h a t
        d u r in g w eek d ay d a y tim e s t h e t r a d e a r e " d o in g w e ll" o r " j u s t
        co p in g *    f o r 94% o f t h e t i m e w h e r e a s t h i s f a l l t o 4 8 . 1 % o f
        t h e tim e f o r th e w eekend l a t e n ig h t tr a d e .


        TABLE 2 :        A B I L IT Y TO MEET DEMAND FOR DIFFERENT PERIODS


                                                                 ASSESSMENT

                                              DOING WELL          J U S T COPING                NOT COPING

          DAYTIME MON—THURS                      77.6%                  16.4%                        6.0%

         DAYTIME F R I - S A T                   57.1%                  28.6%                       14.3%

         NIGHT—TIME F R I - S A T               '2,3.3%                 14.8%                       51.9%
2.3     A verage     d e la y s     in    each     tim e   p e r io d

        We e s t i m a t e d w a i t i n g t i m e s o f p a s s e n g e r s f o r e a c h h o u r
        co v ered by th e o b s e r v a tio n s .          Not a l l h ou rs w ere o b serv ed
        e q u a ll y , w it h w eek d ay d ay tim e and w eek en d n ig h t t im e s b e in g
        o v er r e p r e se n te d fo r th e re a so n g iv e n ab ove.          For each hour
        in c lu d e d      in th e a n a ly s is th e r e s u lt s fo r a l l ra n k s a re
        p o o l e d . T h i s i s d o n e t o f a c i l i t a t e c o m p a r is o n w i t h l a s t
        years r e su lts.          F or sem e p e r io d s o n ly on e ra n k w as s u r v e y e d .
        F or th e w eekday l a t e n ig h t th e rank ch o sen w as F i t z a l a n
        S q u a re , w h ile f o r Sunday i t w as th e R a ilw a y S t a t i o n .              In
        b o th c a s e s t h e ra n k w as c h o se n on t h e b a s i s o f a p r i o r
        e x p e c t a t i o n t h a t i t w as l i k e l y t o b e t h e h i g h e s t dem and
        p o in t.

        The r e s u l t s o f t h e h o u r by h o u r a n a ly s i s a r e g iv e n in t a b l e
        3 b e lo w . As can b e s e e n th e p a tte r n o f d e la y s i s b r o a d ly
        s im ila r to th o s e o b serv ed in our p r e v io u s stu d y .


TABLE 3 :        DELAYS BY TIME OF DAY



                                Mon — T h u r s                         Fri -     Sat                Sunday

                     S a m p le     size      A verage      S a m p le s i z e      A verage    S a m p le   A ve
                                                 W a lt                             W S lt                   w a it
      PERIOD         hours          pass         tim e      hours        p ass      tim e        p ass       tim e

  0 9 0 0 -1 0 0 0     2             157          0.32
  100 0 -1 1 0 0       9             417          0             4          117           0
  1 1 0 0 -1 2 0 0   — 9             352          0             4          134           0
  1 2 0 0 -1 3 0 0     9             277          0             4          142           0.10
  1 3 0 0 -1 4 0 0     2             120          0             3          142           0.28
  1 4 0 0 -1 5 0 0     8             331          0             1           53           0
  1 5 0 0 -1 6 0 0     9             332          0             4          293           0.05     40         0
  1 6 0 0 -1 7 0 0     9             385          0 . 01        4          339           0.35     39         0
  1 7 0 0 -1 8 0 0     9-            450          0.29          4          264           0.83    155         0.36
  1 8 00 -1 9 0 0                                                                                 96         2 . 60
  1 9 0 0 —2 0 0 0          1         45          0             4         ' 240          0        72         0
  2 0 0 0 -2 1 0 0          1         38          0             4           273          0       115         1.22
  2 1 0 0 -2 2 0 0          1         67          0             4           238          0
  2200-2300                 1         46          0                                      —
  2300-0000                 1        134          0.11          4          164          43.60
  0 0 0 0 -0 1 0 0                                              4          354          15.30
  0 1 0 0 -0 2 0 0      •   1            54       0             4          379           7.37
  0200-0300                 1            80       0.5           4          465           7.06



       As t h e m ore g e n e r a l a n a l y s i s a b o v e h a s i n d i c a t e d         delays,
       w h e r e t h e y o c c u r , a r e n e g l i g i b l e f o r w e ek d a y d a y t i m e s , and
       m o d e s t f o r t h e tw o n i g h t - t i m e h o u r s and o n e m o r in g p e a k h o u r
       f o r w h i c h d e l a y s a r e o b s e r v e d . On t h e o t h e r h a n d t h e w e e k e n d
       t r a d e e x h i b i t s a m ore g e n e r a l sp r e a d o f d e la y s th r o u g h o u t
       th e day (th o u g h th e a v e r a g e in any on e hour n e v e r e x c e e d s 1
       m in u te ) and n i g h t - t i m e p e r i o d s .



                                                  9
2 .4   M a xim u m d e l a y s

       I n t h i s s e c t i o n we f o c u s in m ore d e t a i l , on t h e t im e s '”and
       l o c a t i o n s o f t h e m a x im u m ( a v e r a g e h o u r l y ) p a s s e n g e r a n d c a b
       d e la y s (ta b le 4 ).


TABLE 4 :     MAXIMUM DELAYS


                                            M ax d e l a y           T im e           D a te

         B arkers Pool
             P a ss e n g e r 1988            13.82               2 3 -2 4            F ri 19.2
                              1989            64.44               2 3 -2 4            Sat 28.1

              Cab                1988         57.78               1 2 -1 3            Thu 2 5 . 2
                                 1989         88.00       -       1 1 -1 2            Mon 3 0 . 1

         F itz a la n Sq.
             P a s s e n g e r 1988            7.23               2 3 -2 4            F r iJ26.2
                               1989           53.27               2 3 -2 4            Sat 28.1

              Cab                1988         71.39               1 2 -1 3            Tue 2 3 . 2
                                 1989         71.07               1 0 -1 1            T hur 2 .3

          S ta tio n
             P a s s e n g e r 1988                3.15           1 7 -1 8            Tue 1 6 .2
                               1989                2.60           1 8 -1 9            Sun 2 9 . 1     •

             Cab                 1988         6 1 .1 8            1 5 -1 6            W ed 1 0 . 2
                                 1989         74.00               1 2 -1 3            Wed    8 .2



       The p a t t e r n here- h a s r e m a in e d a lm o s t t h e sam e a s f o r 1 9 8 8 .
       M axim u m p a s s e n g e r w a i t i n g t i m e s o c c u r o n t h e F i t z a l a n S q u a r e
       and B a rk ers P o o l ra n k s l a t e a t n ig h t a t th e w eekend and a r e
       a s s o c i a t e d , w i t h t h e l e i s u r e t r a d e . M a xim u m p a s s e n g e r d e l a y
       a t t h e r a i l w a y s t a t i o n i s m uch l e s s a n d i s l i k e l y t o b e
       a s s o c ia t e d w ith b u s in e s s t r a v e l l e r s .     F o r c a b s t h e m a x im u m
       w a i t i n g t im e s o c c u r d ttr in g t h e l a t e m o r n in g /e a r ly a f t e r n o o n :
       a s can b e se e n t h e s e a r e v e r y h ig h .

       C o m p a rin g t h e e n t r i e s f o r t h e tw o s u r v e y p e r i o d s w e s e e t h a t
       p assen ger delays                 a t t h e tw o c i t y      c e n t r e ra n k s and cab
       w a itin g tim e s a t F itz a la n             sq u a r e and th e r a ilw a y s t a t i o n
       h a v e b e c o m e m uch m o re p e a k e d . T h e r e s u l t s s u g g e s t t h a t
       p a s s e n g e r s a r r i v i n g a t B a r k e r s P o o l a t 2 3 .0 0 h o u r s o n t h e
       F r id a y      n ig h t c it e d      in   ta b le     4 w o u ld h a v e t o     w ait,    on
       a v e r a g e , u n t i l 0004 h ou rs b e fo r e o b ta in in g a cab - In r e a l i t y
       s o m e m e m b e r s o f t h e q u e u e m ay h a v e g i v e n u p a n d l e f t b e f o r e
       t h i s , so m e th in g we a r e u n a b le t o m ea su re, b u t r e s u l t i s a t
       -le a st in d ic a t iv e o f c o n d itio n s in th e queue a t th a t tim e .




                                             1 0
2 .5   T o ta l   p a s s e n g e r v o lu m e s    and a v er a g e    d e la y s

       F o r e a c h e n t r y i n t h e t a b l e b e lo w e s t i m a t e s f o r b o th 1988
       and 1989 a r e g iv e n t o e n a b le c o m p a r iso n . H ow ever, i t s h o u ld
       b e s t r e s s e d t h a t t h e f i g u r e s a r e e s t i m a t e s a n d a s s u c h may
       b e s u b j e c t t o som e random e r r o r . N e v e r t h e l e s s t h e r e s u l t s do
       prove        in d ic a tiv e     of    th e    m ovem ents         of   the     v a r ia b le s
       concerned (se e ta b le 5 ).


TABLE 5 f 'ESTIMATES OF AVERAGE DELAY TIMES AND FLOWS



                         Rank                                D e la y          L o a d in g s

                       B arkers P ool
                          P assen ger         1988              1.40             5, 600
                                              1989              3.07             4 ,-7 0 0

                           C ab               1988            13 .2 3           4,200
                                              1989            11.02             3,000

                       F itz a la n Sq.
                          P assen ger         1988              0.51            8,700
                                              1989              1.46            7,100

                          Cab                 1988            15.11             5,575
                                              1989            24.23             3,700

                       S ta tio n
                          P assen ger         1988              0.19            6, 300
                                              1989              0.17            4,500

                          Ca b                1988            25.62             3,850
                                              1989            19 .03            3,200


       M a k in g a s m a l l a l l o w a n c e f o r t h e m in o r r a n k s w e e s t i m a t e ,
       t h a t a b o u t 1 7 , 4 0 0 p a s s e n g e r s w e r e m oved fro m r a n k s i n a v e e k
       w ith an a v e r a g e w a it in g tim e o f 1 . 5 7 m in u te s . T h is com pares
       w it h an e s t im a t e d 2 2 , 000 f o r l a s t y e a r w ith an a v e r a g e
       w a it in g tim e o f 0 . 6 3 m in u te s. A verage p a s s e n g e r w a it in g tim e
       a t ra n k s t h e r e f o r e a p p e a rs t o h a v e in c r e a s e d by 0 . 9 4 m in u te s
       o r b y a b o u t 150% .

       L o o k in g        a t th e in d iv id u a l ranks                 we s e e t h a t     average
       p a s s e n g e r d e l a y s a t t h e tw o c i t y c e n t r e r a n k s a p p e a r    to have
       i n c r e a s e d q u i t e s h a r p l y w h i l s t p a s s e n g e r dem and h a s     fa lle n .
       D elays          at    the    railw ay      station           rank      have   fa lle    n    very
       slig h tly .

       In th e       l i g h t o f ou r d e m o n str a tio n in th e p r e v io u s su r v e y
       t h a t t h e c u r r e n t num ber o f l i c e n s e d v e h i c l e c a n p r o v id e a
       m uch b e t t e r s e r v i c e e v e n w h en d em an d i s m a r k e d l y h i g h e r a t
       peak tim e s, th e s e          r e s u l t s a r e r a t h e r s u r p r i s in g . The o n ly
       e x p la n a tio n fo r t h i s i s th a t ca b s are e it h e r n o t in s e r v ic e
       o r t h a t t h e y a r e o t h e r w i s e e n g a g e d . We r e t u r n t o t h i s i s s u e
       w hen d i s c u s s i n g t h e r e s u l t s o f t h e ca b l o g s b e lo w .


                                                   11
 2. 6     P a ir e d       c o m p a r is o n s

         A l a s s g e n e r a l b u t m ore r o b u s t m eth o d o f a n a l y s i n g t h e                       '
          c h a n g e i n s e r v ic e - q u a l i t y b e tw e e n t h e tw o p e r i o d s i s b a s e d
         on p a ir e d         c o m p a r is o n s   o f ob s e r v a t i on s b e tw e e n th e      tw o
         s u r v e y s - T hu s a S a tu r d a y n i g h t fro m t h e p r e v i o u s s u r v e y i s
         c o m p a r ed w i t h a S a t u r d a y n i g h t fro m t h e p r e s e n t s u r v e y and
         s o on . Of th e 21 o b s e r v a tio n p e r io d s in th e p r e s e n t s u r v e y ,
         17 w ere m atch ed t o c o r r e s p o n d in g o b s e r v a t io n p e r io d s in th e
         1988        study          ( n o m atch , w a s f o u n d       for th e        rem aining 4
         o b s e r v a t i o n s ) . T a b le 6 b e lo w p r e s e n t s t h e r e s u l t s o f su c h an
         a n a l y s i s w h ere t h e a v e r a g e d e la y s and v o lu m e s o f t r a f f i c f o r
         each, o f t h e 15 o b s e r v a t i o n s fro m t h e 198 9 s u r v e y f o r w h ic h
         an e q u iv a le n t o b s e r v a t io n w as c a r r ie d          o u t in      1988.   S in c e
         b o th s t u d i e s h a v e b e e n c a r r i e d o u t a t t h e sam e t im e o f y e a r
         t h e e f f e c t o f s e a s o n a l i t y i s k e p t t o a m in im u m ♦



TABLE       S:       E S T I M A T E S OF           W A IT IN G    T IM E S      AND      FLOWS   FROM   FA IR E D
                     OBSERVATIONS

RAILWAY STATION

DATE                                PASSENGER                              CAB

                                  W a it          F lo w          W a it         F lo w

Mon 2 2 - 2 . 8 8      D          0         . 425                 23.78          315
Mo n 3 0 . 1 . 8 9     D          0.18        341                 28.41          27.6

Wed 1 0 . 2 . 8 8      D          0.05            251             30.46          251
We d  8.2.89           D          0.04            278             25.82          278

Thu 2 5 . 2 . 8 8      D          0.16            310             26.51          245
Thu-  9.2-89           D          0               345             28.70          289

Sat     27.2.88        D         .0.11            356             24.54          261
Sat      4.4.89        D          0               307             24.95          209

Sun 2 1 . 2 . 8 8      E          0.90            720               9.23      526
Sun 2 9 . 1 . 8 9      E          0.98            417             1 7 .5 6    289

T o ta l/A v e r a g e

1988                            0.36       2062                    20.58      1598
1989                            0.29       1688                    25.02      1341




                                      X




                                                           1 2
BARKERS POOL

DATE                                PASSENGER                           CAB

                               W a it       F lo w         W a it             F lo w

Mon   8.2.88           D        0           150                24.61          121
Mon 3 0 . 1 . 8 9      D        0 .'6 7     171                21.06          130

We d 1 0 . 2 . 8 8 D            0           163                23.46          130
W/ T 8 / 9 . 2 8 9 D            0           221                19.02          162

Fri     19.2.88        N      4.04         1083                 2.55          653
Fri      3.2.89        N      7.09          584                 4.58          377

Sat     27.2.88        N.    3.33          1011                 0 . 61        504
Sat     28.1.89        N._ 2 7 . 1 9        246                 0             125

T o ta l/A v e r a g e

1988                         3.21         2407             5.68           1408
1989                         8.96         1222             9.50            794


FITZALAN SQUARE

DATE                                PASSENGER                       CAB

                                                                               i—1
                                                                               *1
                               W a it          F lo w          W a it
                                                                               o
Mon   8.2.88           D       0               454         20.32               326
Mon 1 3 . 2 . 8 9      D       0.21            355         19.13               257

  DATE                              PASSENGER                            CAB

Wed 1 0 . 2 . 8 8      D       0               278         44.59               207
Wed 3 1 . 1 . 8 9      D       0               333         37.62               229

Thu 1 8 . 2 . 8 8      D     - 0.06            422         16.57               239
Thu   2.2.89           D       0               301         34.76               208

Fri    26.2.88         N       3 .35           700          9.49               432
Fri     3.2.89         N       4.47            421         11.68               258

Sat    20.2.88         N       2.60         1427           18 . 8 1            359
Sat    28.1.89         N       8.98          660            5.72               348

S a t '2 0 . 2 . 8 8   D       0               528          5.28               709
Sat      4.2.89        D       0.02            513         19.05               304

T o ta l/A v e r a g e

1988                           1 . 60     3809             15.15           2272
1989                           3.51       2583             19.67           1604

Timing     of   observation:        D = Da y     E * Evening    H   *    night




                                                     13
.A g a in t h e a n a l y s i s p o i n t s t o a s l i g h t im p r o v e m e n t i n s e r v i c e ^
 q u a lit y a t th e r a ilw a y s t a t io n ,         t h o u g h d em a n d , i s d o w n b y '
 s o m e 20% . C o n v e r s e l y ,     a t t h e tw o c i t y      c e n tr e ranks th er e
 a p p e a r s t o h a v e b e e n a m arked i n c r e a s e in p a s s e n g e r d e la y s
 m a tch ed b y sh a r p f a l l s in p a s s e n g e r dem and- cab w a it in g
 tim e s h ave a ls o          in c r e a se d q u ite 's u b s ta n tia lly a t a l l 3
 ran k s.

I n c r e a se s in b o th p a sse n g e r and cab w a itin g tim e s p o in t t o a
m is - m a t c h b e t w e e n s u p p l y a n d dem and w i t h t o o m any c a b s b e i n g
a v a i l a b l e a t r a n k s a t t i m e s o f- lo w dem and a n d t o o fe w b e i n g
a v a i l a b l e w h en dem and i s h i g h .

I n t a b l e s 7 and 8 b e lo w we lo o k a t t h e o v e r a l l c h a n g e b y
tim e o f d a y - A lth o u g h t h e e n t r i e s c a n n o t b e in t e r p r e t e d a s
g e n e r a l a v e r a g e s ( s in c e no w e ig h tin g i s c a r r ie d o u t)          th ey
h a v e t h e a d v a n ta g e o f b e in g d i r e c t l y c o m p a r a b le an d a r e
t h e r e f o r e a b l e t o i d e n t i f y d i f f e r e n c e s b e t w e e n t h e tw o
p e r io d s m ore d i r e c t l y .        T hus, we s e e t h a t m atch ed p a s s e n g e r
w a it in g t im e s h a v e d o u b le d and ca b w a it in g tim e s h a v e
i n c r e a s e d b y 7 5% . A t t h e s a m e t i m e p a s s e n g e r d e m a n d ( a s
m easured by cab d e p a r tu r e s)                  h a s f a l l e n b y 2 9% w i t h t h e
n i g h t - t i m e t r a d e e x p e r i e n c i n g a m uch s h a r p e r f a l l r e l a t i v e
t o t h e d a y tim e t r a d e .

T h i s g e n e r a l f a l l i n dem and i s d i f f i c u l t t o e x p l a i n , b u t tw o
p o s s i b i l i t i e s p r e s e n t t h e m s e lv e s . The f i r s t p o s s i b l e s o u r c e
of- t h e r e d u c t i o n i s t h e r e c e n t f a r e s i n c r e a s e w h i c h c a m e
in to       e ffe c t      w h ils t     th e    su rvey       w as ta k in g p l a c e .       T h is
in c r e a s e i s o n ly in l i n e w ith i n f l a t i o n h ow ever and so i s
h i g h l y u n l i k e l y > to h a v e p r e c i p i t a t e d t h e l e v e l o f c o n s u m e r
r e s is ta n c e        n e c e ssa r y to e x p la in th e sh arp f a l l in               dem and
o b s e r v e d . S e c o n d l y , i t m ay b e t h a t p o t e n t i a l p a s s e n g e r s f a i l
to j o in th e queue b eca u se th e r e i s e it h e r a la r g e queue o f
p a s s e n g e r s a lr e a d y t h e r e , o r no c a b s a r e p r e s e n t . T h is m eans
t h a t t h e am ount o f tim e th e y e x p e c t t o w a it i s g r e a t e r th a n
t h a t ’ w h ic h t h e y a r e p r e p a r e d t o a c c e p t . F o r i n s t a n c e i f we
r e f e r b a ck t o t a b le l , on S a tu rd a y 2 8 th J a n u ary th e r e w ere
n o q u e u e s o f c a b s o b s e r v e d a t e i t h e r o f t h e tw o c i t y c e n t r e
ra n k s a t t h e .e n d o f any 5 m in u te p e r io d b etw e en and 2300 and
0300, a n d t h e a v e r a g e l e n g t h o f p a s s e n g e r q u e u e s w e r e 2 8 a n d
39 a t B a r k e r P o o l a n d ‘F i t z a l a n S q u a r e r e s p e c t i v e l y .            It
s h o u ld b e s t r e s s e d t h a t t h i s d o e s n o t m ean t h a t no c a b s
appeared              at    the      rank,      only        th at   cabs were u t i l i s e d
im m ediately               upon       a r r iv a l.     N ev erth eless        under         th ese
c o n d itio n s i t          i s p o s s ib le t h a t o n ly th o s e w ith no o th e r
m eans o f t r a v e l w ere p r e p a r e d t o w a it .




                                       14
TABLE 7 :      COMPARISON OF WAITING TIMES FOR 1 9 8 8             AND 1 9 8 9   (M INUTES)
               (MATCHED OBSERVATIONS)



                                         1988         1989      % INCREASE

PASSENGER WAIT                           1.76         3.52          100

DA.YTIME ( 1 0 0 0 - 1 8 0 0 )           0.04         0.09          125
NIG H T -T IM E ( 1 8 0 1 - 0 3 0 0 )    2.92         8.18          180


CAB WAIT                                11.08        19.43            75

DAYTIME ( 1 0 0 0 - 1 8 0 0 )       14.55            25.47           75
N IG H T-TIM E ( 1 8 0 1 - 0 3 0 0 ) 7 . 1 5          8.65           20




TABLE 8 :      PASSENGER AND CAB FLOWS FOR 1 9 8 8           AND 1 9 8 9


                                           1988          1989       % CHANGE

PASSENGERS SERVED                          8278          5493          -33.6

DAYTIME ( 1 0 0 0 - 1 8 0 0 )              3337          3165          -5.2
N IG H T-TIM E ( 1 8 0 1 - 0 3 0 0 )       4941          2348         -52.9


CABS LEAVING RANK                          5278          3739          -29.2

DAYTIME ( 1 0 0 0 - 1 8 0 0 )              2804          2342         -16.5
N IG H T-TIM E ( 1 8 0 1 - 0 3 0 0 )       2474          1397         -43.5




                                                15
       CAB LOGS

       A sa m p le o f d r i v e r s ,        ch o sen to r e p r e s e n t th e s p l i t !b etw een
       t h o s e on and o f f r a d io c i r c u i t s , w ere a sk ed t o k eep a lo g o f
       t h e i r a c t i v i t i e s f o r a t h r e e d a y p e r i o d f r o m t i m e —o n o n
       T hursday t h e             2n d o f ”F e b ru a ry t o tim e o f f on t h e n ig h t, o f
       4 /5         F e b r u a r y . A l l T w en ty s e t s o f l o g s w e r e r e t u r n e d , o f
       w h ic h 18 c o u l d b e u s e d . T he r e s u l t s fro m t h e c a b l o g s a r e
       su m m a r ise d i n t a b l e 9 b e lo w . T he s e c o n d co lu m n o f t h e t a b l e
       i n d i c a t e s w h e th e r o r n o t t h e cab i s on a r a d io c i r c u i t ;
       c o lu m n 6 g i v e s t h e a v e r a g e t im e b e tw e e n p ic k - u p a n d s e t
       d ow n ; c o lu m n 7 g i v e s t h e a v e r a g e ca b w a i t t im e on r a n k ;
       c o lu m n 8 g i v e s t h e e n g a g e d r a t i o ; a n d t h e f i n a l c o lu m n
       i n d ic a t e s th e p r o p o r tio n o f tim e each d r iv e r w orked d u r in g
       th e e v e n in g o r n ig h t- tim e .


TABLE 9 :       SUMMARY OF CAB LOGS


CAB    RADIO      HRS     NO OF      FARES/       AVE TIME          AVE      ENGAGED         % OF HR£
NO.    CAB?       ON      FARES      HOUR         PER FARE          WAIT     R A T I O (%)   AFTER 15


  1    No        26.5       53       2.0           10.4            17.4          34.8            87.9
  2    No        21.5       29       1.4            9.1            25.8          20.5             8.1
  3    No        23.6       61       2.6            9.4            16.6          30.1            54.7
  4    No        28.1       46       1.6           13.1            14.5          35.8            24,0
  5    No        22.0       45       2.0           11.0            15.7          37.7            72.9
  6    No        10.2       16       1.6           10.9            19.7          28.5             0.0
  7    No        26.7       38       1.4           14.0            24.2          33.0            10.3
  8    No        25.7       60       2.3            7.8            23.8          30.2            30.0
  9   Yes        22.7       27       1.2           18.4            19.3          33.8             0.0
10    Yes        29.0       49       1.7           10.8            17.3      '   30.3             0.0
11    Yes        17.5       22       1.3           17.8             7,9          35.5            68. 6
12    Yes        1 3 . 4 ' 22        1.6           10.6            16v 2         28.8             5.6
13    Yes        25.7       38       1.5           11.6            14.1          28.5             0.0
14    Yes        35.9     . 65       1.8           17.2            13.3          51.2            47.9
15    Yes   '    31.1       47       1.5           22.5            -:o.6         55.0            17.7
1-6   Yes        28.0       49       1.8           12.5            14.3          35.9             3.6
17    Yes        25.5       49       1.9            8.6            15.5          27.6             0.0
18    Yes        35.1       59       1.7           13 . 5          19.6          37.9            36.6


COLUMN
AVERAGES
                 24.9    43.1        1.7           12.7            17.5          34.2            str.o
       *The en g a g ed r a t i o i s d e f in e d a s [ E /(E         + V )]*100       w here   E is
       en gaged tim e and V i s v a c a n t tim e .

      F rom t h e t a b l e w e c a n s e e t h           a t lo w e r en g a g ed r a t i o s a r e
      a s s o c i a t e d w it h t h o s e w o r k in g    p r e d o m in a n tly d u r in g t h e d ay
      b u t t h e r e v e r s e i s n o t a lw a y s        t r u e . We c a n a l s o s e e t h a t ,
      generally           sp e a k in g ,  th o se d      r iv e r s    who w o rk t h e h i g h e r
      p r o p o r tio n o f h ou rs a t n ig h t           e n jo y lo w e r a v e r a g e w a it in g
      t i m e s ’’a t r a n k s .




                                           16
3 .1    C auses o f      lo w   cab    su p p ly    at   ra n k s d u r in g   F r id a y   and   S a tu rd ay
        n ig h ts .

        W ith i n f o r m a t i o n fr o m t h e c a b l o g s a n d fr o m t h e t r a d e we             can
        com m ent on t h e r e a s o n s f o r t h e a p p a r e n t r e d u c t i o n             in      cab
        s u p p ly d u r in g t h e p e a k p e r i o d s o f dem and m e n t io n e d                      in
        se c tio n       2 .6   above.      Two p o s s i b i l i t i e s  w ere s u g g e s te d ,        th e
        id e a t h a t c a b s w ere o u t b u t w ere o t h e r w is e e n g a g e d and                  th e
        p o s s i b i l it y       th a t    cabs        were    sim ply       not    w orking              in
        s u f f i c i e n t l y l a r g e n u m b e r s . We d i s c u s s e a c h p o s s i b i l i t y    in
        tu rn .

3.1.1     N o n -ra n k w ork

        O f t h e 97 r e c o r d e d h i r i n g s m ade b y c a b s w o r k in g f o r a l l o r
        p a r t o f th e p e r io d s          2 3 0 0 -0 3 0 0 h o u rs on th e F r i d a y and
        S a tu r d a y n i g h t f o r w h ic h l o g s w ere t a k e n , o n ly 47 o r i g i n a t e d
        fro m r a n k s ,     j u s t l e s s th a n h a l f .     R a d io w o rk b y t h e t h r e e
        c a b s on c i r c u i t s       a m o u n ted t o     o n ly 2 h i r i n g s ;  th u s th e
        m a j o r i t y -o f w o r k cam e fr o m f l a g d o w n s .       I t - does th erefo re
        a p p e a r t h a t t h o s e d r i v e r s w o r k in g d u r in g t h e s e p e a k h o u r s
        w ere c o n d u c tin g a s u b s t a n t i a l am ount o f n o n -r a n k b u s i n e s s .

        T h e r e i s known t o e x i s t a te n d e n c y f o r p a s s e n g e r s t o s t a r t
        w a lk in g in       th e d ir e c tio n      o f th e ir d e stin a tio n         in ste a d   of
        g o in g t o on e o f th e c i t y c e n t r e ra n k s. T h is o c c u r s b o th in
        t h e e f f o r t t o s a v e m on ey and b e c a u s e m any b e l i e v e i t i s
        e a s i e r t o o b t a i n a t a x i b y f l a g g i n g o n e down o n i t s r e t u r n
        to th e c i t y c e n t r e th an by g o in g to a ran k . Of c o u r s e , th e
        m o re p e o p l e who a c t i n t h i s m an n er t h e f e w e r c a b s t h e r e w i l l
        b e l e f t t o s e r v i c e t h e r a n k s . The l i m i t e d e v id e n c e fro m ch e
        c a b l o g s s u g g e s t s t h a t fla g d o w n s a c c o u n t f o r a s u b s t a n t i a l
        p r o p o r tio n o f t r ip s      (p erh a p s th e m a jo r ity ) d u r in g t h e l a t e
        n i g h t w e e k e n d p e r io d b u t we h a v e n o e v id e n c e t o s u g g e s t
        w h eth er o r n o t th e r e h a s b een a tr e n d to w a rd s fla g d o w n s
        s i n c e o u r l a s t s t u d y . H o w ev er, c h a n g e s in r e g u l a t i o n s w h ic h
        h a v e,recen tly          been a d o p ted by d r iv e r s h ave l i f t e d                 th e
        r e q u ir e m e n t o f d r iv e r s t o r e tu r n t o th e n e a r e s t ran k a f t e r a
        h i r i n g . T h i s m ay h a v e e n c o u r a g e d b o t h t h e t e n d e n c y f o r c a b s
        t o c r u i s e w h ic h i n t u r n m ay h a v e s t i m u l a t e d m o r e dem and f o r
        fla g d o w n s.

        F or fla g d o w n s t o b e t h e s o l e e x p la n a t io n o f t h e c h a n g e s in
        b o th dem and an d s u p p ly o b s e r v e d a t r a n k s h o w e v e r , t h e r e
        w o u ld      need     to     have     been        a su b sta n tia l    s h ift     in b o th
        p a s s e n g e r a n d d r i v e r b e h a v io u r i n t h e l a s t 12 m o n th s .

3.1.2    H ours w orked

        R e f e r r i n g t o t h e f i n a l co lu m n o f t a b l e 9 we s e e t h a t 5 o u t
        o f t h e 18. c a b s u n d e r t o o k n o w o r k a f t e r 1 8 0 0 h o u r s o n         any  of
        th e th r e e days o f th e su rv ey . A fu rth e r 3 d r iv e r s a llo c a te d
        l e s s t h a n .. l / 1 0 t h o f w o r k i n g t i m e t o t h a t p e r i o d . I f w e f o c u s
        p u r e ly on t h e h o u rs b etw een 2 3 0 0 -0 3 0 0 h o u r s on th e F r id a y
        and S a tu r d a y n ig h t (w h ere d e l a y s w ere g r e a t e s t ) _ i t e m e r g e s
        t h a t o n l y 6 d r i v e r s w o r k e d i n som e o r a l l o f t h a t p e r i o d f o r
        b o th n ig h t s .        T h ere a r e c u r r e n tly 277 lic e n c e d v e h i c l e s in
        S h e f f i e l d ; a ssu m in g o u r sa m p le t o b e b r o a d ly r e p r e s e n t a t i v e
        th is      i m p l ie s t h a t o n ly a b o u t 91 c a b s w e re w o r k in g d u r in g


                                               17
         th is     peak p e r io d .

         T h e r a e x i s t s sa m e d o u b t a s t o t h e v a l i d i t y o f th is* - e s t i m a t e
         h o w e v e r a r i s i n g fr o m c l a i m s b y t h e t r a d e t h a t m any p a r t - t i m e
         d r i v e r s who t r a d i t i o n a l l y      w ork n ig h t s h i f t s     fa ile d        to
         c o m p le te t h e l o g s . S in c e t h e tr a d e w ere aw are t h a t th e s tu d y
         w a s b e i n g c a r r i e d o u t , i t i s d i f f i c u l t t o s e e how d r i v e r s
         c o u ld h a v e ju d g ed i t to b e in t h e i r i n t e r e s t s t o n o t w ork a t
         t h e b u s i e s t tim e !

3 .2    D isc u ssio n .

         T h e r e a p p e a r s t o b e som e e v i d e n c e t h a t th e r e - h a s b e e n an
         i n c r e a s e i n f l a g d o w n trips on F r i d a y and Saturday nights.
         W h a t i s - l e s s certain, h o w e v e r , i s the nu m b e r o f c a b s w o r k i n g
         d u r i n g t h e s e p e r i o d s . S i n c e t h e evidence f r o m t h e c a b logs
         s u g g e s t s t h a t r e l a t i v e l y few c a b s w e r e o u t , b u t t h e t j r ^ e ^
         s t r o n g l y c o n t e n d s t h a t th e: v a s t m a j o r i t y w e r e o u € '/ w e
         d i s c u s s t h e implications o f e a c h possibility.. We s u s p e c t ,
         however, that e l e m e n t s o f both, are relevant to e x p l a i n i n g
         the a p p a r e n t l a c k o f c a b s , o n r a n k s .
3.2.1     F u ll    su p p ly o f   cab s.

        W ith in t h i s        s c e n a r io th e  r e d u c tio n    in    ob served p a ssen g er
        dem and i s a t t r i b u t a b l e t o p e o p le s e a r c h i n g f o r c r u i s i n g
        c a b s . A ssu m in g t h e y f i n d o n e , t h e r e d u c e d ca b s u p p ly a t c i t y
        c e n t r e ra n k s i s a ls o e x p la in e d . T he h ig h p ea k p a s s e n g e r
        d e l a y s a t r a n k s r e m a in u n e x p l a i n e d b u t s i n c e r a n k w ork- i s o f
        r e d u c e d s i g n i f i c a n c e so a r e t h e s e d e la y s ,, an d t h e o v e r a l l
        p e r fo r m a n c e o f t h e t r a d e d u r in g t h e p e a k m ay b e b e t t e r th a n
        t h a t s u g g e s t e d b y t h e r a n k d e l a y s a l o n e . I n f a c t i t m ay b e
        t h a t w e ' a r e o b s e r v in g a t r a n s i t i o n a l p e r io d , t h e o u tco m e o f
        w h ic h w i l l       b e a m uch r e d u c e d r a n k t r a d e o n F r i d a y a n d
        S a tu rd a y n ig h ts           and th e   p r e d o m in a n c e o f ca b c r u i s i n g .
        A t p r e s e n t t h e r e f o r e , t h e r e a p p e a r t o b e tw o c l a s s e s o f
        p a s s e n g e r , t h o s e who know t h a t c a b s a r e m ore e a s i l y o b t a i n e d
        a w a y fr o m r a n k s a n d t h o s e ( p o s s i b l y l e s s f r e q u e n t u s e r s ) who
        h a v e n o t y e t- o b ta in e d t h i s in fo r m a tio n .                                     1

        A lth o u g h in         th is     c a s e m ore c a b s w o u ld h e lp     reduce th e
        p r e s s u r e o f dem and a t t h i s t i m e ,         th e e f f e c t in a l l o th e r
        p eriod s           m ight        be       u n d esira b le,    c h a ra c ter ise d     by
        d is p r o p o r t io n a t e e f f e c t s on ca b w a it in g t im e s and e a r n in g s .

3.2.2     R e str ic te d    su p p ly   of   cabs

        If,      a s in t h i s s c e n a r io , c a b s a r e f a i l i n g t o w ork in th e
        p e r io d       of   h ig h      ex p ected         e a r n in g s    th ere        m u st b e   som e
        d e t e r r e n c e a t w o r k . Two f a c t o r s w h i c h m a y c o m b i n e t o p r o d u c e
        s u c h a d e t e r r e n c e a r e now s u g g e s t e d . F i r s t , t h e e v e n i n g a n d
        n i g h t - t i m e s u r c h a r g e i n S h e f f i e l d i s j u s t 20 p e n c e p e r t r i p
        m ade a f t e r        0000        hours.       R esearch           carried           out at     L eeds
        U n iv e r sity _su g g e sts th a t t h is                is   s u b s t a n t i a l l y lo w er th a n
        th e in c e n tiv e        ( o r c o m p e n s a t i o n ) o f f e r e d t o d r i v e r s i n m any
        o th er a rea s o f th e co u n try . Second,                           som e d r i v e r s m ay b e
        d e t e r r e d fro m w o r k in g n i g h t s b y t h e p o s s i b i l i t y o f d am age t o
        t h e i r ca b s (o r th e m se lv e s)            c a u s e d b y v a n d a lis m o f o n e k in d
        o r a n o th er.


                                                18
4.     SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

       When, i n t e r p r e t i n g t h s r e s u l t s o f t h i s           fo llo w -u p stu d y th e
       f in d in g s o f th e o r ig i n a l s tu d y m ust b e                b o r n e i n m in d . T h a t
       s t u d y sh ow ed v e r y c l e a r l y t h a t t h e e x i s          t i n g num ber o f c a b s
       in S h e f f i e l d was c a p a b le o f p r o v id in g                  a h ig h q u a l i t y o f
       s e r v ic e b o th in term s o f o b se r v e d d e la y s              and in term s o f th e
       p u b lic s' le v e l o f s a t is f a c t io n .

4 .1   The p r e s e n t    le v e l   of   s e r v ic e

       We e s t i m a t e t h a t o n a v e r a g e p a s s e n g e r s ^ w a i t a t r a n k s f o r
       a b o u t 1 .5 m in u te s t o o b t a in a ca b ; h o w ev er, t h e r e i s a v e r y
       w id e r a n g e o f d e la y s d e p e n d in g on tim e o f d ay an d l o c a t i o n
       o f ra n k . Of t h o s e t r a v e l l i n g b etw een 1000 and 1800 b etw een
       M onday        a n d T h u r s d a y i n c l u s i v e l e s s t h a n 10% h a d t o w a i t ;
       th o se p a ssen g ers tr a v e llin g                in an h o u r w ith an a v e r a g e
       w a i t i n g t i m e o f o v e r a m i n u t e a c c o u n t f o r l e s s t h a n 4% o f
       th e to ta l.

       P a s s e n g e r d e l a y s a t ra n k s d u r in g d a y tim e in th e p e r i o d
       M onday t o T h u r sd a y a r e fo u n d t o b e r a r e , a n d w h e r e t h e y d o
       o c c u r a r e f o u n d t o b e n e g l i g i b l e . On F r i d a y s a n d S a t u r d a y s
       d e la y s a r e m ore w id e s p r e a d d u r in g t h e d ay b u t      a g a in in m ost
       c a s e s t h e s e a r e f a i r l y lo w . The l a t e n ig h t w eek en d t r a d e i s
       c h a r a c t e r is e d by s u p r i s i n g l y h ig h d e la y s w ith t h e w o r st
       c o n d i t i o n s im p ly in g w a i t i n g t i m e s a t r a n k s i n e x c e s s o f an
       hour.

4 .2   The p r e s e n t    le v e l   of   se r v ic e    com pared      to   th a t   a year       ago.

       C om pared          to    la st      year,       average        cab w a itin g           tim es       are
       s i g n i f i c a n t l y h i g h e r ca t F i t z a l a n S q u a r e , h a v i n g i n c r e a s e d b y
       s o m e 60% , a t B a r k e r s P o o l t h e y a r e s l i g h t l y l o w e r , a n d a t
       t h e r a i l w a y s t a t i o n t h e y a r e d o w n b y a b o u t 2 5 %. M a x im u m
       a v e r a g e h o u r ly ca b d e la y s h a v e in c r e a s e d r e l a t i v e t o h ig h
       v a lu e s fo r l a s t y e a r . At B arkers P ool cab s w ere o b serv ed to
       w a i t f o r n e a r l y 90 m in u t e s f o r a h i r i n g a t t h e q u i e t e s t
       tim e , and a t b o th F it z a la n S q u are and th e r a ilw a y s t a t i o n
       t h e m a x im u m a v e r a g e d e l a y w a s o v e r 7 0 m i n u t e s . T h e s e r e s u l t s
       p o i n t t o a s i t u a t i o n w h e r e dem and r e l a t i v e t o s u p p ly i s v e r y
       lo w d u r in g w eek d ay d a y t im e s .

       P a s s e n g e r w a it in g t im e s h a v e becom e b o th m ore w id e sp r e a d and
       a t t h e tw o c i t y c e n t r e r a n k s h a v e b e c o m e m uch g r e a t e r d u r i n g
       th e peak p e r io d s            o f dem and.             A lth o u g h p e a k d e l a y s  have
       i n c r e a s e d , p e a k dem and f o r r a n k h i r i n g s a p p e a r s t o h a v e
       f a l l e n , q u i t e c o n s i d e r a b l y i n som e i n s t a n c e s . , S u ch c h a n g e s
       i n dem and a r e n o t b e y o n d t h e s c o p e o f s a m p le e r r o r b u t i f we
       had       ob served        an u n u s u a l l y         quite      period      we w o u l d h a v e
       e x p e c te d t o h a v e e n c o u n te r e d la r g e r q u eu es o f c a b s and lo w e r
       p a sse n g e r w a itin g tim e s;            i n s t e a d we o b s e r v e d t h e o p p o s i t e .
       One e x p l a n a t i o n f o r t h i s i s a n i n c r e a s e i n t h e d em an d f o r
       fla g d o w n s on F r id a y and S a tu r d a y n i g h t s .




                                               19
I




    A P PE N D IX :    THE CAB LOG FORM


    DATE:                                                            PLATE NO:
    TIME ON:                                                         TUSE OFF:
    CAB REG NO:                                                      DB X V E R 'S I N I T I A L S ;



     T im e           T im e o f    L oc. o f           T im e o f    L oc* o f           T im e o n    Rank
     engaged          p ic k -u p   p ic k -u p         s e t down    s e t down          rank         lo c a tio n




                                                  2 0
   ”{643
                                                            '[ LORDS ]                      Import Ban                   1644   1645             EC: Aids to                  [ 16 JUNE 1989 ]               Shipping Lines                1646
          [Lc-sd H esketh.J
       th'e Building Employers’ Confederation reports an                  The Minister of State, Department of the              effect on the Hong Kong market. As I understand it,        Viscount Davidson: My Lords, I can paint a slightly
       increase o f full-capacity working principally among            Environment (The Earl of Caithness): My Lords, the       the latest position on Hong Kong is that they support    different picture to the one that the noble Lord the
       tirms in northern England and in Scotland.                      ban on the import o f ivory into the United Kingdom      us in the transfer on the CITES list o f the reference   Leader o f the Opposition has painted. It is wrong to
                                                                       came into effect on 9th June.                            to the African elephant from Appendix 2 to               suggest that either European or British shipping is
          U>rd Strabolgi: My Lords, can the noble Lord say                                                                      Appendix 1, providing that the trade in existing legal   not a potent force in world shipping. The rate of
      how the figure o f some £20 million plus which                     The Earl of Selkirk: My Lords, does that cover         stocks continues to be permitted.                        decline Of the UK fleet has decreased. British flag
      he quoted is split between industrial and business              worked and raw ivory?                                                                                              tonnage, including dependent territories, is some 35
      construction, and domestic housing?                                                                                                                                                million tonnes. That is the fifth largest in the world.
                                                                         The Earl of Caithness: My Lords, yes, it does.                     EC: Aids to Shipping Lines                   European-owned shipping represents some 25 per
         ^ ^ H e s k e th : My Lords, the figure which I quoted                                                                                                                          cent, of world shipping, and under the Merchant
      was £20-6 billion. O f that £7-8 billion represents                Lord Northfield: My Lords, I am sure that we all       11.18 a.m.                                               Shipping Act 1988 we are providing assistance
      new housing; £3-1 billion, industrial premises; £4-5            congratulate the noble Earl on the initiative which         Lord Underhill asked Her Majesty’s Government:         towards training Merchant Navy officers amounting
      bi hon, offices; £2 058 billion, shops; and £1-3                he took when he was in Kenya. When he was there               What are their plans for the withdrawal by all       to £3-5 million a year. We are also assisting with
      billion, entertainment construction.                            was he able to say to the Kenyan and Tanzanian              European Community member states of                    crew travel costs Of £5 million a year. A Merchant
                                                                     Governments that we should be able to give special           discriminatory assistance given to their merchant      Navy reserve o f seafarers to serve on merchant
         Lord Dean of Beswick: My Lords, is the Minister             help to them in order to stop the poaching on the            shipping industry.                                     vessels in time of war was inaugurated in May 1989.
     aware that the high figure he gives of activity in the          ground and the killing of the elephants? Secondly if                                                                The intake o f new officer cadets nearly doubled
     building sector as a whole is to be welcomed? Long those governments ask for financial help in order’to                      Viscount Davidson: My Lords, the admissibility or      to 279 in the 1988-89 academic year, helped by
     may that activity continue, despite the high bank               employ   more game wardens and stop the poaching,          otherwise of state aids to shipping lines o f member     government funding. I think that the noble Lord will
     rate. Does the Minister not agree that the figures              will Her Majesty’s Government give a favourable            states is now the subject of proposals by the            be pleased to hear those figures.
    compare favourably with the first quarter o f last               answer?                                                    European Commission and we are studying these
             H° wever, there is a diminution in house                                                                           carefully. The Government’s objective is to secure          Lord Boyd-Carpenter: My Lords, is my noble
    building o f approximately 20 per cent, in total                    The Earl of Caithness: My Lords, we already give        open, competitive and non-subsidised shipping            friend aware that merely to say that the rate of
    affecting both the.private and public sectors. Does             considerable support to Kenya. We have three                markets and to oppose discriminatqry assistance.         decline has reduced is not particularly encouraging
    the Minister not think, in view of the debate which             ex-patriot staff in the wildlife department. We also                                                                 to those o f us who greatly care about the decline in
    took place in your Lordships’ House last week, that             provide spares for vehicles and radios and other               Lord Underhill: My Lords, I thank the noble           British shipping? Are the Government prepared to
    this is an undesirable trend? Will he seek to influence         equipment.   I asked Mr. Leakey, who has taken over         Viscount for that encouraging reply. However, may        take really determined action against the various
    his colleagues in another place to reverse it?                  the  department, if he wanted any further vehicles or       1 follow it up with two questions? Has the noble         subsidies which our friends in Europe and elsewhere
                                                                    spares, would he please bear Britain in mind? We            Viscount seen the document issued as recently as         give to their merchant shipping? I believe that that
       Lord Hesketh: My Lords, we believe that the                  should consider any request that was made.                  May this year by the General Council of British          is the major cause of the relati ve and absolute decline
   building industry has far more to fear from a                                                                                Shipping? That sets out all the fiscal advantages and    in our shipping.
   re-emergence of inflation than from the possibility of              Lord Graham of Edmonton: My Lords, does the              the amount o f discrimination practised by a number
   high interest rates which may have reduced housing              Minister accept that we on this side of the House            of Community states. Does he realise that British           Viscount Davidson: My Lords, I can tell my noble
   demand in the south-east of England.                            wish to acknowledge the splendid work that he has            shipping does not want retaliatory measures? What        friend that new orders by the UK shipping industry
                                                                   achieved in seeking and imposing the ban on the              they want is, as the document says, a level playing      in 1988 were 66 per cent, higher than for 1987,
      Lord Mellish: My Lords, recognising that the                 import o f ivory into this country?                          field for merchant shipping. Can there be some
  construction industry is probably the finest                                                                                  assurance that this will be secured in time for the        Lord Peyton of Yeovil: My Lords, does not my
  barometer of the nation’s economy and how well we                    However, does he also understand this? He would                                                                   noble friend agree that we cannot take any
                                                                   have the full support of the whole House—in fact,            single market?
  are doing as a country, last year’s figures are without                                                                                                                                satisfaction from the fact that the steep decline of
  doubt very good indeed. Does the Minister see the               the whole country—if it were possible for him to say                                                                   the past 30 years has just slowed down a little? Does
                                                                  a little more today about the measures the                      Viscount Davidson: My Lords, I have indeed seen
  same trend this year? Is there a downfall? If so, why?                                                                        that document, and I can tell the noble Lord that it     he not agree that the major trouble comes not from
                                                                  Government have in mind to try to achieve a ban                                                                        within Europe but from outside it?
                                                                  on the export of ivory from those countries in which          does not make economic sense for the UK
     Lord Hesketh: My Lords, we believe that there is                                                                           Government to match the subsidy policies of others.
 not a “ downfall”, to use the word of the noble                  tnese wonderlul creatures are gravely at risk.                                                                           Viscount Davidson: My Lords, I can only say to
                                                                                                                                The Playing Field—I believe that is the title of the
 Lord, Lord Melhsh. Yesterday I saw—as perhaps he                                                                               document—needs to be levelled down, not up. The          my noble friend that I shall draw his remarks to the
 did—the annual report of British Steel which is an                   The Earl of Caithness: My Lords, it is very difficult     Commission’s proposals for the second stage o f the      attention of my right honourable friend.
 indicator in itself because it supplies so much to the          to influence from this country the export of whatever
                                                                                                                                Community’s shipping policy were made on 5th
 construction industry. According to the report, the             product it may be from other countries. It requires            June. We are studying these carefully. However, we
 prospects for 1989 looked pretty promising.                     the world to say, “ We don’t want to import ivory
                                                                                                                                support the proposed opening up of the cabotage
                                                                 any more . am sure that your Lordships have read,
                                                                                                                                markets. As I said in my original Answer, we endorse              Football Spectators B ill [H.L.]
    Lord Orr-Ewing: My Lords, will the noble Lord                in the press today, as I have done—and I am waiting
                                                                                                                                the need to tackle the state aids question.               11.23 a.m.
remind the House how these very encouraging and                  for clarification—that Japan has banned the import
interesting figures compare with the road                       Hi " ° rkf d ,v° 7 and raw ivory which does not come                                                                        Lord Hesketh: My Lords, I beg to move that this
constniction totals? Does he have the figures                   direct from the African producer countries. So                    Lord Cledwyn of Penrhos: My Lords, is it not           Bill be now read a third time.
available?                                                      already the action which we have taken has had                  an extremely sad m atter that the British Merchant
                                                                                                                                Navy, which was until fairly recently the greatest the      Moved, That the Bill be now read a third
                                                                ettect elsewhere.                                                                                                        time.— (Lord Hesketh.)
   Lord Hesketh.- My Lords, in 1988 road                                                                                        world has ever seen, has been allowed to decline to
construction expenditure was £103 billion.                                                                                      a pathetic level? Will the Minister take account of
                                                                    The Earl of Selkirk: My Lords, I suppose that               what my noble friend Lord Underhill has said about         Lord Graham of Edmonton rose to inove, as an
                                                                means Japan can import from Hong Kong. Can the                  the assistance which is given by our partners in the     amendment to the Motion that the Bill be now read
                                                                noble Earl say anything about Hong Kong or India?               Community to their shipping industries? I mention        a third time, at end to insert “but that this House
                Ivory: Import Ban                                                                                                                                                        regrets that Her M ajesty’s Government have decided
                                                                                                                                the example of assistance by way o f large investment
11.15 a.m.                                                   „„Th5 E?rIl °f Caithness: My Lords, that is the matter             subsidies. Will the Government not be a little more      to proceed further with the Bill, in particular Part I,
                                                             on which I am waiting for clarification. Certainly if              constructive and forthcoming and enter into talks        in advance of any report from the judicial inquiry
_T be Earl of Selkirk asked Her Majesty’s
Government:                                                                                                                     with our partners in the Community to see whether        into the Hillsborough disaster being conducted by
                                                                     ref ln .the press is ri«ht. Japan bans the                                                                          Lord Justice Taylor” .
                                                             import of raw ivory other than from a producer                     some better solution can be found and a little more
 effect6n       *5an °n                 ivory wiil take      country. I do not believe that there are African                   encouragement given to the British sailor and to our       The noble Lord said: My Lords, “What a
                                                             elephants alive in Hong V     , so there would be an               Merchant Navy?                                           Difference a Day Makes” is the title of a popular
                                                                                                                                  HL   25   U
        1647               Football Spectators                      [LORDS]
                                                                                                             Bill [H.L.]                          1648    1649           Football Spectators             [16 JUNE 1989]                       Bill [h.l.]                  1650
          [ L o r d G r a h a m o f E d m o n to n I
                                                                                                                                                          parliamentary hurdles this Session and carrying out       third time, since when an amendment has been
        15th Anril lOQo        a                       day is Saturdav          .i S “ -T",sK i ^ r c'i'"                                           i.    testing and experiments in time to have the scheme        moved, at the end to insert the words set out on
                                                                                                                                                          in place by the spring o f 1990. That target can still    the Order Paper. The question now is that this
                                                                               opposed the id e a o fb rin J ^ .v , 5     Taylor inquiry                  be attained. An all-party agreement could give the        amendment be agreed to.
                                                                            I cards for football spectator H i,         f      17 identit>'               Government Part II o f the Bill almost on the nod.
                                                                              o f the approach o f t h l ^           reply ,s at the heart                The crux of the dilemma is when Lord Justice Taylor        11.24 a.m.
                                                                              report. i K L t t i d ?                     '° the ^                        presents his preliminary findings. Whether they              Lord Hesketh: My Lords, it is now more than two
                                                                                                                                                          impinge on this Bill or not, we are told that if he        months since we last debated this Bill. Two days
       i . T« ,S '“                                0..1            a„                      a S       te m £ ^ ^ ,7              “ " ‘•i ' ’ wi«           does so in time for the Government to take them           after our second day on Report came the terrible
       b»™ ..d « „ T S T j " a « • « ' « < - « «                              satisfied the technology exists so th e S S       “ ■ L We are ,otal|y      into account, a restructured Part I will be put before    disaster at the Hillsborough stadium, on 15th April.
       progress this Bill in the midst Ari?, J    7 ? seek to                                                                                            the Commons, will come to this House and will be           The Prime Minister and other members o f the
       and unbearable traeedv f™- th u         awful, horrific                                                                                           promulgated this Session.                                  Government have expressed their deepest sympathy
      the emotionally damaged *hP                 the inJured’               before th e * M ^ n h to ^ a i^ th ^ th ^    two momhs                         If Lord Justice Tayior does not present his             for those who were bereaved or themselves injured
      the cities o f S h e S J t ; “bS’ t,he players and                     build-up and no delavs « ,au ^             Would be “o                      preliminary findings in time, there must be no cut-off     on that terrible day. I should like to add my own
      to be an act o f unsneaS hi. r ^ 0” ' Seems to me                      piace, Arthur Young t L m ,           technology was in                     date, no point of no return. It would be intolerable       personal sympathy to those concerned. It is With no
      Parliament a n 7 P a r i f ~ SCemty‘ To intrud=                        had presented the Fn'nthaii i na®ement consultants,                         if he felt in any way that to meet a parliamentary         political point in mind that I say that this is the most
     enormous, unbearable                         m to . such               withits re ^ rto n the n ^ l UagUe and the Mini^                             timetable to suit a political imperative he was under      recent and most serious in a line o f tragedies that
     monumental insensitivitv Tn !f„            .exercise of                the Minister said he h id thpClr0UmSta.n cestOwhich                          pressure to report in haste. If that point of no return    have scarred British football since the Second World
     imperative of overriding _ . ° so demands an                           took as its exam nl .h A       " ST r' Arthur Young                          and no report is reached there should be no Part I         War. I am sure that all Members o f your Lordships’
    progress with this Bill at a                u demands                   Arsenal match with M an rhe^enf J ground and an                              this Session,                                              House share my profound hope that this disaster
    o f what happened on that aw ^ H , ‘he evidence                         Place mid-week in N ov em b er 1988 t i l e ”                                   Who would be the losers? Do the Government              will be the last in that line.
    gathered, let alone evaluated It               S-,H to be               attendance at that match                : The final                          believe that the world o f football is standing still,        I should also like to say something, before I move
    speed before all else              plaCes a pnori‘y on                                                                                                                                                          on to the Bill itself, about the reaction of the people
                                                                           54,029, with between 3    to°5PoS)ty °rOWd ° f                                paralysed, waiting either for Ridley or Moynihan?
                                                                           locked outside Arthur vv™     ’?    spectators                                All within football recognise that the next period,        of Liverpool to the disaster. I think that the whole
    Bi^wSiirdeaU wUhmK ° UndT PM11ofthe                                                                                                                  perhaps the next 12 months, is make or break time.         country was deeply impressed with the way in which
    Part I is the best way to d!“ Sw1th°h^ni^hether                                                                                                      Is it not better to give Lord Justice Taylor a higher      the city of Liverpool came together following the
    home is, and will be. the mnrim -     hooligans at                     time substaitfially^and m an'y"^™ ^0^ 11 may j" crease <meueing               worth than Ministers and to defer this Bill to next        disaster. We were all moved by the remarkable floral
    divisions. If the real             subject of bitter                   well after the scheduled k ick^fftim e T>,   be ^ m ille d until                                                                         tributes that covered the Anfield stadium and by the
                                                                           a - n * everyone woutd                                       *°
                                                                                                                                                         Session, with an urgent priority to receive Royal
    have the views or even fh!?, ,S renewed before we                                                                                                    Assent for spring 1990, when it reflects fully the         memorial services held to commemorate those who
                                                                                                                                                         lessons of Hillsborough? That would be the fallback        died. It is a measure of the impression that
                                                                        andso^aXnaSw ^ r o C
                                                                                           ftha Bi"Withsuchda^ r                                         position if Lord Justice Taylor reported later rather      Liverpool’s response made upon the rest o f our
                                                                         US is ,M T e a , a re ? n o n l ^ T Sf qUenCesbefore                            than sooner.                                               country that the disaster fund for those bereaved
                                                                         However, that need n n f k l        y     contempate.                                                                                      and injured now exceeds £6 million though o f course
                                                                                                                                                            Perhaps I may conclude With sadnesss in my
                                                                        r e f l e c t o n ^ h e ^ t h e 'S e ^ o f s j t ' V                             thoughts but with hope in my heart. I know full well       no amount of money will ever provide true
                                                                        Environment, Mr. Nicholas Ridley ° h a T f £ l .V                                how determined the Government are to promulgate            compensation.                                        ; ,
 Justice Tayior is rerliv.H      r retx>rt of Lord                      greatest unease about w hether7h?’/         - f 1 the                                                                                          We cannot fail to be aware o f that tragic
                                                                        Justice Taylor will be riv«,            report o f Lord                          their preferred solution with this identity card Bill.
 will explain to the House hn Ih®. this Session- I                                                                                                       They may well be right. I happen not to think so.          background to our debate today. Immediately after
 why it should be done.      W    0311 be done and                      Government.               8      Proper we'8ht & the
                                                                                                                                                         But to proceed with the Bill before being able to          the disaster, the Home Secretary asked Lord Justice
                                                                                                                                                         analyse and evaluate the report from Lord Justice          Taylor to conduct a public inquiry into what
                                                                                                                           » • * « • » said                                                                         happened. His terms o f reference are:
                                                  r ° i thh«-                                                                                            Taylor is surely to make a travesty o f a tribunal and
                                                                      the Bill at a pace w hich^m .M                          Proceed with               a mockery of parliamentary responsibility.                 “To inquire into the events o f Sheffield Wednesday football
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    gtound on 15th April 1989 and to make recommendations about
                                                                                                                                                            I want this Bill out o f your Lordships’ House and      the needs o f crowd control and safety at sports grounds” .
 the subsequent inquiry^ o f S r d ^                        a,"d                                                                                         on to the Cabinet table. If your Lordships share my          It would be quite wrong for me today to anticipate
                                                                                                                                                         revulsion that the nation and Parliament will be           Lord Justice Taylor’s findings on the causes of the
                                                                                                                                                         plunged into an acrimonious, heart-tearing,                Hillsborough disaster. The Government believed
                                                                                                                                                         soul-searching, bloody inquest on Hillsborough and         before Hillsborough that the Football Spectators Bill
m           m             $              m             t
                                                 effect o f it could probably be to (e a H ta , mOTe. prablems and the
                                                                                                                                                         beyond, before as well as after Taylor, you will           was necessary and we believe that it is still necessary,
forward amendments pursuant' to M d e r t T ^ '  football ground. That is the argument” ***             crush outside a                                  properly and seriously request the Government to           to deal with the continuing problem o f football
given. I acknowledge that I ha vp nnJ ^ ^ aklngs                                                                                                         defer progress on the Bill until after the report.         hooliganism, though we have no wish to draw a link
amendment t0 a g o ^ m e n t ^ S m e r bl“ 006 , J o which Mr. Ridley replied:                                                                           Nothing will be lost by supporting that request. I         between hooliganism and the disaster at
                                                                    “Yes, it could indeed".
                                                                                                                                                         happen to believe that there are millions of men,          Hillsborough.
                                                                    Frances Coverdale then said:                                                         women and, yes, children who, after Hillsborough,
d r a m a " u n d o S y " ' W ^^v eh eal’^ h t T o ’i ce"                                                                                                                                                             I have heard the noble Lord, Lord Graham, speak
                                                                                                                                                         expect nothing less from your Lordships’ House             about the Government’s decision to proceed with
                                                                    you L n u o l h e a d w i^ it'if S a T w a s 'th fc a s e r18 meaSUre Would          today. I beg to move.                                      the Bill now, and I shall explain our reasons for
                                                                    Mr. Ridley said:                                                                        Moved, As an amendment to the Motion that the           doing so. I hope to draw the noble Lords’ attention
                                                                                                                                                         Bill be now read a third time, at end to insert “but       to the amendments which we have proposed to
                                                                   it is for the G ^eram CentToX °ide whaSt r n r What haw>CTS- 1 ,h“ k                  that this House regrets that Her Majesty’s                 provide not one but two opportunities for
                                                                   the last %     r P>' Wh° C° n d M ^        *     S    Z      P“ ' S                   Government have decided to proceed further with            Parliament to debate the national membership
                                                                   He also said that ^            Justjce T             cm                               the Bill, in particular Part I, in advance of any report   scheme following Lord Justice Taylor’s final report.
                                                                                                                                                         from the judicial inquiry into the Hillsborough            The Opposition’s reasoned amendment was put
                                                                    We may no, accept his advice, but a, leas, let's h e a rff
                                                                                                                                                         disaster being conducted by Lord Justice                   down before the Government’s amendments
                                                                   Wh°at                                                   a‘ -east hear                 Taylor”.— (Lord Graham o f Edmonton-)                      providing for those two further debates were tabled
fisSKMStSSSffiE                                                                                                                                            The Chairman of Committees (Lord Aberdare): The
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    and I shall argue that it has been overtaken by them.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      As your Lordships know, we felt it right to pause
                                                                                                                                                         original Question w p at this Bill be now read a           for a time in the passage o f the Football Spectators
                                                                                                                                                            HL   25 U2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      B ill [H.L.]                1654
                                                                                                                                                                             ( 1 6 J U N E 19891
                                                                                                                         1653             Football Spectatots
1651                 F o otba ll Spectators       [ LORDS]                        B ill [H.L.]               1652 [                                                                     that hooliganism must^go, ^ m u s t                       lt js as
                                                                                                                     s      I think this is the b e s t P a r ^ a n d II                to   deal  with  t h  e   p  r o   l ■      rt   politics  in it. It
   [ L o r d H e sk e th .]                                we believe that it would be quite wrong to postpone                                                                           simple as that.                     one j8 Labour or Tory, tt
 Bill following Hillsborough. I am afraid that events      for yet another year taking the powers to put those           that we are now m. The                     Sadly, football
                                                                                                                                                                                         does not matte                        ^      sport a bit cleaner,
 since the disaster have only served to confirm the        measures in place. It is already three and a half years       o fth e Bill is ?s ^tr° nt80^S0bv;0usty still with us. The      is a question of hem                       h ao d fu l-th e tiny
                                                           since Mr. Justice Popplewell reported. That is why            hooliganism is only to o ?           ^ ofuseful respects
 vital need for both parts of the Bill. Only one week                                                                                                                                    given the thu^ *vervthing for decent people,
after tbe Hillsborough disaster, on 22nd April, there      we now propose to proceed with both Parts I and 11                  has been c!aof’^ ' A your Lordships’ House,               handful—who spo 1 ryt                              of the matter
                                                           o f the Bill. At the Same time, I invite your Lordships        during its passage through y                  the progress
 were 24 arrests at West Ham and 94 at Chelsea.                                                                           It would be quite wrong to t            for another year           I speak with a little .kno M?UwaU j suppose
Three weeks later, the last Saturday Of the Football       to recall that Part I of the Bill does not itself
                                                           implement the national membership scheme. It                   that we have made and                          proposes.    I becuase      I am associa
                                                                                                                                                                                          that that is a bad enou^> advert
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     for anyone. Millwall
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ^           years
League season was marred by a number o f serious                                                                          R i d i n g the framework t o t the- .W P P ^ ^
incidents both inside and outside football grounds.        provides a framework within which the Football
                                                           Membership Authority will draw up the scheme.                                                                                  Football
                                                                                                                                                                                          for  its
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Club of
                                                                                                                                                                                                   handful   t a thugs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  \ be®nwhoh^ destroyed ^    ^    the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   haspeace
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        tned
   The most serious trouble on 13th May was a                                                                                 At the saJ ne.dt,h"’®; t he chance to take a further
                                                                                                                           Parliament should ha .              -n      light of Lord I
pitch invasion at Crystal Palace by Birmingham City          We recognise that Lord Justice Taylor may have                                                                                of mind of ^ " y ^ o e S ^ t e that problem,
supporters in which 16 people were injured, two of         comments to make which will be relevant to the                  view on the                before the framework is fiUed        harder than M.Uwall to erao                           £ proposed
                                                                                                                           Justice Taylor s report, b             The amendments
them with stab wounds. At Bristol City’s match with        national membership scheme and of which                         in and the scheme impleme t ^                  ^ ^                 Why is it, then, that under th                  ional identity
Sheffield United fighting between rival groups of          Parliament would wish to be aware before any final                                                                              by the Government, whi^h is tetw h eth erthey
                                                                                                                           that we are to discuss*h° y They take away the
supporters spilled on to the pitch and held up the         decisions are made on the implementation o f the                                                                                scheme,
game. There were several other outbreaks of fighting
                                                                                                                            but two such opportun                   the opposition s        like it or everyone
                                                                                                                                                                                                       not? Whyhas    is .tt°that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ha many
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ®      footbau
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          rkaWe? clubsh say
                                                           scheme. The amendments that we have tabled for                   substance of the argu                 . the noble Lord,
between football supporters in places as far removed       your Lordships to consider today would allow two                                                                                 that the scheme will                          to the noble Lord,
as the Toddington service station on the M .l and          opportunities for Parliament to debate the scheme                                                                                because they are U ^ u r M ran Vtao w ^                   the top
Tewkesbury in Gloucestershire.                             after we have seen Lord Justice Taylor’s final report.                                                                            Lord Hesketh, tta t 1 MOT*®                        not Labour,
   In the face o f continuing problems of this kind        I must emphasise that proceeding with the Bill will                                                                               management in                       ljgten to some of them.
it would be irresponsible for the Government to            enable us to create the framework for the scheme:                                                                                 ’Strewth—one has on'V                    listen to friends? But
postpone Part I of the Bill. When Part I becomes           the scheme itself will come later.                                                                                                Why do the ^ ^ T e f k n o w everythin*. Who
law all those convicted of a relevant offence, whether                                                                        anyone in the House ca 9                       jt ;s very       no, they know so m uch.th y                        ment and in
                                                              The amendments to Clauses 1 and 4 provide at the                that has just been made, l t m n ^ ^ # ^             ^          knows everything. Who >s                           who knows
it is inside a football ground or on the way to or         Bill’s report stage the opportunity for parliamentary
from a match, will be automatically disqualified                                                                             S S C S t a E 1d ^ ^ p r e v a i l earlier when we                the M inisters          in^ L tball? It is a funny old
                                                           approval which I promised to consider. Their effect                                                                                 everything that goes on                    department
from membership of the scheme. Of course, I must           is that the Secretary of State’s approval of the scheme
not pass judgment on those who were arrested on            submitted to him by the Football Membership                       E d T do^not think that we should now be in the                   world, isn’t f . f knk^ 0t fairly w e ll- .S that the
 13th May but, if those arrests lead to convictions,                                                                                                                                           concerned—and I know              j     They are just
                                                           Authority will itself be the subject of parliamentary             position of putting down amendments
then I am sure that noble Lords on both sides of the       approval and we shall arrange that this House, as                                                                                   people there are a S ‘V C;0f a n d doiog what they are
House will agree that it would be desirable that the                                                                           Perhaps 1 may just pul^this oomrne Conservative                 efficient doing a certa j         not remember that
                                                           well as the other House, will have an opportunity to              Lord. Yesterday was a bad day w r ^ ^     ^     u
people concerned should be banned from football            vote upon it.                                                                                                                       told to do, but, as    f       cannot imagine how it
matches.                                                                                                                        Party. There cannot b e a " y h olls and the BBC                department being b        _ t j can see why they
                                                                                                                                lost two by-elections and .fth e p o i ^           ^            was that the scheme came out^ ca
                                                              The amendments to Clause 24 add another, and
   Lord Harris of Greenwich: My Lords, perhaps I           prior, stage of parliamentary approval. No element                   arguments are right,                 opposite, why? 1
may ask the noble Lord a question on that point. As                                                                             European elections. I ask the P W w             , was                                                   tfe -
                                                           o f Part I of the Bill will come into force without a
he rightly said, we must not anticipate a decision by      commencement order and the first commencement                         have some experience of these                 j ^
the courts. However, is he aware that the courts           order, which will bring most of Part I into force, will
already have the power to disqualify people from           require a negative resolution statutory instrument.                  ^ e n g o v e m m e ^ s co m e a n d l
attending football matches?                                The effect will be that the Secretary of State’s
                                                           appointment of the Football Membership Authority,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 s s            ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Edmonton that the Go              everything that the
   Lord Hesketh: My Lords, 1 am, but 1 think that          under Clause 3, and the requirement on the FMA to                                                                                     amendments that                    t0 introduce. That is
we shall get very bogged down in the debate if we          submit the scheme for approval, under Clause 4, will                                                                                  reasoned amendment isi try g               derstan(j from
do not try to follow an element of procedure. 1 am         not be activated until Parliament has debated and                     their way. They h av elo stth ea rt ot P ^ ^       seem t0      my view. That >s what he sa.d a n d ^ u b£ introduced
hoping that, with the leave of the House, I shall be       approved the relevant commencement order.
able to answer questions on the reasoned                                                                                                                                                          him that no sc, ^ r ^ ° i or's report has been received
                                                                                                                                                                                                  until Lord Justice Taylo         P°        (0 discuss it.
amendment at the end o f the debate.                          Parliament will therefore, following Lord Justice
                                                           Taylor’s final report, have opportunities to debate                                                                                    and both Ho“ e"’ a i,1 be done The scheme will be
   The trouble surrounding the Scotland-England                                                                                                                                                   Until then nothing wilIbe a o n e ‘           that the
Match on 27th May was further evidence ofthe need          the scheme both before the FMA is appointed and                                                                                        on the Statute B o o k -             as^ ^ hat_ but its
for both Parts 1 and II o f the Bill. I am afraid that     after it has submitted a scheme for approval. The                                                                                       Government’s maJ°r‘ yt t ke place unless and Until
it is clear that a number of English hooligans went        Government will, of course, ensure through the usual                   honourable. They seek t               ^ House                    implementation will not taice p              chance to
to Glasgow not only to watch a football match but          channels that opportunities for those debates are
                                                                                                                                  hooliganism No o n e o n t        probiem is whether
to find a fight as well. If the Football Spectators Bill   provided in both Houses. As I have said, we shall
                                                                                                                                  quarrel with that. Howeve ,             Here j come              r      T ? !'
had been law, restriction orders imposed under Part        also provide an opportunity for a vote in this House                                                                                     Minister will get to his feetan d say so . Isee        a^
                                                           when the order confirming the Secretary of State’s                     the methods that they ad op                    do the
II o f the Bill would have kept some o f those hooligans                                                                          back to my argument about               ^      have *             f f i S             c ^ e an Achievement—actually to
at home. At least as important, it would have been         approval o f the scheme is debated.
                                                                                                                                   Government not listen? 1                   t , isten t0
open to the Scottish authorities to refuse to sell           The Bill will provide the framework, but there will                   long last started to do so Why oo t . y             ^
tickets to the match to English supporters who were        be no question o f putting the national membership                      people who have spent *           h do they „ot just
not members o f the national membership scheme             scheme into place without full parliamentary                            World of industry and the rest s    ^ that beCause
and any member of the national membership scheme           consideration in the light o f Lord Justice Taylor’s                     listen now and ae " ? " ^ m u s t                    be
convicted of causing trouble at Hampden Park, or           report. That will mean that we can go ahead with                                                                                          regards the original         ’ , went to a number of
on their way there, could have their membership            the scheme rapidly if Parliament is content to do so                     the£ h nde be shoved down everyone’s throat? That                research on my own account I wem o              j^
withdrawn.                                                 following Lord Justice Taylor’s report. Not only is                      is^he wrong way                                   both the       b a n k s-n o t because ’ a™        ' rience of dealing
   The problem of football hooliganism is one that         that a very much better approach than the idea of                           If we start from the basis,                     ^ thc
we have had to face since the Hillsborough disaster        withdrawing Part I o f the Bill and starting again, as
just as we did before. The need for measures to deal       implied by the reasoned amendment; it overtakes                                              ' u h S ' - thL sid e -a re agreed
with it has, if anything, become more pressing and         the need for it.
  1655           Football Spectators                [L O R D S ]                    B ill [H.L.]                1656    1657            Football Spectators                [16 JU N E 1989 ]                      B ill [H i ]
                                                                                                                                                                                               If the Minister looks behind him, he will see that
     [Lord M ellish.]                                         delayed. I agree entirely with the noble Lord, Lord       realised that it was not a very good advertisement                 those of his party who have been criticial of this Biu,
   very popular in south London that on average               Mellish, in that we all wish to see the end of            for the entry of our clubs again into European                     although not necessarily opposed to it, are not here.
   between 10 and 15 people a day go to it because they       hooliganism, and I know that that is the attitude of      competition.                                                       That is not an accident. 1have heard throughout this
  have trouble when they put their discs through the          the noble Lord, Lord Graham. However as I listened             P e r h a p s s o m e n o b le Lord will want to rise and say week from those who, as I have, have taken part
   cash banking facilities which are available outside        to the debate, I found it quite incomprehensible that     to me, “ All right, but do you think that thlS Bill Will            from the start in the debates on the Bill that a number
  the bank. So 15 to 20 people have trouble with their        anybody could accept that the tragedy at                  cure that’’” Certainly I do not think so; of course                 of them have deliberately absented themselves this
  discs with that one bank every day.                         Hillsborough should prevent the passage of this Bill.     not However, this Bill will at least be an indication               morning because they do have the stomach to
     I should like to give the Minister an illustration       I just cannot come to terms with that.                     that the interminable delay ^ c°ming to an end and                 participate in something which is so distasteful to
  of what might happen at football matches. Let us               I thought about the tragedy of Hillsborough and         that something has been decided. I thnik that that                 the public.
  suppose that Millwall, which is one club that I can         what has happened since as regards the behaviour           is most important.                                                     There is a second reason why this debate should
  speak of with knowledge, are playing a very                of crowds at subsequent matches. The noble Lord,                 On 25th May I read what had been said by thechief             not be taking place. Despite what the Minister
  important match—let us say it is playing Arsenal,          Lord Hesketh, referred to that. It was an indication        executive of the Football Association, Mr Graham                   said—and I agree with the noble Lord, Lord Mellish,
  and just imagine that!—so hundreds of supporters            that action must be seen to be taken now. I looked          Kelly and I should like to repeat that to the House.              that he made a very conciliatory speech—he has
  are queing up outside the ground and trying to get         at some more recent matches shown on television, as              “We must reconstruct public confidence in the game. We need    missed the central issue. Like the Minister and the
  in with their discs. These people are ordinary, decent     no doubt did other noble Lords, and was completely           m hreak out of the trap created by hooligans on the one hand       noble Lord, Lord Graham of Edmonton, I do not
  people—registered supporters who comply with the           horrified by what went on in the vicinity of the             ‘" d a t e d facilities a. grounds on the other. It ,s .mportant   intend to anticipate the findings of Lord Justice
  regulations of the Government; we have no truck            ground regarding the behaviour of people coming to           the FA shows it is capable of going forward .                      Taylor. It is debasing parliamentary work and the
  with the spiv. Let us suppose that they arrive at the      matches and its effect on the people who have houses         When I read what Mr. Kelly had said, I realised that               institution of Parliament to ask us to debate a Third
 gate, put in the disc and the system does not work          close by. It seemed to me that unless some indication        at last public opinion was having some effect. It is Reading of a Bill without the evidence on which that
 because something has gone wrong. The people                is given that at last action is to be taken we should         quite vital that the Football Association and                     debate should be based.
 argue, and when Millwall fans argue they really do          never make any further progress.                              everyone involved should understand that the
 have a go. They will say to the attendant at the                                                                          general public are concerned in this matter. It does                  Since 15th April the situation h as changed. I
                                                                 I do not want to get sidetracked on to other issues,                                                                         remind the Minister that in February of this year
 turnstile, “Oi? This won’t do—my card’s all right”.         but I should like to say that it has always seemed to         not only concern the people who go to football
 The turnstile attendant replies, “ I am sorry but this                                                                    matches, who make up only a very small proportion                  warned     the House that the conditions of the Bill
                                                             me that what is wrong is the need for perimeter                                                                                  could very well lead to an increase in violence, in
 doesn’t work and you can’t go in” . Naturally there         fencing. The perimeter fencing itself is not at fault         of the population of this country.
 is a row; that is understandable. One can imagine                                                                                                                                            particular outside the grounds. To my utter distreM,
                                                            at football matches; it is what gives rise to the                   Today on Third Reading I have no intention of that warning was validated in horrific circumstances
 the remarks of the crowd outside that is waiting to        necessity for perimeter fencing; namely, the state of          listing what I think should be done. We all have
 get in to the ground: “Oi! You lot in front, get rid                                                                                                                                         on 15th April. While not anticipating what Lord
                                                            the terraces and the lack of any initiative by the             many suggestions. However, I want action to be                     Justice Taylor will report, those of us who have been
 of that argument! Let’s get through!" They are not         Football League or the football clubs in the past to           taken, and people should realise that action is being
 going to get through and in the end they are turned                                                                                                                                          closelv associated with this business can tell the
                                                            deal with that situation.                                       taken Every time this issue has cropped up in this                 noble Lord now that there will be findings which
 away. If the Minister thinks that they are turned              I should like to move on from there and say, as is          House there has been a suggestion of delay: let us
 away gently, then he could not be more wrong; there                                                                        put it off for whatever reasons. I am quite convinced              will startle the public.
                                                            probably obvious already, that I take part in this
 will be a disaster.                                        debate because I wish to support the Government                  that until this matter is tackled we shall not get                    I refer simply to one issue. I suggest that when the
    Everyone is horrified at the possibility of what        on this matter. I wish to support the Third Reading              T nJU ere. I should have thought that all those urpmg             report is made, Members of this House and of the
might happen as a consequence of this scheme. At            of this Bill quite simply because I believe that we              delay must have looked at the matches since                       other place note the number of injuries and deaths
least the Minister is listening; I give him credit for      have reached the stage when something definite has               Hillsborough and agreed that we cannot continue                   that took place outside the Hillsborough Stadium,
that. Let me put to him no more than this: there            to be done. That was the case some time ago when                 like this One has only to look at a screen to see what             not in sid e. That was the warning that I save to * e
are doubts as to whether the scheme will work. I           the Second Reading debate took place. I said then                 is happening. To look at that and to say, Let us                   House when referring in February t0 ‘he ehve" ‘*
appreciate that he has now said that the scheme will       that I should be very glad to listen to the whole of              leave it and delay durther,” is mcomprehensible.                   of the evening cup tie replay between Manchester
not be implemented under any circumstances until            the debate and if other schemes were put forward I                     I have re a d -a n d I hope that it is coirect because       U n t d and Queen’s Park Rangers when the police
Lord Justice Taylor’s report has been fairly and           should be happy to consider them, but that if other                I have not checked i t- th a t hooliganism is being               asked the Manchester United Club to close the
honestly considered. I speak personally and with           schemes were not put forward, I should support the                 contained in England only through public policing,                turnstiles with 10,000 people outside.
some experience when I say that that from a                Government. That is my position today.                             with costs exceeding £20 million a                                    We do not have the evidence on w hichthisdebate
statement by the Minister is not only worth                     This may not be the best Bill ever, but it is the              that “contained” is an optimistic word. As Graham                 should be based. The events of 15th APnl, as
considering but is worth supporting.                       only Bill that we have. That is my line of thought.                 Kelly said, we need to break out of the trap created              exam ined'by Lord Justice Taylor, shoirid1 be the
                                                           One of my complaints was and still is that the people               by hooligans on the one hand and outdated fa«hties                basis on which the debate should take place. The
   Lord Rodney: My Lords, before the noble Lord            who have been opposed to the passage of the Bill                    a, grounds on the other. I hope very much today                   Government have forced us to participate m the
sits down perhaps I may ask him whether he saw the         ignore or forget that while it is called the Football               that the House will support the beginning of the                  debate today against the weight of Publlc ?p' n'°P:
demonstration that took place outside this House a         Spectators Bill( the ramifications spread a great deal               breaking out of this trap. Although I have the greatest          without the evidence that parliamentarians should
few months ago. If he did see it, I think he will          wider. Reading the newspapers and seeing the                         respect for my noble friend Lord Graham of                       have to debate a matter of this kind. I say          *e
understand that the scheme envisaged bears no              publicity that has gone on ever since the initiative                 Edmonton—he will accept that term—I find myself                   noble Baroness who spoke before me. p i e m i ^ a n t
relation at all (except that it makes use of a disc)       of this Bill was taken, one would have thought that                  unable to support his amendment.                                  factor is not to take action; it is to take th en g h
to the kind of mechanism in the bank which he              the only people concerned were those who went to                                                                                       action. As some of us have been arguing from he
mentioned.                                                 football matches. It goes a great deal wider than that.                                                                                start, the Bill could be the wrong action. It could
                                                           This concerns the householders in the vicinity of the                 12.1 p.m.                                                        increase violence rather than, as we all wish, to
  Lord Mellish: My Lords, I did not see the                matches. I can only say that I am glad that I do not                      Lord Hatch of Lusby: My Lords this^is a debate               diminish it.                                   ,     .r
demonstration and I am prepared to accept that the         live anywhere near a major football ground.                           that should not be taking place. The Government                     So far as I can see, the only reason that wearebeirtg
noble Lord is correct in his remarks. I did not see                                                                              were rightly persuaded after the Hillsborough
                                                                Football matches affect the towns in which they                                                                                   forced this morning to debate th.\s Thl^ ^ e^ ' n| i'i"
the demonstration and cannot argue the case.               are played. They affect shopkeepers, pub owners and                   disaster that it would be insensitive for Parliament              a meealomaniacal obsession with getting the BUI
                                                           the general public. We know what happens on our                       to be debating this question while the suffering was              through at all costs, irrespective ofwhether we have
 11.53 a.m.                                                own city’s transport and the Tubes in London when                     still continuing. Do they believe that the anguish                clear evidence that we are getting it nght with regard
   Baroness Burton of Coventry; My Lords, as I             matches are played, never mind the rail transport                      which was caused by that disaster has disappeared.               to the reduction of hooliganism, the Pr* ^ nt'? n ^
listened to the noble Lord, Lord Graham, I realised        throughout the country. Of course it affects the                       If they do, they are totally out of tune with public             another Hillsborough and the Prevention of the
more than ever the unbridgeable gulf between those         reputation of our country also. I should have thought                  opinion. Public opinion will see this debate as grossly          events that took place on the last day ° f th ® * T °"e
who think that action should be taken today in this        that anyone who had seen the action of hooligans at                    insensitive in view ofjthe events of the last few weeks          These are the elements of evidence on which we
House and those who believe that it should be further      matches sine'        ' Hillsborough disaster must have                 and the people who             e suffered from them.
                                                                                                                                                                                [1 6 JU N E 1989]                        B ill I h .l.]
                                                           [ LORDS]                                                         166,              Football Spectators
  1659               Football Spectators                                                B ill [ h.l ]                1660
                                                                                                                            been diowed to continue where ^egedly only seven
    [L o r d H a t c h o f L u s b y .]                            members in that House, but to the genera) public
 should be debating. They are not there. The                       outside Parliament it is usually incomprehensible.                                                                       fT ~ n c lu d e Sa f l began There are m an y 1™        to
 Government should not have forced the House to                    To the public the reasoning is more like unreasoning.    ^ p a c i^                                       half-hours
                                                                   Members of the public would ask, “Why, if you do                                                                         be learned from H i l l s b o r o u g h ; ^ t h e y m u ^
 debate this Third Reading this morning.
                                                                   not like the principle, do you temporise? Why do
   12.8 p.m.                                                       you not vote outright on a straight Motion?” That        o ffic e r   T aT been quoted ^ s a y in g that^ w a r d in g
                                                                   surely is what we shall have the opportunity to do                                                                       a S a c t i o n will b e V r r e d , as has happened so
     Lord Morton of Lindisfarne: My Lords, 1 listened              in due course when the Government put forward
  with some interest to what the noble Lord, Lord                                                                           rb a n d rtT ch lefstew ard 'd eclarin g that the terrace
                                                                   their own Motion.                                                                                                        many times in the past.
  Hatch of Lusby, said. I do not think that the House                                                                       wstQ a no-eo area for them-
  can be accused o f being insensitive to the dreadful               I refer again to my main argument. The principle                      that I do not seek to apportion
  tragedies that have happened over the last weeks or             of the Bill is not now being called into question.           In saying that 1 ao no            involved as
                                                                  An extraneous matter has been introduced as an            responsibility-After all    ^ ^    including the
  months. On the other hand a debate on a reasoned
  amendment on Third Reading is a very unusual                    argument for delaying the passage of the                  anyone. 1 simply Belie         enough in seeking
  occurrence in this House. I should have thought that,           Bill—something which does not appear on the face
  in view of the assurances that the Minister has                 of the Bill. I submit that it is inappropriate as an                                                                       concerned with footbaU ana no o     ^ ^       ^
  given this morning that the House will have the                 amendment, whether it be reasoned or otherwise.                                                                            debates which have taken pla      probiems and
  opportunity, not once but twice, to come to a                      Having said that and before I sit down, I fully                                                                         concerned with dealing wim tnow |                he
  decision in a specific debate on a Motion, the                  understand the concern which the whole House feels                                                           U needs'to    the noble Lord
 reasoned amendment put forward is not now                        about this extremely difficult problem, but I suggest                                                                      remarks made earlier by t      House had criticised
 necessary.                                                       that delay in any form, as the noble Baroness, Laldy                                                                                                                                          *
     I wish to deal very shortly with a narrow point. It          Burton, said, would be a great mistake. Let us get
  is a question of what can be done on Third Reading.             on with it. Let us get the Bill through and then deal                                                                       did so are present.                                                .
                                                                  in due course with the promises which have been             has now to be taken. In my s                 . .
 We go back to our old friend Erskine May. It is
                                                                  made by the Minister.                                       reason for delaying the passage of t h _ .n g ^ c e                N° °nC ^ r m L f b / S e ^ d                    ContnrutiOns
 stated that amendments o f a reasoned or delaying                                                                                                                                            problem which must be                            of the House,
 character may be moved in the same way as on                                                                                                                                                 have been made from                           of HUlsborough o t
                                                                    12.14 p.m.
 Second Reading. However, I believe that in this
 House it is a very rare occurrence. I know that it                   Lord Knights: My Lords, as I reflected last night        schem ^tns^eqm r^dto^om u^te^t^does^no^m ore                    S X          S S M -o f *■ s r g E K j K t t
 happened in 1972 on the European Communities                      on what contribution I might make to this debate I                                                                          ^ t c h t U r c o n s i d ° e fr t^ f u f u r e of football in
 Bill. I gather that it happened again in 1982. My                 took the opportunity to glance again at the report of       "     c      t m t h more the formulationof the scheme.
 knowledge does not extend back for more than 10                   the inquiry set up to investigate the disaster which
 years in your Lordships’ House. I do not think that               occurred at the Bolton Wanderers football ground               ,t is the fear ^ ^ S ^ w U l t e r c r e l t e on
 there have been any other cases.                                  on 9th March, 1946, when 33 spectators were killed           that the resu't of the schem          we saw at
                                                                   and hundreds injured. The parallels with                     more occasions the         ry       0f spectators               scheme. Therefore we nw d to^au sfym .                               (0
    The point that I wanted to make was that such an               Hillsborough made chilling reading. “Too many                Hillsborough with large ve “7ast moment. It is for
amendment has no effect on the progress of a Bill                                                                                                                                               three issues               0^ t< im e of the Taylor
                                                                  were admitted to the enclousure”, the report said. It                                                                         consider and debate                    consider the
through Parliament. Whatever your Lordships’
                                                                  also described unauthorised entry as a factor—                                                                                report. Secondly, we n ^ m ® fecoinmendations
House decides today will not affect the progress of               although not a major one—contributing to the
the Bill. It is merely an expression of opinion. I do                                                                                                                                            incorporation of the approp       subsequently be
                                                                  disaster. The siting of the crash barriers provided for
not necessarily say party political opinion because
                                                                  a direct channel or direct pressure to be transmitted
that is too pejorative for me on this occasion. It does           from some distance away.
not concern detail upon the contents of the Bill as                                                                                                                                             to confirm such a scheme.                                        which
it is constituted.                                                   Noble Lords may agree that from reports we have                                                                               I believe that those are the
                                                                  read of the evidence being presented to Lord Justice
    Erskine May states that it is considered                                                                                                                                                     the noble ^ rd’^ ° rl ? ests have been conceded by
                                                                  Taylor similar comments are likely to be included                fuUy  into .^ N eNevennei
                                                                                                                                                    v e r th e le s s there is one aspect
undesirable that an issue which has been fully                                                                                     recommendations.                                              9 5 p e r cent* o          s h a ll h a v e a n o p p o r tu n i ty n o t
                                                                  in his report. What was different about Hillsborough                                                                           th e G o v ern m e n t W e s h ^ l h a ^ e an O P P ^ . ^ th e
debated and decided upon at a previous stage in the
                                                                  was that the tragedy as it unfolded was seen by                  with
                                                                                                                                   the Gwhich,
                                                                                                                                         o v e rn m’fe nlt ^will. seek
                                                                                                                                                                   ^ ^to ’deal
                                                                                                                                                                          deal wwhen
                                                                                                                                                                                  nen the Bill
                                                                                                                                                                                            ^ is^ only to debate the ^ V      ^ ’some ofthe criticisms
Bill should be re-opened on Third Reading. I suggest
that it is unwise for an entirely different reason, and           millions of people on their television screens. The                                                                              scheme as a whole. Cont ry      Minister also made
                                                                  result was shock, anger and recrimination on a scale             being considered in                       footban grounds are   put forward in th isH o .               the opjnion
that is one of strict relevancy. The principle of                 which no other disaster, apart from that of Aberfan,             previous occasion in th                     „ and continuing
relevancy must govern an amendment. The                                                                                                                                                            clear that a vote will be   8,           appears to
                                                                  has produced. No body of people watching the scenes               privateplaces.lt istheclubs P ™ * ™ ‘„ d manage
amendment must strictly relate to the Bill which the              would have been more horror-stricken than the                     obligation and responsib                    They must also
House, by its order, has resolved upon considering.               police. O f all responsibilities laid on senior police            spectators                                            invited
  Our Companion to the Standing Orders is quite                   officers, none weighs more heavily than that                      secure reasonable sat®jy               .       h an extent as
                                                                                                                                                                                                1 X T                                                                  “
                                                                                                                                    on to their premises, s u p p e d <:o sxicn           ^     .g matter further and to vote upon it.             .
clear on that point.                                              stemming from the problems of policing a situation
  “The principal purposes of amendments on Third Reading are      which has a potential to develop into public disorder.                                                                              I understand and appreciate the concerns o
to clarify any remaining uncertainties, to improve the drafting   Many officers that day would be saying, “ There, but                                                                              noble Lord. However, I believe tha^ 5 Per
and to enable the Government to fulfil undertakings given at      for the grace of God, go I”, for they would have
earlier stages of the Bill”—                                      understood better than most how the seeds of such                                                                                 his requests have been m^     ” S       today after
and, I suggest, at this stage of the Bill, from what we           disorder and such disasters can be found at most                        No<loubtIxriJ™i«W'»^“                    jn S e r
have now heard from my noble friend the Minister                  football, grounds in this country. The reasons are
this morning.                                                     fairly clear, I believe. They can be summed up as
  The noble Lord, Lord Graham, has had, even as                   total complacency in the sense o f “We have had no                     a jr J S s r s r - r s r A s s :
                                                                                                                                                                                                    on this issue today.
I have had, experience as a Government Whip in                    trouble before”. “ It cannot happen here” on the part
                                                                  o f all those involved.                                                consulted at all stages in the drafting o^tn                 Viscount Moackton of Breachley: My Lor ,
another place. We both know the very limited value                                                                                                                                                  sorry to intervene, i put down my name but it was
of a reasoned amendment. The party in opposition                     How, otherwise, can one explain the fact that so
who puts down an amendment may think that it is
of value. That value may be limited to the party’s
                                                                  many recommendations of past inquiries have not
                                                                  yet been impleir ‘ed? How can a situation have                         S iS S h s -                                             I ommitted-----

                                                                                                                                            HL 25 V
                                                                                                                                                                                                r ]( JU N E 1989 ]                           Biff [H.L.]
                                                                                                                                          1665            Football Spectators                   [ 16 JUNfc       i
 1663               F o otba ll Spectators                    [LO R D S]                        B ill [H.L.]                     1664
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12.40 p.m.                                          .,
                                                                                                                                          of what Lord Justice Taylor said in a certain portion                      Lord W allace o f C oslany: My L o rd s, *he
  12.26 p.m.                                                         Bill to allow the report of Lord Justice Taylor to be
                                                                                                                                          of his report” .
    Lord Mishcon: My Lords,I apologise to the noble                  before the House.
                                                                                                                                             Pvprvbodv knows who waists to analyse it that all
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ^lres^^iviTcJuieWM^'tha^I^'ould^ speiAin^
 Viscount and point out the fact that my name already                  There was a Written Answer given on 24th April
 appears on the speakers’ list.                                      by Mr, Moynihan, the Minister for Sport in &fl$WeT                                                                         yeahraSUhabsebeena c a t alT sttoA V m any grounds and
    i address the House on this amendment M ow ing                   to this Question:                                                                                                          in later years has become a supporter and member
 the reasonable speech of the noble Lord, Lord                          "To ask the Secretary of State for the Environment what                                                                 of supporters’ clubs from outside the htOTe team s
                                                                     account will be taken ofthe Hillsborough disaster and the judicial
                                                                                                                                          that°is all ‘w hat LordTustice T a S hatsafd may be
 Trafford. I shall later point out where I believe his               inquiry of Mr. Justice Taylor before the Football Spectators Bill                                                          area, This involves a lot of travel to home matches
 reasoning should leave him as it has not at the                     is introduced in the House”.                                                                                               a fw e a t expense. Such supporters respect the la#
 mom ent I concentrate on the assumption, first, that                His reply was:                                                        • „ nee(j for this because events h a v e supervened a n f are decent people. All of them are against the
 noble Lords are present today with open minds.                                                                                            which make this Motion unnecessary. No dement         proposed scheme.
                                                                       ‘‘The timetable for the Football Spectators Bill will allow the
 Secondly, the House is conscious of the fact that it                House, in considering the Bill, to take account of reievent           of Part 1 is to have a date without a Parll®.mf!^fi^    That is not the reason why I am speaking On
 is a legislative body, responsible to the public for                recommendations from Lord Justice Taylor’s inquiry into the              . What t>owers we are being given in this House    this amendment. 1 believe that the Government are
 assuring that legislation is properly dealt with.                   Hillsborough disaster”.—[Official Report, Commons, 26/4/89*,                                                                acting indecently in jumping the gun b eforetne
                                                                     col. 415.]                                                                                                                  completion of the report from ^ r d ^ s t .c e j a y l o r .
    I proceed on the first assumption of open minds.
 I remind the House of the terms of reference given                      1 now turn to the amendment and to the logical                    the Government put before us!
 to Lord Justice Taylor. They were:                                   sequence of the speech made by the noble Lord,
                                                                                                                                              We were given nothing, no assurance at all. The
  “To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday football         Lord Trafford, and others who have spoken against                        a ~r7h? Minister in his Written Answer has
ground on 15th April 1989 and to make recommendations about           this amendment. I could understand it if any noble
the needs of crowd control and safety at sports grounds”.             Lord rose in this debate to say that it was quite                     been broken This House is being asked, without
When the terms o f reference were announced in                        wrong to postpone the passage of the Bill through                                                                           poMticaladvantag^lf that is*[he case, i°isOTmpjetely
another place on 17th April, (col. 19 of the Official                your Lordships’ House. Nobody has proposed that
Report) the Secretary of State for Home Affairs                      so far, and so far as I know there will be no speaker
answered questions. He took the trouble to make                       subsequently who says that that is the interpretation                 with legislation.                                                        too grave and will raise many questions in the final
absolutely clear how wide the terms of reference                     of the Motion before the House. As I understand it,
were intended to be. Mr. Michael Shersby asked:
  “Can he say whether the inquiry will particularly consider the
                                                                     the House will be passing the Third Reading of the
                                                                     Bill. The Bill will go to another place. All that this
                                                                      Motion does is to call upon every open-minded Peer
                                                                                                                                            iS S E S S S
                                                                                                                                            £ e observation of Lloyd George when he said.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     S h o u l d like to
question of safety of stadiums and whether it will have the power
to recommend temporary closure, should that prove necessary?         to express regret if the Bill goes through another                       ••It is undesirable to traverse a chasm m two leaps _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     s r c s r t S M t f w y a
Can he also say whether the inquiry will further consider how        place, especially in regard to Part I, before proper                                                                                            Minister that the                              because
supporters travel to matches, the parking arrangements and the       consideration can be given to the report o f Lord
way in which supporters approach the ground? Can he further
say whether the inquiry will consider the role of the Football       Justice Taylor.
Association in connection with the proposed football membership         Perhaps I may turn to the speech by the noble
scheme?”.
                                                                     Baroness, Lady Burton. She is always listened to
In reply the Secretary of State said:                                with great attention in this House and when she
   “We have deliberately cast very widely the terms of reference     speaks about sport we recognise and remember her
for Lord Justice Taylor so that he can examine all those matters     very eminent past. I thought that there must have
that my hon. Friend has listed, ! believe without straining at the                                                                           this amendment.
terms of reference. There are many angles to this4—many points       been a misunderstanding about what the Minister
of comment and criticism have already arisen, even in the last       has said so far and I believe that the noble Lord,
48 hours—and it is right that Lord Justice Taylor should be able     Lord Mellish, may have misunderstood it. The
to look at them air’.                                                Minister has not said, as one would be led to believe                    ' disco u n t Monckton ofBrenchley: My ^                ds’^
  Also in the debate the question was cogently raised                by the Written Answer that I read out from the
of whether the issues which were to be dealt with                    Minister for Sport, Mr. Moynihan, that in the House
in Lord Justice Taylor’s report would be properly
examined. The matter was raised by Mr. John
Carlisle, a very ardent supporter of the Bill which
                                                                     of Commons there will be no Committee stage
                                                                     because it would be nonsensical to take amendments
                                                                     on the Bill before one knows what Lord Justice
                                                                                                                                             IS                  iiis S                                      l         that is an expression which 1 deeply shat .
we are now talking about. He said:                                   Taylor is recommending in his report. The Minister                       taken. The Governme                       place. Reasonably
   “As my right hon. friend knows, I am one of the strongest         has not said that there are arrangements in
supporters ofthe Football Spectators Bill, and I remain committed    programming the Bill, as the Minister was saying in
to the principle of membership to combat football hooliganism.       that W ritten Answer, that the Report stage will not                                                                                                 I    mi   Harris of Greenwich: My Lords, a week ago
Does my right hon. friend accept, however, that in consideration     be taken, that Third Reading will not follow and
of what has been said this afternoon—and, indeed, of the tragic
circumstances—it would be wise to postpone any further               that the Bill will not be passed. What he has said is                                                                                              a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        cave    evidence to tne i n < ^    j   c*%*«wnir about
discussion until the full results of the public inquiry are known?   something that is completely and positively empty
I hope that my right hon. friend will then bring to the House a      and has nothing to do with the expression of regret
Bill that will receive not merely all-party support but support      that I hope this House will make without stopping
from outside the House, to combat the terrible problems that         the passage of the Bill.
have been highlighted”.
                                                                        What did the Minister say? I took a note of it and
The Secretary of State duly replied;
                                                                     I know that he will correct me if in any way I am
   “As I have said, there will be a pause for the sake of            misleading the House or misunderstanding what he                                                                                                    The X X n Detective Sergeant Morton, went an
seemliness—as the House would wish—and also for consultations
on the possible strengthening of the Bill. Both purposes are, I      has put to the House. There will be parliamentary                                                                                                   ^o say “     e then looked up and
think, important from the point of view of my hon.                   approval of the scheme. That has nothing to do with                                                                                                 Liverpool fans surging m to the top ofth e
friend”.—[Official Report, Commons, 17/4/89; cols. 26-7.]            the provisions in the Bill. Does he agree with me
                                                                                                                                                 r ,a i W . s . s ^ s - ^ s * ! * s s                                    following the decision to open the gates to relieve a
                                                                     that if you put a scheme before Parliament nobody                                                                                                   crush of thousands of latecome^ pressing to ^e U n
Therefore, in quoting what a Minister of the                                                                                                     y sK S R S O S " —
Government has replied in course of discussions of                   will be allowed to rise and say, “ Please, 1 want to                        players themselves .                                        , . ■        from the Leppinjp Lane end of      gr      *
this report I am bringing to the attention o f the                   act as a committee on this scheme. 1 do not like the                        Let us at least do something: 1 ask your Lordships                       a young boy aged between 11 and 15. The boy was
House the understanding at that time that further                    wording o f Part U or subsection (3) and in regard to                       not to accept this ar  "Iment.
discussion was promised to those who supported the                   the scheme I         to move an amendment because                              HL 25 V2
       •667              F o otba ll Spectators
                                                                t LORDS ]
          [L o r o H a rris o f G r een w ich ]
                                                                                                  B ill Ih .l.]                 1668                 Football Spectators             1 16 JU N E !989 J                     B iff[RL|                    lew
                                                                         Pwmd. Win Lord Justice Taylor take the view that              is w dl aware, what many senior police offrem fear          My noble friend Uwd T n fib ri pointed aat,asotfcen
       S & ' S ^ S y s r ’^ w ""                                                                                                       is that violence within grounds will spread to the          had done cariier, the difference between the basis o f
                                                                                                                                       streets outside, city centres, railway stations and         the BiU and the scheme that comes after it. 1 believe
                                                                                                                                       motorway service areas. When the noble Lord, Lord           it is very important for all of us to keep that in mind
      totally impossible”.     P“" h"” throu8b Il>e fencc. but it was                                                                  Hesketh, said that that was one of the reasons why          a t a ll tim e s- T h e n o b le L o rd , L o r d Monckton oF
                                                                                                                                       we want this Bill as quickly as we do, as the House         Brenchley, pointed out that many people itV the
      J u s h ^ T a v 'I n r ^ ° f juSt. 0ne witness before Lord         „ J tak® *hat example because we devoted a fair               will recall he was unable to respond to the question        country were crying out for something to be done.
      th l i ^ Z yr 1 qu,ry:-'ust one policeman amid                                                                                   that I put to him; namely, is he not aware that the         As always, the noble Lord, Lord Mishcon, Was in
      the scores o f others, some no doubt confirming his                                                                              courts already have a power to disqualify people            brilliant form. He presented a most persuasive case.
      account of what occurred and some disputing it.
        As your Lordships know, and as has been said thi«
      mornmg we win not re’elve the1„terimSa™
                                                                                     sr                    zr.S'Tj'S                   from entering football grounds?
                                                                                                                                         1 believe that the noble Lords, Lord Graham,
                                                                                                                                       Lord Mishcon, and others, have pointed out the
                                                                                                                                                                                                   At one point I felt that I was going to be convinced.
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Though the noble Lord does not like the scheme
                                                                                                                                                                                                   being discussed rather than the Bill that is to leave
         Lord Justice Taylor for some weeks He will                                                                                    unwisdom of proceeding in the way in which the              your Lordships’ House today (and that I can
     presumably be able to tell us what in his iudement                           k u   evldence given before Lord Justice             Government have in fact decided to move. I know             understand) we believe that it will be an adequate
     7 ‘ w o ”8 on that hideous Saturday aftern^n-                                                                                     of no occasion during the period which 1 have been          and successful Outcome to the matters that will be
     *      ?     r Ure 0f the crowd in Uppings Une                                                                                    involved in public life when any government have            resolved when the scheme is discussed.
     led to the disaster; whether there were e ir o r f of                                                                             behaved in a comparable situation with such an                 The noble Lord, Lord Wallace of Coslany, said
     whaT’e xten/hp,6 gr° und ?uthorltl« or the police; to                                                                             extraordinary combination o f insensitivity and lack        that the Government were jumping the gun. It has
     nil?        •    y dnnkln8 was a factor; and what                                                                                 of judgment.                                                 always been important that the Government have
    S o f Kfeenmeter                 8 Pl3yed in the f i l i n g                                                                         12.54 p.m.
                                                                                                                                                                                                    proposed two stages. They have proposed to produce
                                                                                                                                                                                                    a Bill that provides the foundations and then to build
       That being so, we have to ask whv in th « e                                                                                         Lord Hesketh: my Lords, with the leave of the            on them. That will happen with the construction of
                                                                        occasion. 1 raised this m atter with the noble Harl
    arcumstances we are being invited today to                          Lord Ferrers. On the 14th March at col. 194 offhe               House, perhaps 1 may briefly reply to some o f the          a football membership authority and the scheme.
      ©commence discussion on the proceedings of a Bill                                                                                 points that have been raised during the debate this         Most important o f all, the noble Lord, Lord Mellish,
    which is directly relevant to £ l u T f X m e n t a                       I         m replyin8 to an amendment which                afternoon. 1 took some time laying out the                  said something very nice, and that is not always
    issues being examined by Lord Justice Taylor How                                                                                    Government’s position at an earlier stage. The noble        experienced by someone speaking from the Dispatch
    can it possibly be nght for Parliament to anticipate                                                                                Lord, Lord Mellish, introduced an electoral                 Box. He said that in the past the Government had
    his findings, as indeed Parliament is b e L a S £                                                                                   atmosphere to your Lordships’ House when                    not listened. He said that what I have said today
    fhnet noWeeTh iHfi,ndi5gS? What we have beln told by                                                                                commenting on the events o f yesterday. 1 am entirely       showed that it may be better late than never. The
    l^rrf M kh0          u ,Hesketh. and as the noble Lord                                                                              confident that one day Glasgow Central may become           fact is that we have listened and provided
    Lord Mishcon rightly said, is that Parliament will                                                                                  a Conservative-held seat. 1 believe that the noble          amendments that we shall come to later this
   thfno t Tf          .nght t0 block the BiU, but the one                   we know, that emergency arose in Leppings                  Lord understands that it is not on the list o f the most    afternoon in order to take account o f anxieties that
   thUHonT               uC the right t0 d° —and certainly            Lane. 1 do not believe that any rational person can               winnable seats.                                             have been expressed. 1 was very grateful for the noble
   to I S           nu‘ have the opportunity of doing_is             now doubt that if on that occasion there had been a                   He referred to the efficiency o f the scheme and        Lord’s remarks. 1 shall say no more on the subject
   to amend the scheme itself to take account o f what               computer malfunction at that end of the «                          the technology as did the noble Lord, Lord Harris.         because earlier 1 expended a considerable amount of
   a U,rd Justice o f Appeal, appointed by th l                      there would have been scores killed in the streets                 1 remind the noble Lord, Lord Mellish, that we have        your Lordships’ time in this debate. I am sure that
   Government, finds in his report.                                                                                                                                                                the noble Lord, Lord Graham, wishes to speak now.
                                                                     T o n e o f the Whatklappened on the terraces. That                always said that we have to be satisfied that the
      I take one small but, in my view imnni-tant                    at ^hf« c.I mD° re obv,ous conclusions to be drawn                 technology is going to work before it is implemented.
                                                                     at this stage. But on this most fundamental issue                  The noble Baroness, Lady Burton, quite rightly                Lord Hatch of Lusby: My Lords, before the noble
  S  r r in
  Knights, h histter dea[‘ The
                  speech.  xth by the nob,e'
                               noble  Lord and 1 went                Parliament will have no opportunity to look at this               pointed out that the Bill spreads far further than          Lord sits down, I wonder whether he will answer
                                                                                  ‘he light of Lord Justice T a ^ i n q u t             football. It also spreads to the good name and             one simple and straight question. He has described
  Po1ic*r (W SentatlVeS ° f the Association of Chief
  Police Officers to see the noble Earl, Lord Ferrers               I at th“ mA r         y Wr° ng- 11 is quite M traordina^           reputation of this country. We are very conscious of        it as a framework Bill. If the Third Reading is passed
     . r 3. a helpful meeting, for which we wer*                    that the Government who set up this inauirv                        that. The noble Lord, Lord Hatch o f Lusby, accused         and the Bill is passed in another place and then, as
  grateful, and we made some progress. However there                                   by 3, m° St distinguished member of              the Government of megalomania. 1 do not believe            a result of the report by Lord Justice Taylor it is
                                                                                                                                       that is true at all. They are responding to a demand.       seen that the Bill is either irrelevant or dangerous,
 ratS ttie
       e a eend
            nndmroff rth0ftSUbStantial
                      that             issues
                            meeting. One   ofleft
                                              them^resolved
                                                     was the        in th(5sUd m c „ 1 f S ’t i ^ PrePared t0 pu t Parliame" ‘                                                                     what opportunity will this House have to change the
                                                                                                                                           My noble friend Lord Murton of Lindisfame quite
 WMUil          I u by the noble Lord- Lord Knights                    1 have expressed my own views reeardine this                    rightly drew your Lordships’ attention to what he felt      Bill? It is on that issue that many noble Lords believe
 Will the Police have the rig h t- a statutory rig h t-to           element o f the Bill. There was a second le* to the                was the not good reason for having this amendment           that this debate should not have taken place.
 be consulted before this scheme is implemented?                    argument which 1 shall try to deal with fairly briefly             before your Lordships’ House today. Throughout the
                                                                    It was introduced by the noble Lord, Lord Hesketh                  passage of this Bill we have been grateful for the            Lord Hesketh: My Lords, by leave o f the House
 fXn^him
 i tnank him, ar
               the er fr0mthe
                   answer     ”0bleQuestion
                           to that  Earl- foratwhich
                                                 tho                                                                                                                                               for the second time, we have stated from the very
                                                                    w     S Bill.
                                                                               ! h=                                                    experience of the noble Lord, Lord Knights. He drew
 moment is no they are not. However is ft                           with the        He tolddusT that”1there
                                                                                                       r hy We
                                                                                                            hadSh0uld Proceed
                                                                                                                been violence          the attention of the House to the fact that this is a       start that we do not wish to anticipate the inquiry
important in the light of the report from Lord Justice                             a.ace’ West Ham and in Scotland. He                 framework Bill and that the foundations provide for         that is taking place. So let us wait and see what
Taylor which will bear on this as on so many other                  anH flr T           Scottish experience rather swiftly,            the scheme. The government’s amendments that                happens with the outcome o f the inquiry.
 O         f at,Pa,ri 'ament should have the opportunity            a" d f°T vt ery understandable reasons, because we                 will be dealt with this afternoon will respond by
n o l S ‘thy I f f * ° n the lmP°rtant matter that the             know that Scotland will not be covered by this BiU                  providing Parliament with two opportunities to               lp .m .
police should have a statutory right to be oronerlv                Notvwthstandmg what the noble Lord said in his                      discuss this issue. He also asked me about the                 Lord Graham of Edmonton: My Lords, perhaps I
consuJted? That is only one ofthe many issues which                speech, we also know that an attempt was made on                    position concerning consultation with the police. As        may say at once that the debate has been conducted
                                                                   that occasion to ensure that no tickets were available              the noble Lord, Lord Harris, quite rightly pointed          in good spirit. Passionate views have been presented
House*         UnreS° 1Ved WheD the Bi“ leaves^ this
                                                                   S     if the
                                                                            theeBiM                                                    out, following a letter that he received from my noble      on both sides o f the argument about the BiU. There
hJ ° day therefore will be the last opportunity to                 arise if     Bill wereWC S3W, *he
                                                                                          passed  withsituation that could
                                                                                                         large numbers  of             friend Lord Ferrers, the Government feel that this          has been no acrimony in any o f the speeches because
have any form o f detailed consideration o f the                   people who knew that they could not get into the                    matter can be dealt with by agreement. At the               even those who have spoken with passion have at
contents o f this Bill and we shall be doing it in                E      f S * ”                                    £ £                moment the Government do not believe that it                the same time sought to understand the view of those
               hat Lord Justice Taylor says following                                                                                  should be dealt with by statutory procedure.                on the other side of the argument.
one of the greatest disasters on an English Footbalf              That is one of the many reasons why there is so                         However, I shall draw to the attention of my right          The Minister has helped us by the attitude that he
                                                                 much police seep'   about this Bill. As the H ouS                     honourable friend the 'm arks o f the noble Lord. I         has displayed today. He may recall that in a fleeting
                                                                                                                                       FoMbciB Spectators
                                                                                                                                                                                   JW tE W l
 1671            F o otba ll Spectators             ( LORDS]                       B ill [h.l.]                1672   \m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MowrtewBS, L.
                                                                                                                                                                                       Foley, L
                                                                                                                      continuing the agony of the thousands of people                  Fraser of Carmyfiie, U           M uM ttt, E.      _
      [Lord Graham of Edmonton.]                            book in that sense, will not implement that Act           outside. We should not proceed without this stricture                                             M urtoo o f Liadtsftroe, L.
   reference in my opening speech, I acknowledged           of Parliament if Lord Justice Taylor says that the                                                                         Gaiaford,                        Napier and Ettrick* L
                                                                                                                      on the Government. I beg to move.                                Gardner o f P a r te , B.
  and paid tribute to the fact that the Government          government scheme is impracticable, and so on. If                                                                          Gmsrway, L.                      NorftetU
  amendments were in response to matters raised at          he says that—it is all hypothetical—we shall never                                                                          Hacking. L                      Orr-EwtafcL
                                                                                                                      1.9 p.m.                                                          Hailsham of Saint                Oxfuird, V.
  an earlier stage by, among others, noble Lords On         see that Act of Parliament implemented in any way.                                                                                                           Pender, L.
  this side of the House. However, in his view what         Is that correct?                                            On Question, Whether the amendment to the                         Marylebone, L.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Peyton of Yeovil, L.
                                                                                                                      Motion that the Bill be now read a third time shall               Henley, L.
  he had to say pre-empted the necessity for our                                                                                                                                        Hesketh, L.                      Porritt, L.
  amendment. The noble Lord, Lord Trafford, made              Lord Hesketh: My Lords, with the leave of the           be agreed to?                                                     Hives, L.                        Reay* L.
  some kind remarks about my diligence on the Bill          House, the fact of the matter is that the scheme             Their Lordships divided; Contents, 83;                         HomeoftheHirseI,L.               Rodney, L.
                                                                                                                                                                                        Hoop«r, B.                       Romney, E.
  in general. He said that 95 per cent, of what I wanted    will not be implemented until it has been before          Not-Contents, 96.                                                                                  Saint Brides, L.
                                                                                                                                                                                        Ironside, L.
  was contained in what the Minister had said. He           Parliament.                                                                                                                 Jellicoe, E.                      St. Davids, V,
  hoped that 1 would be non-controversial and would                                                                                            division no .   1                        Johnston of Rockport, L.          Saltoun of Abemethy, Ly.
  withdraw the amendment.                                      Lord Graham of Edmonton: My Lords, that helpful                                                                          Joseph, L.                        Selkirk, E.
                                                                                                                                                 CONTENTS                               Killeam, L.                       Shannon, E,
      Perhaps I may remind the House o f the purpose       intervention and the more helpful answer from the                                                                                                              Sharpies, B.
                                                           Minister tells it all. By declining to regret the                                                                            Kimball, L.
  of the amendment. It has a great deal to do with the                                                                                                  Kings Norton, L.                Knights, L.                       Shaughnessy, L.
                                                           progress, we are being invited to discuss the nature        Addington, L.                    Longford, E.                                                      Skelmersdale, L.
  Bill, but it also has a great deal to do with two                                                                    Airedale, U                                                      Lauderdale, E.
                                                           o f the Bill, overladden with the horror of                                                  Lovell-Davis, L.                 Layton, L.                       Slim, V.
  other scenarios. Once the Bill leaves the House, one                                                                 Allen of Abbeydale, L.           Macaulay of Bragar, L.                                            Strathclyde, L.
                                                           Hillsborough and perhaps without the benefit of                                                                               Lindsey and Abingdon, E.
  assumes—although the Government have not been                                                                        Amherst, E.                      McIntosh of Haringey, L.         Long, V.                         Terrington, L.
  precise with the timetable—that it will shortly be       Lord Justice Taylor’s report. 1 remind the noble            Ardwick, L.                      McNair, L.                                                        Teviot. L.
                                                                                                                       Attlee, E.                                                        LyeU, L.
  introduced for its Second Reading in another place.      Lord, Lord Mellish, who is a friend, that Mr. Colin                                          Mayhew, L.                       McFadzean, L.                    Thomas of Gwydir, L.
                                                           Moynihan said that it is inconceivable that Lord            Birk, B.                         Mersey, V.                       Mackay of Clashfem, L.           Trafford, L.
  Immediately after the Bill becomes the property of                                                                   Blackstone, B.                                                                                      Trefganie, L.
                                                           Justice Taylor will say that identity cards are not                                          Mishcon, L.                      Macleod of Borve, B.
  another place, it will not be possible for a debate                                                                  Bonham-Carter, L,
                                                                                                                                                        Monson, L.                                                         Trumpington, B.
                                                           relevant. How on earth can the Minister say that it         Boston of Faversham, L.                                           Mancroft, L.
  either on the Floor of the House or in Committee to                                                                                                   Murray of Epping Forest, L.      Marley, L.                        Wyatt of Weeford, L.
  be devoid of references to Hillsborough. The noble       is inconceivable? He has not heard the evidence. He         Bottoraley, L.                   Northfield, L.                                                     Young of Grafiham, L
                                                                                                                       Briginshaw,L.                                                     Monckton of Brenchley, V.
  Baroness, Lady Burton, whom we all deeply respect,       does not know the working. As I reminded the House                                           O’Neill of the Maine, L.         Morris, L.
                                                                                                                       Bruce of Donington, L.           Peston, L.
  said that Hillsborough has nothing to do with the        earlier, the Secretary of State Mr. Ridley has said         Callaghan of Cardiff, L.
 BiU. The Minister made allusions to the fact that         that Lord Justice Taylor is an adviser and that he will     Cledwyn of Penrhos, L.           Phillips, B                        Resolved in the negative, and the amendment to
                                                                                                                                                        Pitt of Hampstead, L.            the Motion that the Bill be now read a third time
 they are two separate issues. That is where we part       advise the Government. He was them magnanimous              Cocks of Hartcliffe, L.          Ponsonby of Shulbrede, L.
 company. What happened at Hillsborough may or             enough to say that the Government will listen to            Craigavon, V.                       ITeller.)                     disagreed to accordingly.
                                                           what he has to say. That is all. He did not say that        Dean of Beswick, L.               Prys-Davies, L.
 may not have something to do with the identity card                                                                   Denington, B.
 scheme; but what Lord Justice Taylor says are the         if Lord Justice Taylor came out with incontrovertible       Dormand of Easington, L.          Rea, L.
                                                           evidence, the scheme should not be introduced.                                                Ritchie of Dundee, L.            1.17 p.m.
 lessons to be learnt from Hillsborough may very well                                                                  Elwyn-Jones, L.                   Robson of Kiddington, B
 have something to do with the Bill.                                                                                    Ennals, L.                       Russell, E.                        Bill Read a Third time.
                                                                                                                        Ewart-Biggs, B.                  Russell of Liverpool, L.           Clause 1 [Scope and interpretation o f this Part]:
     In my amendment, I invite the House not to               Lord Hesketh: My Lords, with the leave of the             Ezra, L.
 anticipate what Lord Justice Taylor may have to           House, I feel that the noble Lord slightly insinuated                                         Sainsbury, L.
                                                                                                                        Falkender, B.                    Scanlon, L.
 say. I lay strong stress on the point that every day      that it is possible that Lord Justice Taylor’s report        Falkland, V.                     Seear, B.
                                                                                                                                                                                             Lord Hesketh moved Amendment No. 1:
 hundreds and perhaps thousands o f people who live        will not have due attention paid to it. I must make          Fitt, L.                         Stallard, L.                       Page 1, line 19, after (“made”) insert (“and approved”),
 in Sheffield and Liverpool open their newspapers to       it absolutely clear that it will. The most important         Foot, L.                         Stoddart of Swindon, L.
                                                                                                                        Gallacher, L.                                                        The noble Lord said: My Lords, in moving
read what I can only describe as horror stories. 1         thing which I also said earlier is that we cannot                                             Strabolgi, L.
                                                                                                                        Graham of Edmonton, L.           Tordoff, L. {Teller.)            Amendment No. 1,1 intend to speak to Amendments
shall not go into the detail, but those who have read      anticipate what will be in the report.                       Grey, E.                         Turner of Camden, B.             Nos. 3,4, 5,6, 7, 8,9, 10 and 20. We have discussed
the newspapers this week will know exactly what 1                                                                       Grimond, L.                       Underhill, L.                   the effect o f these government amendments during
mean. In two or three weeks’ time they will be invited                                                                  Hampton, L.                       Wallace of Coslany, L
                                                               Lord Graham of Edmonton: My Lords, the noble             Harris of Greenwich, L.                                           the debate on the Opposition’s reasoned
by the Government to listen to horror stories that                                                                                                        Wedderbum of Charlton, L.
                                                            Lord’s ministerial friend Mr. Moynihan was                   Hatch of Lusby, L.                                               amendment. They provide two opportunities for
                                                                                                                                                          White, B.
may or may not be as authentic as those to be               sufficiently moved to say that he felt it inconceivable      Hayter, L.                       Wigoder, L.                     Parliament to debate the national membership
repeated in Parliament, to be rebutted in Parliament                                                                     Hooson, L.                       Williams of Elvel, L.            scheme after Royal Assent to the Bill, the first before
                                                            that this aspect would not be in the report. We also         Houghton of Sowerby, L.
and to be argued about in Parliament while Lord             have the words of Mr. Ridley who said that the               Howie of Troon, L.
                                                                                                                                                          Willis, L.                      the scheme is drawn up and submitted for approval
Justice Taylor is trying to make sense of what                                                                                                            Winchilsea and Nottingham,       and the second after the Secretary o f State has
                                                            Government would listen to what Mr. Justice Taylor           Hughes, L.                         E.
happened.                                                   had to say. I accept what the Minister is saying now         Jeger, B.                        Wise, L.                         approved it. The effect ofthe amendments to Clause
    The noble Lord, Lord Mellish, asked whether we                                                                       Jenkins of HiHhead, L.                                            1 and Clause 4 is to make the approval o f the scheme
                                                            that they will listen carefully to what is being said.       John-Mackie, L.
could take it from the Minister that nothing would         However, what the Minister has offered the House                                                                                by the Secretary of State the subject of parliamentary
be done until Parliament had had the opportunity            is that when the FMA has produced a scheme, and                                     NOT-CONTENTS                               approval by means of negative resolution. Any
to give approval through the order procedufes. The         when the scheme has taken into account the                                                                                      subsequent replacement scheme would similarly be
                                                                                                                           Alexander of Tunis, E.         Camden, M.                       subject to parliamentary approval. Tnese are the
Minister was silent. Everything will be done before        Government’s views—they having studied the                                                     Camock, L.
then. The Bill will be fought through Parl&ihent.                                                                          Alexander of Weedon, L.                                         amendments that 1 promised to consider at Report
                                                           report of Lord Justice Taylor whose views they may              Ampthill, L.                   Cottesloe, L.
The issues in the Bill are matters of deep controversy.    or may not accept—the House will then be invited                                               Davidson, V. [Teller.]           stage.
                                                                                                                           Arran, E.                      Denham, L. [Teller.)
Overlying that will be Hillsborough. That will- be         on one Motion, without an opportunity for                       Auckland, L.                                                       Amendment No. 20 to Clause 24 is new. The
                                                                                                                           Beaverbrook, L.                Digby, L.
enough to repel any one who shares in the trauma           amendment, in two debates of a general character,                                              Dilhome, V.                       amendment provides an opportunity to debate the
of Hillsborough. We all share in it. I am repelled by                                                                      Bellhaven and Stenton, L.                                        principle ofthe scheme following the final report ot
                                                           to approve an action by the Government. That is                 Belstead, L.                   Donegal!, M.
being part of a procedure that forces that kind of         what we are being invited to do in substitution for             Bessborough, E.                Dundee, E.                        Lord Justice Taylor before the FMA is appointed. I
thing to be part of our parliamentary timetable.           proper scrutiny by Parliament.                                  Birdwood, L.                   Effingham, E.                     do not propose to go over the ground that we have
                                                                                                                           Blatch, B.                     Elies, B.
                                                              All my amendment asks is that until Lord Justice                                            Elliot of Harwood, B.             already covered. I beg to move.
                                                                                                                           Blyth, L.                      Elliott of Morpeth. L.
   Lord Melllsh: My Lords, so that we can have it          Taylor gives us the wisdom of his inquiry we ought              Boyd-Carpenter, L.
on the record, and so that we all know what we are         not to project the horror story from Hillsborough               Burton, L.                     Elton, L.                           Lord Northfield: My Lords, I do not want to detain
                                                                                                                           Burton of Coventry, B.         Erroll of Hale, L.                the House. However this is the only opportunity I
talking about, perhaps I may set out my                    either on to Parliament or on to the public. It is                                             Faithfull, B.
understanding of the position. The Government,             a sensible and a reasonable request. Unless it is                Butterworth, L.                                                 have to raise an issue on Which I have spoken
                                                                                                                            Caithness, E.                 *"" 'ts, E.
assuming that they have their Bill on the statute          absolutely necessary 1        not want to be part of
 1675                  Football Spectators                    [ LORDS]                        B ill [h.l.]                      1677              Football Spectators                        [ 16 JU N E 1989 ]                        B ill [H.L]                    1678
                                                                                                                        1676
    [L o r d N o r t h f iel d .]                                      attempt, confining that to unlawful entry. It becomes    match is about to happen—at which he becomes an                              Page 4, line 16, after (“scheme”) insert—
 informally to the noble Lord. As a result o f the way                 an offence unlawfully to attempt to enter the ground,    unauthorised person. If he does not have a pass,                               (“(a) the Secretary of State shall lay • copy of the
                                                                       but it is not an offence under the Bill unlawfully to    attempts to remain in the stadium beyond the point                                modifications before each House of Parliament, and.
 in which these amendments have been proposed we
                                                                       attempt to remain in the ground as an unauthorised       at which he h a s b e e n told that he is not an authorised                  Page 4, line 20, after first (“schcmc") insert—
 are uncertain as to the function o f the Football
 M e m b e r s h ip A u th o rity . T h e a u th o r ity was brought   person.                                                  person and is to leave, and makes a nuisance of                                (“(8) the Secretary of State shall by order confirm his
                                                                                                                                himself so that the police have to come to turn him                              agreement to the new scheme and shall lay a copy of it
 in on a side wind as a way of drawing up a scheme.                       On Report, I tried to illustrate the sort o f thing                                                                                     before each House of Parliament, and
 Clause 3 says:                                                        that might happen. A tradesman enters the ground         out, he is o f course attempting to remain in the
                                                                                                                                                                                                               (b) subject to subsection (7A) below,").
   “There shall be a body responsible for the administration of        lawfully in the morning to deliver goods, or a           ground during the football match as an unauthorised
 the national football membership scheme".                                                                                      person.                                                                      Page 4, line 22, 8t end insert—
                                                                       carpenter enters a stadium lawfully in the morning                                                                                      (“(7A) The powers of the Secretary of State to make orders
   Clause 4 says:                                                      to do repairs. As the time of the match approaches          If I were to take this matter to a Division, I should                     under this section are exercisable by statutory instrument which
   "The Football Membership Authority shall, as soon as                he decides that it would be nice to remain and watch.    be impeding the further progress of the Bill. I am                           shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of
 reasonably practicable slier its designation takes effect, prepare    He is told that he cannot do so because he is an         mindful also that there will be an opportunity in                            either House of Parliament,”).
 a draft scheme”.                                                      unauthorised person and must leave. He says that         another place to go into this matter further. The                            Page 4, line 23, leave out subsection (8).
 In other words, the Football Membership Authority                     he is blowed if he is going to leave; he is going to     Government’s reply has been hopeless, but subject                             On Question, amendments agreed to.
 came in as a piece of administration to draw up the                   stop and watch and match. He refuses point-blank         to what the noble Earl may be now going to say, I
 scheme. The worry o f a number of us is that the                      to leave and becomes abusive. The police have to be      shall ask to withdraw the amendment.
authority should be more than merely a body that                       called to take him out. He is just as much of a                                                                                        Clause 5 [National Membership scheme:               contents
 draws up a scheme and is responsible for                              nuisance as the fan who tries unlawfully to enter           Earl Ferrers: My Lords, if I may have the leave of                       and penalties]',
administration. Now that we have had time to reflect                   the ground. I do not know by what reasoning the          the House, I would not wish to prevent the noble
                                                                       Government believe that the fellow who tries             Lord from doing that. I realise that the noble Lord                           Lord Harris of Greenwich moved Amendment No.
upon the situation created by the addition of the
 amendments, we believe that it should be an                           unlawfully to enter is a worse criminal than the         is agitated about this matter. It worries me when he
advisory body. It should advise the Secretary of State                 fellow who tries unlawfully to remain in the ground      says that we are miles away from the point. Perhaps                           Page 4, line 29, at end insert—
on the running of the scheme, on possible changes—I                    so that one commits the additional offence o f an        the noble Lord will be good enough to look at Clause                            (*‘(1A) All evidence introduced under the procedures
                                                                                                                                                                                                              established and described in paragraph (k) Of subsection (2)
know that it can agree changes with the Secretary of                   attempt and the other does not.                          2(1). It refers to an offence of remaining on the                             below shall be given orally.”).
State under Clause 4—and on possible termination                         Natural justice requires that those two fans are       premises at a time relevant to a match. If a carpenter
of the scheme if that proves necessary. While it is                                                                             remains at a time which is relevant to the match, he                           The noble Lord said: My Lords, I am moving this
                                                                       dealt with equally. If the one attempt is a criminal                                                                                 amendment in the name of the noble Lord, Lord
operating it should be able to advise on the running                   offence, so should be the other. I look forward to       commits an offence. It does not matter whether he
of the scheme and on points that should be brought                                                                              is attempting to remain, he is remaining.                                   Graham, the noble Viscount, Lord Craigavon, and
                                                                       hearing what the Government have to say. I beg to                                                                                    myself, t find it rather surprising that 1 have to rise to
to the attention of the Secretary of State regarding                   move.
the general policy and principles contained in the                                                                              1.30 p.m.                                                                   move the amendment because, until the government
Bill.                                                                                                                              Lord Airedale: My Lords, I appreciate that, but in                       amendments were tabled this week and we read the
                                                                          The Minister of State, Home Office (Earl Ferrers):                                                                                result of the briefing by Ministers of the football
   At this late stage I am not expecting the minister                  My Lords, the noble Lord, Lord Airedale, is on to        my illustration, a person having refused point blank
                                                                                                                                to leave is turned out by the police. They have to                          correspondents, we assumed that there wis
to give any undertaking. I suggest, however, that                      one of his characteristically ingenious matters of                                                                                   agreement on the issue. It is a m atter of fundamental
when the Bill goes to another place the Government                     precision. He tabled an amendment on Report. I           come and turn him out. He has been doing his
                                                                                                                                absolute damnedest—if that is a parliamentary                               importance. I very much hope that the Government
should flesh out the functions, duties and role of the                 said that I thought that it was unnecessary to ensure                                                                                will be able to reassure us on the matter.
Football Membership Authority. It should not be                        that the offence in Clause 2(1) covered an attempt       expression—to remain and watch the match. That
                                                                       to remain. “ Remaining” is sufficient since anyone       is his attempt; he does not succeeed and because he                            The issue before us is very simple: what is to be
left merely with its administrative and drawing-up                                                                                                                                                          done when someone is expelled from the football
functions. It should become an advisory body on the                    who attempts to remain must obviously be                 does not succeed, he does not commit the offence of
                                                                       remaining. That is unlike the entry provision,           remaining inside. However, he commits or would                              membership scheme? The question arises of what
whole policy of the scheme which is the cornerstone                                                                                                                                                         rights the person has to challenge his accusers. , I
of the Bill. I would have moved an amendment but                       because it is possible to attempt to enter without       commit the offence, if it were an offence, of
                                                                       already having succeeded.                                attempting to remain in. If he were trying to get in                        asked this question when we were in Committee.
did not believe it worthwhile. I hope the Minister                                                                                                                                                          The noble Lord, Lord Hesketh, who was speaking
will ensure that the matter is looked at carefully in                     The noble Lord said that there were two offences      unlawfully from outside, he would be caught as
                                                                                                                                attempting to get in under the provisions of the                            on that occasion, will recall it. He told me that of
the other place.                                                       under the subsection. In fact, it creates three                                                                                      course the rights of the accused person would be
                                                                       offences: one of entering, one of remaining and a        subsection. That is the position. However, I beg
                                                                                                                                leave to withdraw the amendment.                                            preserved because he would have the opportunity of
   Lord Hesketh: My Lords, with the leave of the                       third of attempting to remain. If the noble Lord’s                                                                                   his case being considered by a tribunal. After we had
House, the noble Lord, Lord Northfield, is correct                     amendment were incorporated into the Bill there             Amendment, by leave, withdrawn.
                                                                                                                                                                                                            had a rather prolonged series of exchanges, he told
when he says that the Bill goes to another place from                  would be a fourth offence of attempting to remain.          Clause 4 [National membership scheme: making,                            me that the Government were holding discussions
here. 1 shall draw his remarks to the attention of my                  One cannot attempt to remain without remaining.          approval, modification etc.]:                                               on the m atter with the Council on Tribunals; He
right honourable friend.                                               In his example the noble Lord said that the person                                                                                   assured me that hearsay evidence would be excluded.
   On Question, amendment agreed to.                                   having entered the ground might have been asked             Lord Hesketh moved Amendment No. 3:                                      We were satisfied that the Government had met our
                                                                       by a steward to leave but had replied that he would         Page 4. line 4, after ("requirements,”) insert ("by order”).             point.
   Clause 2 [Offences relating to unauthorised                         be blowed if he would leave. He wanted to stay. The
attendance at designated football matches]'.                                                                                       On Question, amendment agreed to.                                           However, what is now proposed? in the
                                                                       fact is he was staying; he was remaining. Therefore it
                                                                       is no advantage to have an amendment which creates                                                                                   amendment which today stands in the name of the
  Lord Airedale moved Amendment No. 2:                                                                                             The Deputy Speaker (Lord Murton of Llndisfarne):                         noble Lord, Lord Hesketh, we see that the tribunal,
                                                                       an offence out of attempting to remain.                   My Lords, the following amendments all refer to
  Page 2, line 40. leave out ("of entering premises.’*).                                                                                                                                                    as it was referred to in the Bill, is now to be
                                                                          The noble Lord in attempting to simplify the           the same point. If your Lordships will allow me, I                          abandoned. There is an insertion of totally different
  The noble Lord said: My Lords, Clause 2 raises                       wording o f the amendment has complicated its             propose that we take Amendments Nos. 4 to 10
the subject of attempting to commit offences. I was                                                                                                                                                          language. This suggests to us that the rights of an
                                                                       meaning. I hope that he will see that it would be         together.                                                                   accused person will be drastically curtailed.
wrong on Report to suggest that that was                               better if his amendment were not in the Bill.
unnecessary. I had forgotten the general rule that the                                                                                                                                                         In the light of that, we have tabled this
offence of an attempt to commit an offence does not                                                                                Lord Hesketh moved Amendments Nos. 4 to 10:
                                                                         Lord Airedale: My Lords, the noble Earl takes so                                                                                    amendment, which would require that evidence
apply in summary cases before the magistrates. I was                                                                               Page 4, line 5, at end insert (“and if he does so, he shall lay a copy    given before any organisation which had the
                                                                       much trouble and does his homework so well that I         of the scheme as approved before each House of Parliament").
properly put right about that.                                         am astonished by that reply. He is miles away from          page 4, line 6, leave out (“gives it his approval”) and insert
                                                                                                                                                                                                             responsibility o f determining whether a person wag
  Subsection (1) is curious. It refers to two offences;                the point. If a person goes in as a carpenter to do       (“approves the scheme under subsection (3) above, then, subject             to be excluded from the scheme should be on the
namely, unlawfully entering a football ground and                      some work in the morning, he is obviously entering        to subsection (7A) below                                                    basis of oral evidence. The question to which 1 hope
unlawfully remaining there, and then the offence of                    lawfully. There    -t then come a time—the football         Page 4, line 8, leave          >m (“Authority”) to end of line 9.         we shall receive a clear and also persuasive answer
  1679                F o otba ll Spectators           [ LORDS]                          B ill [ h .l ]             1680   1681            F o otba ll Spectators             [1 6 JU N E 1989]                     B ill [h .L]                1682
    [ L o r d H a r r is o f G r e e n w ic h .]                 that accusation to be made only in writing, without       who has stated, for example, that the accused was a               reviewed by people who are independent o f the
   from the noble Lord, Lord Hesketh, is this. It is a           a chance to examine the person who or organisation        drunken lout the previous week. The accused must                  FMA. The FMA will need to establish a panel of
   fundamental question and I should be grateful if he           which made the accusation. It requires that the           have this right if he feels his identity has been                 independent people for this very purpose. I said that
   would take note o f it and answer in explicit terms.          answer should be given orally. I hope that the            mistaken. There must also be the right to question                we would consult the Council on Tribunals on these
   Will an accused person have the right to challenge            Government will recognise that their amendment            a witness who alleges such things. To limit such a                amendments. We have followed the council’s advice
   his accusers?                                                 which is to be moved makes this amendment                 matter to evidence in writing would, I think, be                  in proposing them. I hope that ih the light o f what
                                                                 necessary.                                                                                                                  I have said, the noble Lord will feel able to withdraw
       Let us say that a person is accused of racial                                                                       absolutely wrong bearing in mind the obvious stigma
   chanting. I hope that the noble Lord is following the           Viscount Craigavon: My Lords, as the noble Lord,        that attaches to a person if membership and                       his amendment.
   point. It is o f some importance. I repeat, let us            Lord Harris o f Greenwich, said, I have put my name       admission are refused.
                                                                                                                                                                                                Lord Harris of Greenwich: My Lords, the noble
   assume that a person is accused o f racial chanting           to this amendment. I fully support his very forceful                                                                        Lord has not the remotest intention o f withdrawing
  and is thrown out of the ground as a result. The               speech and also the speech we have just heard. I              Lord Hesketh: My Lords, the amendment which
                                                                                                                           the noble Lord, Lord Harris, has moved anticipates                his amendment, particularly in the light Of that very
  person concerned denies it. What are to be his rights?         have a few brief remarks to make. I have been                                                                               unpef*ti»«iv« rtm y which aW fittf frtwwf # mifpWf
  Can he give oral evidence before the organisation or                                                                     Amendments Nos. 12 to 15 standing in my name. I
                                                                 reading the Report stage o f the Bill and a speech of      think that it not} be for Tie coavtsocace the House                   q u e stio n s vm m I    to *fee xeM * Uwtfi. I w
  the body which will have the responsibility of hearing         the noble Lord, Lord Hesketh. It seems to me that                                                                            Hesketh. I asked him at the beginning o f ray «peec*
  his case and will he be able to cross-examine his                                                                         if I speak to both my amendments and to his at the
                                                                he was trying not to deter the clubs from using the                                                                           ■whether, if a person wanted to confront his accuser
  accusers?                                                     machinery o f appeal by making it simple. In my              same time.                                                       and deny absolutely the charge made against him,
                                                                opcsiocL the m acitmerr o f appeal h beiag made fir              My amendments fulfil the undertakings that 1gave              he would have that right. He replied that there would
     I x t ire » v that tfcr pvx)e»or agains fetw * tfc® o f
                                                               ieoma^kfortbeiUmaodabetamcxHbeiafitPBA                        during the earlier stages of the Bill. Amendment                  be an oral hearing in an appropriate case. But what
 a wage                  T ie i& n rari     *T Ju a rf U s                                                                   No. 12 would limit the FMA’s discretionary bans on
 shoot racial abase". The man concerned says, “It              m the wrong way. I hope, if that is the case, that the                                                                          is an appropriate case? Who is to determine that?
                                                               noble Lord will redress the balance.                          membership to a maximum period of two years.
 was not me. We were in a dense crowd. It was a man                                                                          Amendment No. 13 would make it a mandatory                            As the noble Lord, Lord Knights, rightly said he
four or five to my right or left” . Does the accused                                                                          provision of the scheme that the FMA should notify               and I very rarely disagree. However, I fear that we
person have the right to cause the steward to be                  Lord Knights: My Lords, I seldom disagree with                                                                                are on this occasion in fundamental disagreement. I
                                                                the ideas advanced by the noble Lord, Lord Harris             anyone it disqualifies from membership of the
cross-examined or does he not? It seems to me that                                                                            reasons for that disqualification.                                regard this as a central question o f the liberty of the
this is a matter of the highest importance. I repeat,          o f Greenwich. However, I am afraid that I must do                                                                               individual. The noble Lord is correct in saying that
there have been suggestions in the press, clearly after         so on this occasion. His argument seems to be based              Amendments Nos. 14 and 15 concern the                          at the moment an individual club has the right to
government briefing, that the statements concerned             on the assumption that a person has a civil right to           procedure under which anyone who is refused                       keep someone out o f its ground. He is absolutely
will be given in writing. But if that is true, I must          enter a football ground. I do not believe that that is         membership or is disqualified from membership and                 right. That applies to football clubs just as to any
tell the noble Lord that it seems to me a most                 the case. A person has a right to enter a football             feels aggrieved about the FMA’s decision may make                 other place of public entertainment. However, we
extraordinary provision.                                       ground if the club is prepared to give him permission          representations about it. We have had very helpful                are not talking about individual clubs; we are talking
                                                               to enter. A club can withdraw that permission at               discussions with the Council on Tribunals on how                  about a statutory scheme which imposes criminal
    May I ask the noble Lord whether it is true that           any time, without reason. That is the position that            best to handle this matter. As presently drafted the
the Government are taking this action because they                                                                                                                                              penalties. That is the distinction. Are people to have
                                                               applies at all places of public entertainment.                 Bill provides for a tribunal to hear and determine                their rights taken away in this arbitrary fashion and
have had some unwelcome advice from the Council                                                                               appeals against disqualification. Establishing a
on T ribunals? If so, what was the view o f the council?          As I have said, perhaps too many times already,                                                                               and not be guaranteed any opportunity of being able
                                                               places of entertainment are private premises and               formal tribunal in this way would mean that the                   to face their accusers? Who are some of the people
I think we should all be extremely interested to hear                                                                         principles advocated by the council on appeal
what it was. Where does the onus of proof lie? Does            people enter with the consent and permission of                                                                                  we are talking about in this matter? Some o f them,
                                                               those who own the premises. If we are to create a              procedures would have to be applied in full. The                  undoubtedly, will be able to frame representations
it lie on the people who want to exclude the person                                                                           council felt that the impact on the individual
from the scheme, or is it transferred to the person            situation in which only football clubs—this measure                                                                              with no difficulty at all. However, many will not be
                                                               does not apply anywhere else—have to justify by                concerned of refusal or withdrawal of membership                  able to do so. Many would be deterred from doing
against whom the complaint has been made?                                                                                     from the scheme was not of the character and weight
                                                               way of a procedure which is very similar to a trial                                                                              so or would find themselves unable to put their
    Let it not be said by the noble Lord, “Let us leave        why they have withdrawn permission for entry to                that is usually dealt with by tribunals which are                 representations in writing. Those representations
this to the Football Membership Authority”. That               their premises, we are raising this m atter to a level         subject to the council’s supervision.                             would be passed to a body of men before whom, as
is no answer at all. We are talking here about people’s        that we shall find very difficult to sustain in practice.          We must remember that clubs already can and do                I understand it, the accused would not be guaranteed
civil rights and the Government have an absolute                                                                               bar people from their grounds without giving them                any right of audience.
obligation to satisfy us that they will be protected in          Lord Mishcon: My Lords, I too hesitate before I               the right to make any form o f representation. It is
the matter. I very much hope that he will be able to                                                                                                                                                I have rarely heard an argument which strips
                                                               intervene, especially on a Friday afternoon. I wonder           also the council’s view that if oral hearings were to             people of their civil rights on the grounds of
reassure us that there is nothing in this as sinister as       whether the noble Lord who has just spoken and                  be a normal procedure in the way that the noble
it appears at first sight. I beg to move.                                                                                                                                                        administrative convenience—that Was the purport
                                                               whose experience with the police we value in this               Lord, Lord Harris, proposes in his amendment, that                o f the noble Lord’s speech—introduced in any Bill
                                                               House has really considered what the Bill intends to            in itself would mean that the council’s principles                in this House since I have been a Member.
   Lord McIntosh of Haringey: My Lords, perhaps I              do. It intends to regulate the membership scheme so             and procedures had to apply. That, in turn, would
may add my support on behalf of my noble friend                that those who are undesirable—let there be no                  mean that many hearings might not be held until
                                                                                                                               after a short period of disqualification had expired.             Lord Graham of Edmonton: My Lofds, will the
Lord Graham to the arguments of the noble Lord,                doubt about the public impression of this
                                                                                                                               That would certainly not be fair to anyone.                     noble Lord allow me to intervene in the hope that
Lord Harris. It seems to me that the key to this and           matter—for one reason or another, cannot be                                                                                     the Minister will deal with the point about oral
the reason why the amendment is necessary is in                admitted to a football ground and cannot be                        We therefore envisage an informal procedure for              hearings being part of the procedure where
Amendment No. 14 to be moved by the                            admitted to membership o f the scheme. That is not              making and considering representations against the              appropriate?     Who     will    decide    what    is
Government. If we had had a tribunal, I assume that            the question that is normally within the policeman’s            FMA’s decisions. The representation would                       appropriate?—I am asking the noble lord, Lord
it would be constituted under the tribunals Act and            mind or the civilian’s mind who knows about these               normally be made in writing, although we do not                 Harris, whether he feels that the Minister could help
that the Council on Tribunals would make sure that             matters when it is a matter of joining a drinking club          rule out the possibility o f occasional oral hearings in        the House by dealing with that particular point. I
there was a right o f cross-examination.                       or any other kind of club.                                       appropriate cases. The procedure will be simple,               could not understand what the noble and learned
   As the matter stands, the whole nature of the                 This Bill has been intentionally introduced to stop            speedy and fair. We must not deter the FMA and                 Lord tried to say from a sedentary position.—If the
proceedings which may be instituted under the                  violence and to stop undesirable people from being               the clubs from imposing bans. Dealing with cases               Minister can tell us what is meant by “appropriate”
 clause as it is to be amended if the Government’s             able to come to a football ground. Therefore, there              quickly is important because that is part and parcel           and whether the accused person has the right to opt
 amendments are accepted means that the right of               must be a procedure which guards the character and               of making the procedure as fair as possible.                   for an oral hearing, I believe that that would be
 cross-examination is taken away. It cannot be right           the reputation of people who are refused                           In the interests o f fairness, it is also essential that     helpful.
 to have an accusation made purely in                          membership. There must be an ability for a person                the procedure for reviewing FMA decisions should
 writing—because to deny somebody a spectators’                to state that, if he is denied membership of the                 be independent. Amendment No. 15 gives a member                   Lord Hesketh: My Lords, 1 dealt with that jifeint
 card is an accusation. It cannot be right to permit           scheme, he must have         nght to face his accuser,           who is disqualified the           to have the decision          in my speech. The position of the noble Lord, Lord
   1683                  F o otba ll Spectators          [ LORDS ]                        B ill [h.l.]                1684   1685               F ootball Spectators                  {16 JU N E 1989]                         B ill [h.l ]                   1686

      [ L o r d H e s k e t h .]                                 different. If one enters a ground or attempts to do so      Layton, L.                        Oxfuifd, V.                            Clause 14 [Effect o f order]:
    Harris, is based on an assumption that rights are            without being a member o f a national scheme—not a          Long, V.                          Reay, L.
    being taken away. In my speech I made two relevant           club—one commits a criminal offence. One can be             Lothian, M.                       Rodney, L.                             Earl Ferrers moved Amendment No. 18:
                                                                                                                             LyelL, L.                         Romney, E.
    points. The first is that, when we took the advice of        sent to prison. In my view there is no doubt that if        McFadzean, L.                     Saint Albans, D,                       rage 12, line 22, leave out (” or of detention in a yount
    the Council on Tribunals, far from being                     people are expelled from the scheme it is a                 Mackay of Clasbfern, L.           St. Davids, V.                       offenders institution”).
    disappointed or disagreeing with the Government,             commentary, and will be taken as a commentary               Madeod of Borve, B.               Satloun of Abenwtfcy, Ly.               On Question, amendment agreed to.
    the council felt that the impact on the individual           by many fair-minded people, that they have done             MaacrofLL.                        ShamMO, E.
                                                                                                                             Maricy.L.                         a»rptes.B .
    concerned of the refusal or withdrawal of                    something seriously wrong.                                   Morris, L.                       Skelmersdate, L.                        Clause 21 [Further provision about, and appeals
    membership o f the scheme was not of a character or             I say that those rights will be stripped away from        Mountevans, L.                   Strathclyde, L.                       against, declarations o f relevance]:
    weight such as is usually dealt with by tribunals.           th a n with no guarantee that they win have the              Munster, E.                       Thomas of Gwydir, L
                                                                                                                              Murton of Lindisfame, L.          Trafford, L.                           The Earl of Arran moved Amendment No. 19:
      To aatwer the question o f die noble lord. Lord            opportunity to pot their own case before the body            Norrie, L.                        Trefgame, L.                           Page 19, line 5, leave out (“three”) and insert (“five").
   Harris—as 1 did in m y speech sod am doing                    which wiO make the final determination o f the               Orr-Ewing, L.                     Wyatt of Weeford, L.
  again—when one combines that point with the fact              matter. They will have no opportunity to                                                                                                The noble Earl said: My Lord9, on behalf of my
  that at present people ha ve no rights as regards being       cross-examine their accusers. In my view that is a              Resolved in the negative, and amendment                              noble friend, I should like to speak to Amendment
  ejected or prevented from entering a football ground,         fundamental attack on an individual's civil liberties,        disagreed to accordingly.                                              No. 19.
  as the noble Lord, Lord Knights, pointed out with             and we shall vote for this amendment.                                                                                                  This amendment fulfils an undertaking which my
  regard to other places of entertainment, it can be                                                                                                                                                noble friend Lord Hesketh gave during Report stage.
  seen that the Government are in no way stripping         1.54 p.m.                                                          2.2 p.m.                                                              It requires the prosecution to give a defendant at
 away people’s rights. Far from it. We have taken            On Question, Whether the said amendment                                                                                                least five days’ notice before his trial that the court
                                                                                                                                Lord Hesketh moved Amendment No. 12:                                will be asked to make a declaration that the offence
 advice and are trying to introduce a system which        (No. 11) shall be agreed to?                                          Page 4, line 43, leave out (“a period’*) and insert (“an            was football-related and that it is therefore relevant
 will be fair and easy to operate.                                                                                            appropriate period not exceeding two years*’).
                                                             Their Lordships divided: Contents,                        53;                                                                          for the purposes of mandatory disqualification from
    Lord Hailsham of Saint Marylebone: My Lords,          Not-Contents, 65.                                                     On Question, amendment agreed to.                                   the national membership scheme.
 perhaps I may appeal to the noble Lord the Leader                                                                                                                                                     We had a brief discussion when my noble friend
 of the House on a point of order. The noble Lord,                                 div isio n NO. 2                             Lord Hesketh moved Amendment No. 13:
                                                                                                                                                                                                    moved this clause on Report as to whether the period
 Lord Harris, was quite rightly addressing the House                                                                            Page 4, line 46, at end insert (“and for notifying persons who
                                                                                    CONTENTS                                  are excluded from membership ofthe grounds for the exclusion;”).      of advance notice should be three days, as we first
 on his amendment in reply to the Minister. He was                                                                                                                                                  proposed, or five working days as the noble Lord,
 interrupted by the noble Lord, Lord Graham of            Addington, L.                       Longford, E.                      On Question, amendment agreed to.                                   Lord Graham, preferred. My noble friend offered
                                                          Airedale, L.                        Lovell-Davis, L.
 Edmonton, who then made a supplementary speech                                               Macaulay of Bragar, L.                                                                                five days in a generous spirit of compromise. It is of
 in the middle of the speech of the noble Lord, Lord      Attlee, E                                                             Lord Hesketh moved Amendment No. 14:
                                                          Blyth, L                            McIntosh of Haringey, L,                                                                              course a matter of balance. The defendant must be
 Harris, and the Minister then replied. Where are we      Broadbridge, L.                     McNair, L.                        Page 5, line 11, leave out from (“establishing”) to end of line     given sufficient notice to allow him to prepare his
 getting? Surely on a Friday afternoon we ought to        Bruce of Donington, L.              Mishcon, L.                     and insert (“procedures for the making and consideration of
                                                                                              Monson,  L.                     representations against").                                            case against a declaration of relevance being made,
 stick to the rules of order of the House.                Callaghan of Cardiff, L.
                                                                                              Northfield, L.                                                                                        if he so wishes. At the same time, we need to ensure
                                                               Cledwyn of Penrhos, L.
                                                                                              Ogmore, L.
                                                                                                                                On Question, amendment agreed to.                                   that there is no unreasonable delay in the
                                                               Cocks of Hartcliffe, L.
  The Lord Privy Seal (Lord Belstead): My Lords, I             Craigavon, V,                  O’Neill of the Maine, L.                                                                              administering o f justice.
think that we ought to stick to the rules o f order of         Dormand of Hasington, L.       Phillips, B                       Lord Hesketh moved Amendment No. 15:
                                                                                              Pitt of Hampstead, L.             Page 5, line 13, after ("it”) insert (‘ and for the independent        This amendment gives effect to the willingness
this House whether it is Friday or any other day.              Elwyn-Jones, L.
                                                               Ennals, L.                     Ponsonby of Shulbrede, L.       review of the decisions in the light of the representations;”).       that my noble friend expressed on Report to move
The noble Lord, Lord Harris, was making his final                                             Ritchie of Dundee, L.
                                                               Falkland, V. [Teller.]                                                                                                               to five days’ notice. TTiere was some discussion
reply on his own amendment. He has the right to do                                            Robson of Kiddington, B           On Question, amendment agreed to.
                                                               Fitt, L.                                                                                                                             during our debate on whether notice should be for
so and I suggest that the noble Lord, Lord Harris,             Foot, L.                       Russell, E.
                                                                                                                                                                                                    calendar days or working days. This amendment
now proceeds.                                                  Graham of Edmonton, L.         Seear, B.                         Lord Hesketh moved Amendment No. 16:
                                                                 [Teller.]                    Strabolgi, L.                                                                                         means that the defendant will have five calendar
                                                                                              Tordoff, L.                       Page 5, line 35, at end insert—                                     days’ notice where a declaration of relevance is to
    Lord Harris of Greenwich: My Lords, it is always           Grey, E.                                                           (**( ) Nothing in section 28( 1) and (2) of the Data Protection
                                                               Grimond, L.                    Turner of Camden, B.                                                                                  be sought. If we opted for “working days” it would
 a great pleasure to bring the noble and learned Lord,         Hampton, L.                    Wallace of Coslany, L             Act 1984 (which exempt personal data relating to crime from
                                                                                                                                                                                                    be appropriate to spell that out in the Bill. We have
• Lord Hailsham of Saint Marylebone, to his feet,              Harris of Greenwich, L.        Wigoder, L.                       the subject access provisions in certain cases) shall apply to
                                                                                              Williams of Elvel, L.             personal data held by the Football Membership Authority for         not done so because we think that five calendar days
 even at nearly two o’clock on a Friday afternoon. I           Hooson, L.                                                       the purposes of the national football membership scheme.”).         represents the best balance between fairness and
                                                               Howie of Troon, L.             Willis, L.
 am grateful to him for reminding the House that I                                            Winchilsea and Nottingham,                                                                            speed; In our original proposal that three days’ notice
 was endeavouring to reply to the debate.                      Jenkins of Hillhead, L.                                              On Question, amendment agreed to.
                                                               John-Mackie, L.                  E                                                                                                   should be given, our precedent was the Criminal
    However, I was also grateful to the noble Lord,            Kilmarnock, L.                 Winterbottom, L.                                                                                      Courts Act 1973. That precedent was in respect of
 Lord Hesketh, for intervening because he made the             Lawrence, L.                                                       Clause 7 [Disqualification for membership o f
                                                                                                                                                                                                    calendar days.
 point that the Government were not removing any                                                                                scheme]:
                                                                                     NOT-CONTENTS                                                                                                      Five days’ notice that a declaration of relevance
 rights from the individual on the ground because                                                                                                                                                   is to be sought is fair to the defendant and consistent
 clubs already have rights to cause people to be
                                                              Alexander of Tunis, E.         Elliot of Harwood, B.                  Earl Ferrers moved Amendment No. 17:
                                                              Arran, E.                      Elton, L.                            Page 6, line 24, leave out (“or of detention in a young           with the principle of swift justice which is so
 excluded from a ground. I dealt with that particular         Bauer, L.                      Erroll of Hale, L.                                                                                     important in the context of football hooliganism. I
                                                                                                                                offenders institution”).
 issue about two minutes before the noble Lord, Lord          Bellhaven and Stenton, L.      Faithfull, B.                                                                                          beg to move.
 Hesketh, got to his feet. The point had been made            Belstead, L.                   Ferrers, E.                          The noble Earl said: My Lords, in moving this
 by the noble Lord, Lord Knights. The answer to it            Bessborough, E.                Foley, L                           amendment, I shall speak also to Amendment No.
                                                              Birdwood, L.                   Greenway, L.                                                                                             Lord Graham of Edmonton: My Lords, the
 is that of course a club has the right to exclude            Blatch, B.                     Hailsham of Saint
                                                                                                                                18.                                                                 Minister is quite right that at earlier stages of the
 anybody. It can do it today, tomorrow or next week.          Caithness, E.                    Marylebone, L.                     These two small amendments remove                                 Bill this was a m atter of some concern, I believe that
 It can do so if it is a football club, a cricket club or     Camock, L.                     Harlech, L.                        unnecessary references to detention in a young                      he has gone some way with his ministerial colleagues
 if it is Wimbledon. There is no doubt about it.              Davidson, V. [Teller.]         Henley, L.                         offenders’ institution in Clauses 7(3)(a) and
                                                              Denham, L. [Teller.]           Hesketh, L.                                                                                            to take our point, However, perhaps he will deal
    The issue here is a totally different one. We are         Digby, L.                      Hives, L.                          14(l)(a).    The     relevant    definitions  of                    with the possibly tangential aspects of illness,
 introducing criminal penalties. Criminal penalties           Dilhorne, V.                   Home of the Hirsel, L.             “imprisonment” in Clauses 7(9)(a) and 12(9)                         convenience and such other circumstances. If there
 do not apply if someone tries to climb over a wall           Donegall, M.                   Ironside, L.                       respectively already include detention for young                    are problems o f a person being able to keep to the
                                                              Dundee, E,                    Joseph, L.                          offenders. I beg to move.
 to get into Wimbledon or the Canterbury ground of            Effingham, E.                  Killeam, L.                                                                                            five days, will there be a procedure whereby that
 the Kent Cricket Club. The situation here is quite           Elies, B.                        rights, L.                         On Question, amendme         reed to.                             appeal, request or excuse can be put forward?
                                                                                                                                1689          F ootball Spectators          [ 16 JUN    1989]                 B ill [H.l]              1690
 1687                 F o otba ll Spectators                 [ LORDS]                        B ill [h.l.]               1688

                                                                       today to delay the passage of the Bill. I genuinely do   2.15 p.m.                                                   On Question, Bill passed, and sent to the
    [ L o r d G r a h a m o f E d m o n t o n .]
                                                                       not believe that the Government understand what a           Lord Monson: My Lords, irrespective of its              Commons.
    I reiterate that the amendment is certainly better
                                                                       furore will be caused when the Bill reaches another      detailed content, this emerges from our deliberations
 than the Bill, but there might well be circumstances
 in which, even with five days’ notice, there would                    place. However, so far as concerns this House, it is     as a -wholly misconceived Bill. It is misconceived
                                                                      a good opportunity for me to say that this side of        because it tackles the symptom rather than the                    Wesleyan A ssm ace Society B9I
 be personal difficulties. I am not talking about
                                                                      the Chamber has always understood the need for             disease—and only one of the many symptoms at
anyone who procrastinates or tries to avoid                                                                                                                                                  Reported from the Unopposed Bill Committee
                                                                      legislation and the desire of the Government to take       that. The disease is the surplus aggression and
appearing. I am talking about genuine reasons why                    action. Our quibble is not with Part II of the Bill                                                                   with amendments.
it may be difficult.                                                                                                             violence of young males in this country. The
                                                                     which is long overdue—it is to the credit of the            phenomenon is endemic in Britain for a variety of
   The Earl of Arran: My Lords, with the leave of                    Government that they are now dealing with the               reasons, including the absence o f national service in
the House, the simple answer to the noble Lord’s                     matter—but with the concept and the totality of a           Britain compared with the situation that still prevails        Associated British Ports (Hull) Bill
question is that, if the person produces a medical                   national compulsory identity card scheme.                   on the Continent, the encouragement by the present
certificate in the event of illness, that is perfectly all              The Minister may dress up the scheme. He may             Government of the get-rich-quick property boom              Brought  from the Commons; read a first time, and
right.                                                               say that this is an enabling Bill, an outline or a          society, at least until October 1987, with the            referred to the Examiners.
                                                                     skeleton scheme. At the end of the day the House has        consequence that a substantial segment of young
   Lord Graham of Edmonton: My Lords, I am                           been asked to progress a Bill designed to introduce a       people felt excluded from the alleged benefits of that
grateful to the Minister for that answer about the                   compulsory identity card for those who wish to              society, our inadequate and probably under-funded                         Isle of Wight Bill
medical side of the matter. I shall not labour the                                                                               state education system, and the virtual breakdown
                                                                     attend a football match. We believe that to be a
point. There could be other circumstances that make                                                                              of discipline within that system, and a breakdown           Brought from the Commons; read a first time, and
                                                                     retrograde step. Having said that, I repeat my thanks
it impossible for the person to comply with that                                                                                 of family cohesion of which the highest divorce           referred to the Examiners.
                                                                     to the Minister and acknowledge the care and
requirement. I believe that the spirit of the Minister’s             diligence he has shown always in listening to what          figures in Europe, announced two days ago, are only
remarks is perfectly sensible and reasonable.                        this side of the House has said and often meeting           one aspect.
   On Question, amendment agreed to.                                 our points.                                                     It is in stark contrast with the situation prevailing  Tyne and Wear Passenger Transport Bill
                                                                                                                                  in France, for example, where family cohesion is still
  Clause     24      [Citation,                    commencement,        Lord Harris of Greenwich: My Lords, I agree with          strong. That is why, although French youth is very          Brought from he Commons; read a first time, and
consequential repeal and extent]:                                    everything that the noble Lord, Lord Graham, has             far from being docile, tame or uncomplaining, one referred to the Examiners.
                                                                     said. I add my thanks to the noble Earl, Lord Ferrers,       will not find lager louts or football hooligans in that
  Lord Hesketh moved Amendment No. 20:                                for the useful discussions that we have had with            country.
  Page 20, line 11, leave out subsection (2) and insert—             representatives of the Association o f Chief Police             By this legislation the Government are inserting
                                                                                                                                                                                            Police Officers (Central Service) Bill [h.l.]
  (“(2) The provisions of this Act (other than this section) shall   Officers. I hope very much that the matters raised
not come into operation until such day as the Secretary of State                                                                  their finger into one hole in the dyke while there
may appoint by order made by statutory instrument.                   in those discussions will be carried forward and that        remain 100 other holes through which the tide of            Returned from the Commons agreed to.
  (2A) Different days may be appointed under subsection (2)          a number of them will be included in the final Bill.         young male aggression can potentially surge. Even if
above for different provisons of this Act.                              During the debate on the gracious Speech I                this legislation succeeds without bankrupting many
  (2B) The statutory instrument containing the first order under     described this measure as a “ silly little Bill” .           of the smaller clubs, or producing the grievous                 Tees (Newport) Bridge Bill [h .l.]
subsection (2) above shall be subject to annulment in pursuance      Following the detailed consideration that we have            problems about which many other noble Lords have
of a resolution of either House of Parliament.’*)                                                                                                                                             Returned from the Commons agreed to.
                                                                     been able to give to it I should like to make a              warned us, it will merely transfer the violence from
  On Question, amendment agreed to.                                  substitution to the first of those adjectives. It is a       the football grounds to other sporting events, to the
                                                                     nasty little Bill. Most of us on these Benches and           pubs, the streets and the shopping centres. I hope                      House adjourned at seventeen minutes
  An amendment (privilege) made.
                                                                     quite a large number on the Benches opposite who             that the House of Commons will give the Bill the                   past two o’clock.
  Lord Hesketh: My Lords, I beg to move that the                     have today given the Government majorities of 12             drubbing that it deserves.
Bill do now pass.                                                    and 13—revealing a certain lack of enthusiasm there
                                                                     for the contents of the Bill—as well as many other             Lord Hesketh: My Lords, I do not intend to                            Written Answers
  Moved, That the Bill do now pass.—{Lord
Hesketh).                                                            noble Lords recognise that the Bill is irrelevant to        rehearse once more the reasons why this Bill is
                                                                     its stated purpose. AT best it will have only a limited     necessary. Football hooliganism remains a major                            DEER WITH TB:
                                                                     effect within the grounds. It is the view of many           problem both at home and overseas. The Bill                        COMPULSORY SLAUGHTER
  Lord Graham of Edmonton: My Lords, this is the
last opportunity for those who have followed the                     senior      police     officers      with    operational    provides further powerful measures to deal with the
                                                                     responsibilities for policing football grounds that it      problem on both these fronts.                               Lord Burton asked Her Majesty’s Government:
matter closely to say a few words. Very often those
words are to wish the Bill well and to express the                   will lead to a deterioration in behaviour in the streets       I     should like to reassure your Lordships once more     If they will introduce a compulsory slaughter
hope that it has a successful passage through another                outside. It may thus lead to more rather than less          today, as I did earlier, that we shall not approve and      scheme for deer suffering from tuberculosis.
place. I am sure that the Minister will understand                   violence.                                                   implement the scheme until we are satisfied that it
that in view of the debate I am not in a position to                    I find it extremely hard to believe that many            will work effectively and efficiently. I do not wish        The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State,
say that.                                                            Ministers in the Government dissent from that view.         to make a long speech at this stage of our proceedings Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food
   First of all, however, I want to pay tribute to the               That is why the Bill has been left to the care of a         today. However, before I finish my remarks, I should (Baroness Trumpington): Only a few herds are
noble Lord, Lord Hesketh, who has certainly dealt                    junior Minister in the Department o f the                   like first to thank my noble friends the Earl of believed to be infected with tuberculosis. But, in the
with the Bill much more comprehensively towards                      Environment. Its real author is the Prime Minister.         Caithness, Lord Ferrers and Lord Arran for their interests of preventing its becoming established, the
the end of our discussions than at the beginning. Let                Throughout she has handled colleagues who doubt             help in taking the Bill through your Lordships’ Government have decided to introduce a
me hasten to say to the noble Lord the Leader of                     the wisdom of this measure with the same degree of          House. On the Benches opposite I should like to compulsory slaughter scheme where this is necessary
the House who is in his place that that is not a                     sensitivity as she has applied to her relationship with     extend my particular thanks to the noble Lord, Lord to control disease in deer kept in farms or parks.
back-handed compliment. I appreciate the fact that                   the Chancellor o f the Exchequer. The Bill is therefore     Graham, and the noble Lord, Lord Harris, for the Compensation will be paid at 50 per cent, of the
at all times the Minister has sought to understand                   a suitable memorial to the Prime Minister.                  major contributions that they have made in all stages value of the slaughtered animal, subject to a ceiling.
the intentions behind many of the observations from                     The Bill is both silly and irrelevant. It will damage    of the Bill as it has gone through your Lordships’ The necessary order under the Animal Health Act
                                                                                                                                 House. I should also like to thank the many noble         1981 will be introduced as soon as possible. This
these Benches. On most occasions he has been                         many small football clubs, some of which may be
successful. On one or two occasions he has not been                  driven out of business. It also represents a                 Lords from all sides of the House who have taken measure, together with the steps already announced
quite so successful.                                                  fundamental attack on people’s civil liberties and          part in our debates. At a personal level, I can say to make tuberculosis in deer a notifiable disease
                                                                     the civil liberties of hundreds of thousands of              that there could not have been a more educational and to introduce movement controls and marking
   We on these Benches are very sad and sorry that                                                                                Bill to deal with as c      first Bill. I beg to move.  requirements, represent a major initiative by the
the Government resisted the opportunity earlier                      law-abiding footba         'porters.
                                   Wr»t|£|, II *m §S,      ?.C
1,!, ir*«lw .CJJwwwwMv. a. i*w *
                                            ;» g . M e. ® I 884
 e « p « tf
                  of Sheffield
; v i i ' j f v /i o i i c ! I i c i u
                                M etropolitan District
                                                                                                x®

  Roger Pensam. Ecis^MsiM. solicitor                                                        A dministration and Lagan Department
  Head of Department
                                                                                             Town Hall,
                                                                                             Sheffield $1 2HH

 Our reference                      GP/DVM
 Your reference
 0ate                               17th August,                      1989




    TO THE MEMBERS OF THE GENERAL PURPOSES
    PANEL (MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL
    SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE)




    Dear Councillor,

    Meeting to be held on Thursday,                                                   17th August,                      1989

^Itfith reference to the agenda for the above meeting, I enclose
( 3 * letter from the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
    regarding the Safety Certificate issued in respect of the
    Hillsborough Football Ground.

    The letter will be considered in conjunction with the
    papers already distributed for the meeting.

  1Y o u r s f& i t h ^ n l 1




    Acting Head ^£?Eepartment




    Enclosure



     Tn                                                                                    734014 - Mr. D. V. McDermott
    ou                     For telephone enquiries on this matter please ring......................................(STD Code 0742)
                                                     Telex 54243 (Administration & Legal)
      Sheffield Wednesday
              . Football Club pic                                                                               ( j n ]l j CHIc? SXsCUTlVfc i              I
                                                                                                                                    S hEFBEf.0    jc.P .O .f
      Our R e f :         GHM/JB/D34

      1 6 th A ugust 1989                                                                                   —
                                                                                                                    r*s
                                                                                                                        —
                                                                                                                                 16AUG1989II PUB
      M r. I . L . P o d m o r e ,
                                                                                                           I.
                                                                                                           ,                — J fi.E.U. i P.E.C.U.j £).. /
      C h ief E x e c u tiv e ,                                                                            I        ^        I          i         \ H /■)
      C ity o f S h e ffie ld ,
      Town H a l l ,
      S h effield .
      S I 2HH



      Dear Sir,

b     Re:       S afety C e r tific a te                  - H illsb o ro u g h

      I am i n        r e c e ip t o f your l e t t e r                d ated 11th A ugust 1989.

      W ith r e g a r d t o t h e            item s         i n A pp en dix 2 w h ere a r e s p o n s e h a s b e e n r e q u e s t e d :

      No.     3)     A c o p y o f a r e p o r t f r o m Mayor T u r n s t i l e s i s e n c l o s e d .     A rep la cem en t
                     f o r T u r n s t i l e 5 0 w h ic h i s s i t u a t e d a t P e n i s t o n e Road i s o n o r d e r .

      No.     4)      A copy o f th e                     Agreem ent i s           en clo sed .

      No.     7)      A copy o f th e n e c e ssa r y l e t t e r                       from D r. E astw ood i s            en clo sed .

      No.     8)      A m en d m en ts t o       t h e s i g n p o s t i n g o f th e ground and  th e  p r in tin g o fth e
                     t i c k e t s have b een u n d erta k en t o th e s a t i s f a c t i o n o f th e South
                     Y o r k s h ir e p o l i c e and F i r e S e r v i c e .

      I w o u ld p o i n t o u t t h e amended ground c a p a c i t y f i g u r e s a r e , i n f a c t , i n c o r r e c t .
;o    The a r e a o f t h e Lower N o r th W e st T e r r a c e i s i n f a c t P en 6 , p a r t o f t h e W e s t
      T e r r a c e w h ic h i s e x c l u d e d from u s e (A p p en d ix 2 N o. 1 0 ) T he c a p a c i t y f o r t h e
      N orth W est T errace s h o u ld t h e r e f o r e be 2 , 3 0 0 . _                                    ^       ^
                                                                                               «(
      F i n a l l y , I w o u l d r e f e r t o t h e p e n u l t i m a t e p a r a g r a p h o f my l e t t e r d a t e d 2 8 t h J u l y
      1989 t o yo u r A d m in is t r a t io n and L e g a l D ep artm en t.                 L a s t w e e k -' t h e W o r k i n g P a r t y
      ap p roved th e P o l i c e r e q u e s t t h a t a c c e s s t o th e N orth Stand s h o u ld be v i a
      P e n i s t o n e Road u s i n g t u r n s t i l e s 7 7 - 8 8 .    Our c o n c e r n o v e r t h i s p o l i c y w a s
      c o n firm ed in th e f i n d i n g s o f th e I n te r im R ep o rt (P ara 2 9 0 ) .                     I w ou ld t h e r e f o r e
      c o n f i r m my r e q u e s t f o r a w r i t t e n r u l i n g - o n t h i s m a t t e r p r i o r t o S a t u r d a y ' s m a t c h
       — —                                                                                   — — ■ —
     Y o u r s - -f a f e f e f o M y f y__________                                         "T £ O




     TT7H. K a c k r e H '
         c r e L ai y          -
     Hillsborough. Sheffield          S6 1SW.     Telephone: (0742) 343122
      Telegrams: Wednesday Sheffield 6. Telex No.547709 W EDNES
      rax   No. 0 7 4 2 3 3 7 1 4 5    Registered in       England     No. 6 2 4 73
                                                                                                       V        '

      Cnairman H E. McGee. Secretary G.H. Macwell. F.C.C.A Manager R. Atkinson
      Directors: M Sneppara.   J.P., F.C.A   <Vice-Cnairman).   S.L. Speight. O.B.E.,
      C Woodward. K.T. Adav. E. Barron. G.K     Huliey.
                E A S T W O O D & PARTNERS                                                                                                                             S t.    A n d re w *      House
                                                                                                                                                                       23      K in g fle ld       Rood
                                (Consulting Engineers)
                                                                                                                                                                       S h e ffie ld         S11      9A6
                Director*                                                                                        ADMINISTRATION & LEGAL                                T el.: ( 0 ? 4 2 ) 5 5 4 5 S 4
                W . ta s tw o o d                            ■>e r g ., a h.Q     O cn q..                           DEPT. SHEFFIELD
                                                                                                                          HEAD OF           ASSISTANT                  F a x : (0 7 4 2 ) 5 5 4 3 3 0
Mi'*'-;V -                                                                                                                 DEPT               HEAD           L.S
                A A W c o fi

                B € . A F«5!■■■•,'mrf
                                                                                                                           1 8. AUG 89                        PAA

                (i ,Sjuf                                                                                             OSM,
                                                                                                                                                                         Premier               lioiiis
                                                                                                                                                                          17/13 H4ttAn Garden
                0         tir» !n v r»
                                                                                                                                                                         London          EC1N         SAN
                S .'- P r c s u m                                                                                                                                        Tel - (01 > 242 7438
                G .M . S ea m a n                                          0. C     r I                                                                                  Fa*.: (O f> 404 6424
                D . S .



                                                                                                                                    fcei                         WE/AV/1123S

                                                                                                                                     P*-
                                                                                                                                                                 17 .August                  1-1)89

              Mr. D . How: * -
              A d m i n i s t r a t i oi               and       Legal D e p a r t m e n t ,




                                         R-.

                                                               c'!-' f f               in      I1;-         d F o ot ba ll                 Club
                                                                                                            ov     fnt.e r;rn H e p o r
                                    At          t he    request                 of        the P o l i c e ,               a meeting with Club                                       r e p r e s e n t a t iv.j
               warf h e l d              this          afternoon                   to d i s c u s s              a radial b a r r i e r                               a nd    the        three            radial.
              ■fences,              amongst                other            things.                        The m e e t i n g w as                     attended                  by       a                            o
               r e p r e s e n t a t ive                o f t he            F i re            Service            and        tw o           representatives                           of       the
               Sheffield                   Citv         Council                 Building                   Surveyors Department,                                         in a d d i t i o n               to Mr]
               0.         D o ol e v ;in.cl M r . D.                    Capper, representing; the Club,                                                                I was          present                at    -4
               t h e -later pert                        of     rhe d i s c u s s i o n s                      following                     the m e e t i n g                  of     the G e n e r a l
             •: P u r p o s f ' N        Panel          at     the          Town              Hall         e a r lie r         in the             afternoon.                                                      '

                                     The         Pol.i.co r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s                          expressed                   disquiet                    abou t          the e f f e c t . ^
              :oi         the     fences               and     the b a r r i e r                      or    crowd movement                            in the                  event          of an
               cm o rgrei                                    ^nested                   tha             hey b e            removed.
                                     Dealing               with          the           Kop end               first,            there           is a c o n t i n u o u s                        radial             ' t
               fence             Irorr: top             to b o t t o m                 of       the        K op w h i c h             was      erected                   in      1980,                  It h a a ;
                       o,t-* st                the     horizontal                      gangway              approximately                         half                  way down                the Kop.
                            fence              is s i t u a t e d           some              distance             to        the           south           of            the goal,                   line
                dividing                  the        Kop     roughly                      two-thirds               a n d on e               t hird.
                                     When            the     crowd                is         leaving- t h e g r o u n d                      at       the               e n d of         a         game,          it is
                noticeable-                     that       this          radial                 fence         causes                a considerable                               obstruction                      to
                those            people              t rv ing         to          leav e          at       the     J o hn           Street/So                     reham Street                       c or n e r ,
                and         in      p:tr r .'icu lar           creates                       a bor 1 1 e n e c k             at        the      top of                  the      Kop.



                    J. A S t r a n g e           A . J. C lo u g h                     R .T a n d y              J.IVS. W o o d                  C .M . P o lla rd                   R .K .G o d d e n
                                                                                                                 6 cvc.                          6 e';i;     C         M IC          t- S C.A. (AcC0v.i^W,', t
                                                                                                                 M; v                             M     ' * f i'T c                  & Atfrr.fnistrflfion
 The s i tuation would, o b v i o u s l y be w orse                      in an emergency.           The Police!
 feel      strongly that               the fende should be taken out as they beli e v e                         the
 original         purpose of trying to segregate fans at that end of the ground                                           ’
 no     longer applies.                   The v iew was sup p o r t e d by the Fire Service and                       I
 be 1.1evtr i'i:a.t. the 8 uilding Surveyors D epartment                          r<3presen tat ives a 1 s o
 thought       that       on balance               it should be taken out.              I am also in favour
 of                              f.-nro ,

               A burner             at    the Kop end of the ground consists of a single
rail       running, between                the tops of the s u ccessive              lines of crush b a r r i e r s
 from the         horizontal             gangway to the p e r i m e t e r       fence.         It   is offset
slightly          to    the north of the centre                     line of the pitch          and w ould clearly         ■
be an obsta cle                to people and spec t a t o r s trying to move                    away    in the event*
01      an e m erg ency or crowd trouble                     in the a r e a     immedi a t e l y behind the goal.
It      was felt       that      it has very            little purpose as            there has been no history
of      horizontal             crowd surges          in the K o p     in recent      years,    mainly      I believe
because ot             the very beneficial                 effects of the very good array                  of
c o ntinuous           horizontal           lines of crush barriers.                  T here    is also a very
short       length        of    single rail barr i e r             running down       from     the horizontal
K a-ngway , a 1most             immediatelv b e h i n d the goal.
               Turning now to the Bramall                         Lane    terrace,    there are two fences
which       run    1 rorn the         columns         supp o r t i n g the front of the new stand down
to tne peri.meter ience.                             One of these        is located at t.h« northernmost
       ' um!:1 an,J the        other one            is three bays along from the north end.                       To
complete          the picture,              there used to be a third fence at the south end
of      the Brarnaj.j. Lane stand but: this was                       removed     some years        ago.        It may
be      that       that        third      fence       j.s still   shown on the drawings whi oh
accompanied            the very           first       a pplication       for a Safety    Certificate,           but
•i f    sri-      ! r-r ,;vr    ;.,j ^ .st-n f .

               These      remaining                two fences at the Bramall           Lane end are also
considered           by   the Police               to present     a       ,.ntial hazard        In emergency,
and have n eg ligible effect                          in preventing        lateral    crowd surges.
               The Club          has a c c e p t e d the advice put            forward by the Police,
with my concurrence,                     and has asked :-e to write               formally       requesting
pe rmission          to remove           the       three fences and the two barriers.
               Ihe 1'olice view is that                    having e s t a b l i s h e d that     there     is
possioiy a s afety hazard aris i n g from the p r e sence                                      these   fences and
           EASTWOOD 5> PARTNERS                                                                                             SHEET     3.

f
                                                                                                                                                  i   "

                                                                                                                                                  t
      barrier,                 it    is d e s i r a b l e        that    they      s h o u l d be r e m o v e d        at    an     early    date.
       J. t h i n x. th at               in t he     post-Taylor r e p o r t c l i m a t e t h a t                   is a proper
      a t r.i x u a e .              Th e re wi 1 1. be           no    f i rst    team      f ixtures         between        S at urday",
      IT) A ugust               and Saturday,                9 September             1989.        That       gives      a convenient
      t w o       weeks         window          in w h i c h      t he w o r k     could he         carried          out.           I believe
       that. we           could           make      t he    necessary         arrangements              on     behalf        of     the Club
      I or        the    work            to    t\e d o n e p r o v i d e d    t h at    the C i t y       Council           can     give
      nuth-rity                 h v I-riday,           2 b August.
                          It        is, r e a l i s e d ,    of    course,         that it may not be p o s s i b l e                      for
      the         G en e r a j       Purposes Committee                    to c o n s i d e r     the     matter        at    such      short
      notice.                   In       that     case      there w ill           be a f u r t h e r      ga p    of    rather        more
      than          two w e e k s             between       a home m a tc h          on T u e s d a y ,      26 S e p t e m b e r ,    and
j^)   '-lie n e xt             home       league       match       on    Saturday,           14 O c t o b e r .
                          I am a r r a n g i n g            for    six    copies        o ff    each      of     a plan       of     t he K o p
      and         a plan            oi    the B r a m a l l       Lane    terrace           to be    c o l o u r e d up       and
      ft..-rwarded to v o u                     by t o m o r r o w ' s    post .            There    was       not     sufficient           time
      It' h a v e         these           printed          and    coloured         this      evening.




                                                                                               Yours      Sincerely,




                                                                                                                                                          rI



      r*      :
                        1. >


      Sheffield Lnited Football Club                                      - Mr,        D.   Capper
      ■'.'.'.■IIe u t Un i t e d Football Club                            - Mr.        D.   Dooley
       0 u t T: Y •:r k i-.h : >1e F r.1 ice




                                                                                                                                                 p .CVi
                                                                                             CC
                            “The Family Club"                                                       ry\J
  Bramall Lane, Sheffield S2 4SU Tel: 0742 738955 Fax: 0742 723030



  DC/DMF
                                                                          !§ , i ml| I
                                                                           •'Wi&SS&SSfefil
                                                                                                                 CJM>.
                                                                                        “t L *
  16 August 1989
                                                                           ~ g T J             1 8 M JG B Sf

                                                                                                         —   —

  Mr. I. L. Podmore,                                                                         I k H.y.i
  Chief Executive,                                                            m,
  City of Sheffield Metropolitan District,
  Town Ha l 1,
  Sheffield,
  SI 2HH


  Dear Sir,

  Re: Safety of Sports Grounds - Hillsborough Inquiry

   I acknowledge receipt of the Interim Safety Certificate issued to
   Sheffield United Football Club on 12 August, 1989.

  In accordance with Schedule 2 of the Certificate, I set out below
  the information required to be submitted to the council by 16
  Augus t .

  Paragraph 23

  Each turnstile has been inspected by Mayor Turnstiles Ltd and
  its potential flow rate measured.

   In accordance with recommendation 19 of the Taylor Report into
   the Hillsborough Disaster, I can confirm that the correlation
   between the viewing areas in the Spion Kop (Southern End), New
   South Stand, John Street Stand and Terraces, and the turnstiles
   serving these areas is such that all the spectators intended
   to be admitted to those areas can pass through within one hour.
   In the Bramall Lane Stand and Terrace areas and the Spion Kop
   (Main Area) servicing is necessary to some turnstiles, before
   this criteria can be met.

  We hope to complete this work prior to the first game of the
  season on 22nd August but if this it not possible, we will reduce
  the capcity in these areas accordingly and inform you prior
  to the game  taking place.




R.J. Brealey (Chairman), D. Dooley (Managing Director), A.H. Laver, M.A. Wragg, R. Wragg, P.G. Woolhouse
 Company Secretary : D. Capper,        Team Manager : D.T. Bassett,      England Reg. No. 61S64
Paragraph 24

I enclose herewith a copy of the written agreement w i t h the
Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire Police setting out the
respective responsibilities of the Club and the Police for
Crowd Safety Control.

Paragraph 27 (a) (b) (c)

I enclose herewith a copy of a letter received from Eastwood
8 Partners who have carried out the inspection and review pursuant
to conditions 27 (a) and (b) of the Safety Certificate.

Paragraph 28

We have reviewed our signposting both inside and outside the ground
and consider them to be adequate.  Various signs have been
renewed and emergency exit signs are being erected at all perimeter
fence gates.

We believe that information currently printed on our match *
tickets complies with the requirements of the Taylor Report.

I hope that the above information is to your satisfaction and if
I can be of any further assistance, please do not hesitate to
contact me.

Yours faithfully.




D W I D CAPPER,
Company Secretary
     AGREEMENT BETWEEN

SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB

          AND THE

   SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
This document is a written agreement between South Yorkshire Police (hereafter

referred to as 'The Police') and Sheffield United Football Club (hereafter

referred to as 'The Club').




This agreement signed on behalf of both parties is created in pursuance of

recommendation four of the Interim Report of the Inquiry held by The Rt Hon

Lord Justice Taylor into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster of 15 April 1989.




The agreement between The Police and The Club is as follows




Maximum Capacities for Terraces

The Club will be responsible for limiting the number of spectators entering

each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity figure assessed in

accordance with recommendation two of the Interim R e p o r t .




The Club will do this by means of the computerised system which records the

number of persons passing through each turnstile.       The Spion Kop is divided

into two pens.   One pen is entered via turnstiles in John Street, the other by

turnstiles in Shoreham Street.     The Club will provide stewards to prevent a

cross flow of spectators from one pen to the other.




The Club will inform the police control room when a particular pen or area is

approaching capacity.    The Club will be responsible for closing off further

access to a pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.          The

Police accept The Club may on occasions have difficulties in this regard,

therefore, The Police will provide assistance if necessary.




The Police accept that denial of access to any part of the ground may create

public order problems in respect of spectators so excluded and The Police will

prepare contingency plans to deal with such situations.
Filling and Monitoring Terraces

The Club will provide on the perimeter track a steward for each pen or

terraced area during such times that there are spectators in that pen or

terraced area.    The sole duty of these stewards, who will be in addition to

any other stewards employed by The Club, will be to check crowd conditions in

the pen or terraced area to which they are assigned for possible overcrowding

or distress.     The Club will provide The Police with a plan of the ground

showing where the stewards with this responsibility will be situated.




The Police will provide in respect of each gate in the perimeter fence (or

group of gates if they are close together) police officers authorised to

decide whether or not to allow spectators through a gate to relieve

overcrowding.




All police officers deployed at perimeter gates which will be kept fully open

at all times when spectators are on the terraces, will be authorised as above.

Each will be in possession of a police radio in direct contact with police

ground control and will be identifiable by a distinctive coloured tabard.




The stewards checking the crowd for overcrowding or distress will not be

issued with police radios but the police officers on the gates and perimeter

track will communicate to police ground control any relevant matter brought to

their attention by these stewards.




Cutting Equipment

The Club will provide and make readily available suitable and sufficient

cutting equipment to permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release

numbers of spectators if necessary.     This cutting equipment will be operated

by employees of The Club who will be trained in its use.     The use of such

equipment will be at the discretion of the nominated senior police officer who

will be the officer in charge of policing the event.
Liaison

Before each match both parties to this agreement will liaise in respect of the

foLlowing matters:-

     i)   the anticipated number of spectators expected having regard

          to the separate supporter groups;




    ii)   the method of crowd segregation (if any) intended to be used;




   iii)   any information in relation to crowd problems;




    iv)   the number and location of turnstiles to be made available

          to each group;




     v)   an estimation of the time it will take each group to pass

          through the turnstiles;




    vi)   where tickets are used, that the information on those tickets

          corresponds with the planned arrangements for admitting

          spectators to the ground.




Postponement of kick-off is at the discretion of the police officer in command

at the ground.   It is therefore essential The Club provide a telephone link

between the referee's room and the police control room.




The Police have prepared contingency plans for the event of emergency services

being called to the ground.   These include routes of access, rendezvous

points, accessibility within the ground and routes of egress.   The Police will

liaise with The Club concerning these arrangements whenever these plans are

amended or as otherwise appropriate.
The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police has nominated his Deputy,

Mr Peter Hayes QPM LLB MA, as the Chief Officer with responsibility for

liaison with the management of each football club and local authority

concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.




Any variation of this agreement in respect of a particular match will be

agreed by the parties in advance in writing.




SIGNED ..                        on behalf of Sheffield United Football Club




SIGNED .                         Dn behalf of South Yorkshire Police




DATE
E A S T W O O D & PARTNERS                                                                                                        S t.      A n d rew s       House
                                                                                                                                  23        K in g fie ld     Road
               (C o n s u ltin g Engineers)
                                                                                                                                  S h e ffie ld        S11      9 AS
Directors :
                                                                                                                                  T e l.:     (0 7 4 2 )    554554
W . E a s tw o o d               F.Eng., B.Eng., Ph.D., D.Eng.,
                                 C.Eng., F.I.C.E.. P.P.I.Struct.E,,
                                                                                                                                  Fax:        (0 7 4 2 )    554330
                                 F.l.M ech.E., F.G.S., M.Cons.E.

A. A. W ood                      B.Eng., Ph.D.. C.Eng;. F.I.C.E.,
                                 F.!.Struct.E., M .I.W .E .M .. M.Cons.E.                                                                                      ana at :
R.C. A . E a s tw o o d          B.Sc.,. C.Eng., M .I.C .E ., F.1.Struct. E.

G .Spir                          C.Eng., F.I.C.E.. M.I.M ech.E .
                                                                                                                                     Premier       House
                                                                                                                                     1 2 /13 Hatton Garden
C .S .G re a v e s               B.Eng., C.Eng.. M .I.C .E .. M.I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                                                     London EC1N SAN
S. P res to n                    3 . Eng., C.Eng., M .I.C .E ., M.I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                                                     Tel.: (01) 2 4 2 7 4 3 6
G .M . S e a m a n               B.Sc.. C.Eng., M .I.C .E ., F.I.Struct.E.                                                           Fax.: (01) 4 0 4 5 4 2 4
D .S. S te p h e n s             C.Eng., F.I.C.E., F.I.Struct.E., F.B.I.M.


                                                                                                Our R e f :                 WE/KB/11238
                                                                                                Your R e f:




 The Secretary,                                                                                                               15 August 1989
 Sheffield United Football Club,
 Bramall Lane,
 Sheffield S2 4SU.



 Dear Mr. Capper,
                                 Hillsborough Inquiry - Interim Recommendations
               Thank you for faxing me extracts from the letter you have
 received from Sheffield City Council regarding the Interim
 Safety Certificate.
               I am pleased to report to you regarding the conditions
 (a) and (b) in Scheduled, paragraph 27 as follows


 (a)           A visual inspection was carried out by Mr. John Strange,
               C.Eng., F .I .Struct.E., of this firm covering all crush
               barriers in the ground.                                          The inspection was completed on
               Tuesday, 8 August.                                     Some rusting has, of course, occurred
               on many of the barriers though the condition tends to
               be better at Bramall Lane than at some other grounds
               because most of the barriers are under cover.                                                                      None of the
               barriers is sufficiently affected by rust for it to be
               necessary to carry out emergency strengthening or replacement
               by 16 August, 1989.




 Associates:

 J. A. Strange              A . J. Clough                      R. T a n d y            J .M .W o o d              C. M . Pollard                 R. K. Godden
 C.Eng., F. I. Struct. E.   B.A.. C.Eng., M.C.I.B.S.E..        C.Eng., F.I.Struct.E.   B.Sc., C.Eng., M.I.C.E..   B.Eng., C.Eng., M.I.C.E.,      F.S.C.A. (Accountant
                            M .I.Mech.E.                                               M.I.Struct.E.              M.I.Struct.E.                  & Ad ministra tion
                                                                                                                                                 M anage r)

                                             A n U n lim ite d C o m p a n y . R egiste red in E ng la nd - No. 1 8 3 314 4
EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                                     SHEET    2 .




  (b)   A survey of the barriers has revealed that in a few
        places they do not comply fully with the criteria in
        chapter 9 of the Green Guide.   Drawings are now being
        prepared showing the extra barriers which will be
        required so that tenders can be invited.   As part of
        the same contract any barriers which have incipient
        corrosion or other minor defects will be suitably
        repaired or strengthened.

        As soon as the scheme drawings and specification are
        complete we shall, of course, be submitting them on
        your behalf to the Sheffield City Council as licensing
        authority for their approval.


                           Yours sincerely,
                                                         g^EFF (j|^ f"ev\T*wwwm




                            UnitedFCi                                                                           .«

                           Bramall Lane, Sheffield $2 4SU Telephone: (0748) 7389SS
                                                                                                           Fax: 0742 723030




                                                                             ' . ' i Mi > i.

                                          f    [ H<t >   (;Xt !<■< i i yr-

             TO;       U        Ho^t ( Clf/ o f                                )                              FAX NO :         ]^0(A


             FRCM;                            " 51-HffitL/}        v m i TLO         ft,


             EWTE:                                                                                                     TIME:    I If l o p n



BC.'r■       Nu. OF F.V,KJj ;        IU
lit':



             MESSACK:


                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                               M




t




         ctdri: R.J.Brml«y (Chairman), D, D ooley (M«n*gi*ig Director), 'A JL ltvar, M.A. Wttnyg, R. Wr»gg, £.& -;W oe^
         flttttutiHibVv'   3*cr«t*ry: GrtMMlh,       . Team M*n*g*r : D.T. B tiittl,      England •■»•$. No. 6 1 B M |g - *'®H

                                                                                   -nmh'fay: .'.'j.'*..-^- -f" ’'-i'
                ■ ...   1   1   "'Wf'   ..... 1 '.......         ■»(lVirJ*iTi,    ...          'T,
           8* 0742738933        SHEFF UTD FC                                     16/00   ’09    16!2




          Sheffields
               tield i
          unite\dFCk£
                                                                                            </>




                            'The Family dub”
Bramall Lane, Sheffield S2 4SU Tel: 0742 73898S Fax: 0742 723030


DC/EMF
                                                                        C.P.U.         CHIEF EXECUTIVE I " ""'f
                                                                                     ' * SHEFFIELD     | C '^..0. |
                                                                            M.T, '
15 August 1989
                                                                            O         1 7 AUG TO ? j           .
                                                                         S7RAT
M r . I . L , P odmorB,                                                              k.E.IJ.
chief Executive,                                                             U.P.                                     /H   iAi
City of Sheffield Metropolitan District,
Town Hall,
Sheffield,
SI 2HH



Dear S i r ,

Re: Safety of Sports Grounds - Hillsborough Inquiry

I acknowledge receipt of the interim Safety Certificate issued to
Sheffield United Football Club on 12 August, 1989.

In accordance with Schedule 2 of the Certificate, I set out below
the information required to be submitted to the council by 16
Aug us t ,

Paragraph 23

Each turnstile has been inspected by Mayor Turnstiles Ltd and
its potential flow rate measured.

In accordance with recornnendation 19 of the Taylor Report into
the Hillsborough Disaster, I can confirm that the correlation
between the viewing areas in the Spion Kop (Southern End), New
South Stand, John Street Stand and Terraces, and the turnstiles
serving these areas is such that all the spectators intended
to be admitted to those areas can pass through within one hour.
In the Bramall Lane Stand and Terrace areas and the Spion Kop
(Main Area) servicing is necessary to some turnstiles, before
this criteria can bo met.

We hope to complete this work prior to the first game of the
season on 22nd August but if this it not possible, we will reduce
the capcity in these areas accordingly and inform you prior
to the game taking place.




       (Chairman), D. D ooley (Managing Diract or), A.H. Lavar, M .A.W rtgg. R. Wragg, P.<3. Wc
                  D. Capp«r,      T**m M anager: D.T. Ba**att,       England Rag. No. 61064
I enclose herewith a copy of the written agreement with the
Chief Constable of Iha South Yorkshire Police setting out the
respective responsibilities of the Club and the Police fur
Crowd Safety Control.

Paragraph 27 (a) (b) (e )_

I enclose horewith a copy of a letter received from Eastwood
6 Partners who have carried out the inspection and ruview pursuant
to conditions 27 (a) and (b) of the Safety Certificate.
Par a gi aph 26

We have reviewed our signposting both inside and outside tho ground
and consider them to he adequate. Various signs have boon
renewed and emergency exit signs are being erected at all perimeter
fonce gates.

We believe that Information currently printed on our match
tickets complies with tho requirements of the Taylor Report.

I hope that the above information Is to your satisfaction and if
I can be of any further assistance, please do not hesitate to
contact me.

Yours faithfully.____



m V I D CAPPER,
Company Secretary
8   0742738955    SHE F F   UTD   FC        16/08   ’ 89   16




            .?




                  AGREEMENT BETWEEN

           SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB

                            AND THE

                 SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
This document la a written agreement between South Yorkshire Police (hereafter

referred to as 'The Police') and Sheffield United Football Club (hereafter

referred to as 'The Club').




This agreement signed on behalf of both parties is created in pursuance of

recommendation four of the Interim Report of the Inquiry held by The Rt Hon

Lord Justice Taylor into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster of 15 April 1989,




The agreement between The Police and The Club is as follows




Maximum Capacities for Terraces

The Club will be responsible for limiting the number of spectators entering

each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity figure assessed in

accordance with recommendation two of the Interim Report.




The Club will do this by means of the computerised system which records the

number of persons passing through each turnstile.     The Spion Kop is divided

into two pens.   One pen is entered via turnstiles in John Street, the other by

turnstiles in Shoreham Street.    The Club will provide stewards to prevent a

cross flow of spectators from one pen to the other.




The Club will inform the police control room when a particular pen or area is

approaching capacity,   the Club will be responsible for closing off further

access to a pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.        The

Police accept The Club may on occasions have difficulties in this regard,

therefore, The Police will provide assistance if necessary.




The Police accept that denial of access to any part of the ground may create

public order problems in respect of spectators so excluded and The Police will

prepare contingency plans to deal with such situations.
*’ ‘g alling and Monitoring Terraces

  The Club will provide on the perimeter track a steward for each pen or

  terraced area during such times that there are spectators in that pen or

  terraced area.         The sole duty of these stewards, who will be in addition to

  any other stewards employed by The Club, will be to check crowd conditions in

  the pen or terraced area to which they are assigned for possible overcrowding

  or distress.      The Club will provide The Police with a plan of the ground

  showing where the atewards with this responsibility will be situated.




  The Police will provide in respect of each gate in the perimeter fence (or

 group of gates if they are close together) police officers authorised to

 decide whether or not to allow spectators through a gate to relieve

 overcrowding.




 All police officers deployed ,t perimeter sates which will be kept fully

 at ail u m «     when spectators ere on the terraces. will be authorised ,s above.

 Bach will be 1„ possession of , police radio In direct contact with police

 ground control and will be identifiable by a distinctive coloured tabard.




 The stewards checking the crow! for overcrowding or distress will not be

 issued With police radios but the police officers o„ the gates and perimeter

 track will communicate to police ground control any relevant matter brought to

their attention by these stewards.



5y.tt_i_ng Equl pment,


The Club will provide and make readily available suitable and sufficient

cutting equipment to permit the Immediate removal of enough fencing to release

numbers of spectators If necessary.         This cutting equipment will be operated

b, employees of The Club who will be trained In it, use.         The „se of such

equipment w,ll be at the discretion of the nominated senior police officer who

will be the officer in charge of policing the event.
Lla1son

Before each match both parties to this agreement will liaise in respect of the

following matters:-

     i)   the anticipated number of spectators expected having regard

           to the separate supporter groups;




    ii)   the method of crowd segregation (if any) intended to be used;




   iii)   any information in relation to crowd problems;




    iv)   the number and location of turnstiles to be made available

          to each group;




     v)   an estimation of the time it will take each group to pass

          through the turnstiles;




    vi)   where tickets are used, that the information on those tickets

          corresponds with the planned arrangements for admitting

          spectators to the ground.




Postponement of kick-off is at the discretion of the police officer in command

at the ground.   It is therefore essential The Club provide a telephone link

between the referee's room and the police control room.




The Police have prepared contingency plans for the event of emergency services

being called to the ground.   These include routes of access, rendezvous

points, accessibility within the ground and routes of egress.   The Police will

liaise with The Club concerning these arrangements whenever these plans are

amended or as otherwise appropriate.
The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police has nominated hia Deputy,

Mr Peter Hayes QPM LLB MA, as the Chief Officer with responsibility for

liaison with the management of each football club and local authority

concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.




Any variation of this agreement in respect of a particular match will be

agreed by the parties in advance in writing.




SIGNED ..                        on behalf of Sheffield United Football Club



SIGNED                           on behalf of South Yorkshire Police
                V


DATE     ___
                                  S       0742738955                                  SHEFF                UTD    FC                                       16/08     "89     16:25          P . 09




EASTW O O D & PARTNERS                                                                                                                                             St. Andrews House
               (C o n s u ltin g E n g in e e rs )
                                                                                                                                                                   23 K ln g fie ld Road
                                                                                                                                                                   S h e ffie ld S11 ®A«
plrtctott
                                                                                                                                                                   Tel.i (0742) SS4SS4
W . E a s tw o o d                    t-ti.u        B tMM Hr> 0 . LI C.IH
                                      0 *rf iQ      M C f   P P I S^r««cr f                                                                                        Fax; (0742) 5 9 4330
                                      rlMr^ F Fnfl.M r-.n-.r '                                             :
A .A . W o o d                           S-.        Hr I! . l          tr.q     I- I l . t   ,
                                      rifjt'-ui.tr             m    ;w rw Mc,v,r                                                                                                               and at A
R.C.A.Eastwvuod                       o.Si...                      m.       t. t . i i/ji'wci.c                                                                                                      /

G .S p ir                             r Mi<i         f- i c. t         M i Me-; t> *•                                                                                Premier H o u n
                                                                                                                                                                     12/13      Garden
C.S.GrAaven                           d lin y        <             A'1 I L t       V’ ■ rj i *• i<J f r.
                                                                                                                                                                     tondon KC1N 8AN
8 . Presto n                          B fcnw         L fcnq M I.L. . t             M I S T ru li t
                                                                                                                                                                    T el.:   (01) 2 4 2 7 4 3 6
G .M . Se«m an                        B.S l , C Erty.. M I C E . f 1 S t r u c t. £                                                                                  Ftm     (01) 4 0 4 S 424
D S. S teph en s                      r: r ny        f   , (. r;   f    i          ir        f o im


                                                                                                                                 0<jf Re#                     WE/KB/11238
                                                                                                                                 Voui* R<*f



The Secretary,                                                                                                                                                15    A u g u st       1989
 Sheffield United Football Club,
 Bramail Lane,
 Sh e f f i e l d 32 4SU.




D&ar Mr. Capper,
                                      H i l l s b o r o u g h Inquiry - I n t e r i m R e c o m m e n d a t i o n s
               T h a n k y o u for faxing me e x t r a c t s from the letter y o u have
r e c e i v e d from S h e f f i e l d City C o u n c i l r e g a r d i n g the Interim
Safety Certificate,
               I am p l e a s e d to re p o r t to yo u r e g a r d i n g the c o n d i t i o n s
 (a)        and          (b)       in S c h e d u l e 2, p a r a g r a p h 27 as follows


 (a)        A visual                    i nspection was c a r r i e d out by Mr.                                                                       John Strange,
             C.Eng.,                F . I . S t r u c t . E . , of this                                                    firm c o v e r i n g all c r u s h
               barriers                   in the ground.                                                       The i n s p e c t i o n was c o m p l e t e d on
               Tuesday,                  8 August.                                           Some rusting has,                                    of course,           occurred
             on many of the b a r r i e r s t h o u g h the c o n d i t i o n tends to
             be b e t t e r at Bramail Lane than at some other g r o u n d s
             b e c a u s e m o s t of the b a r r i e r s are under cover.                                                                                         N one of the
             b a r r i e r s is s u f f i c i e n t l y a f f e c t e d by rust for it to be
             n e c e s s a r y to carry out e m e r g e n c y s t r e n g t h e n i n g or r e p l a c e m e n t
             by 16 August,                                      198 9.




AsrstK‘QltfS
J. A. Strange              A. J. Clough                                            R. Tandy                            J .M . W o o d              C M . Pollard             R. K. Godden
 C.Eny., F.I.Struct E.     Ft A , ,C . F r > g . , M . C . I . R . 5 . E ,         C .En g.,F.I.£lruC I E.             B.St.,C.Ert0., M.I.C.E.,                              F.$.C-A. ( A ttO u r ltjn t
                           M .I.M o d i.E .                                                                            M.i.Struct.E.               M.i.Struct.B              ^Administration
                                                                                                                                                                             Mondger) .              i
                                                                                                                                                                                                     'U
                                                         An Unlimited Company. Registered in England - No. 1833144
                                                             L'uiittUfcWi 1'; '                                                    \
SASTWOOD » PARTNERS                                                          SHfcET    2 .




  (b)   A survey o f the b a r riers has r e v ealed that in a few
        places they do not comply fully w i t h the c r i t e r i a in
        chapter     9 of the G r e e n Guide.        D r a w i n g s are no w b eing
        p r e p a r e d showing the e x t r a b a r r i e r s w h i c h will be
        required so that tenders can be invited.                      As part of
        the same c o n t r a c t any b a r r i e r s w h i c h have incipient
        c o r r o s i o n or other m i n o r defects will be suitably
        r e p aired 01   strengthened.


        As soon as the scheme d r a w i n g s and speci f i c a t i o n are
        c o m p l e t e w e shall,   of course,     be s ubmitting them on
        y o u r b e h a l f to the S h e f f i e l d C i t y Coun c i l as l i c ensing
        authority for their approval.


                                     Yours   sincerely,
                                            m /m
                                            m e /s m

                                            IS          A ugust 1989


-is                  .. -)|I: rI-M
                                 —t y 'gs

Messrs Ksabl* Hawaon
Solicitors
Old Csthsdral Vicarag*
it Janes* lew
8BlfIl»
81 i m


m m x l®«?

fmmsmmkw « cb b b t n u i O R
                            W      SP'lWiWPaC # i I«li jB ra iP w   ■*#»** ■ » * •   COUHCIL
                                                                                     ^m ^rw w w t^ 'T rn *ii»   ASP
                                                                                                                  rnnTmrr O A-«arM     S
                                                                                                                                 wi. mnriii»«i»i-«mir


HILLSBORODGB DISASTER

I thank f®« for fear letter ef 11 Jtoffttst,eseloninf        copy Writ and
Statement ®f Claim and await hearing further frost yea u p m th®£•«»«.

Yours sincerely




 H f t fTMj 'wnroin^riM^rgp liis & f iS
                                     11«   i*r * 1 HftifTTiffiI" ("IM■* ii fii ***




                                                                                                                                                734018
Acting Head of Department*                  Councillor CJC Batts
Administration and Legal                    Leader

16 August 1989
AH/GW                                                      *
4018 - Mr Webster




HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - LEGAL ACTIOS

As you may or nay not         recall#  it has been agreed  between the
representatives for the various Defendants and the Claimant® in this
matter that there b® two "test" action® and, in this regard, I enclose
for your Information and attention a copy Writ and Statement of Claim
which has been passed to      me by the Solicitors acting on behalf of
Municipal Mutual which, of course, will b® the subject      of detailed
meetings between ourselves and the Insurers.

Accordingly, my purpose at this stage in copying the document to you
is first of all to ensure that you are fully aware of this matter and
secondly to draw your attention to pages 16 and 17 which setB out th®
particulars of alleged! negligence, so far as the Authority i® concerned
and is particular to draw your attention to th® ©stent of those areas
of alleged negligence by the Authority in comparison with those alleged
first of all against the Police, (quite obviously), secondly th® Club
and, equally importantly,     the Club's Advisers, namely Eastwood and
Partners.

Whilst the Authority has quite clearly to deal with the criticism® made
of it,and proposals in this regard are already well underway in the
form of detailed reports, I believe the enclosed document does, in effect,
underline the points mad« previously by both myself and Li* Bashforth
that it is important in all these matters not to lose sight of the iasue
of causation, in that whilst in no way seeking to sainimise the criticisms
made against the Authority, the point will have to be made in due course,
that although they are regrefcahi© and reguire action they did not
contribute substantially to the disaster which occurred.




 cc     Councillor J Fiore, C h a i n MEGS
        Councillor P Nelson, Deputy Chair* SfflSGS
        Chief Executive
        Mrs B Bashforth, Principal Solicitor, Common Law
        Mrs F Woodhead, Senior Solicitor, Licensing
                                      KEEBLE HAWSON
                                                  SOLICITORS
                                      incorporating Branson Bramley & Co.

 A. H. GREGORY        N. T. HAWSON                                                OLD CATHEDRAL VICARAGE,
 C. J. PRVCE          G. CONNELL
 P. A. SEALEY         A. J. COOMBE
 K. L WEBSTER         C. M. M. AYRE                                                              ST.JAMES’ ROW,
 M. A. PLATT

 Consultant:
                                                                                                            SHEFFIELD,
 A. H. CONNELL
                                                                                                                      S1 1XA.
                                                                                  TELEPHONE 0 74 2 -7 22 0 61
 Sheffield City Council,
 Legal & Administration Department,                                                   MDX NO. 1 05 3 7
 Town Hall,
                                                                                      FAX NO. 0 7 4 2 - 7 0 0 8 1 3
 SHEFFIELD I.
                                                                                      FAX NO. 0 7 4 2 - 7 5 0 2 4 3

 FOR THE ATTENTION OF MR. MARK WEBSTER

OUR REF:                          YOUR REF:                                       WHEN YOU TELEPHONE OR CALL PLEASE ASK FOR:

, AHG/JLY                                                                              Mr. Gregory
                                                                                        1 1th August 1989


 Dear Mark,
 CHAPMAN v. SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL AND OTHERS
 HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

 I enclose copy Writ and Statement of Claim issued in this matter for your
 attention.
 Yours sincerely,




 A.H. GREGORY
 KEEBLE HAWSON




                                                                                LIB           CONV
                                                                GS                                    CL




                    THE FIRM IS REGULATED BY THE LAW SOCIETY IN THE CONDUCT OF INVESTMENT BUSINESS
          Writ of           IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE                                               1<£9 . - C       - N o .5925
         Summons

        lUDemand|ed         Queen's Bench Division
         (0.6.r.1)

                            [       L iverpool                               District Registry]

                     < \S ? B e tw e e n                        JOAN CHAPMAN
                                               WIDOW A N D A D M IN IS T R A T R IX O F TH E E ST A T E O F
              /■x£’ \'J             '
                                                   RAYMOND THOMAS CHAPM AN D E C E A SED



                             -     N/ -    ■
                                                                                                                  Plaintiff


    (    )                                                                 AND
                           THE C H IE F CONSTABLE o f SOUTH Y O R K S H IR E                         F i r s t Defendant
                            S H E F F IE L D W ED N ESD A Y FO O TBA LL C LU B P L C                 Second Defendants
                            SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL                                                    Third Defendants
                            EASTWOOD & PARTNERS . (Consulting E n g in e e r s )
                                        . .. !(--av'f.i--rm)                                         Fourth         Defendants


(1) insenname.            T o th e D e fe n d a n t C ) THE CHIEF CONSTABLE OF SOUTH YORKSHIRE whose
    a d d r e s s for s e r v ic e i s : - South Yorkshire Joint S e c r e t a r ia t , Regent Street, B a rn sley,
                            f n South York s h i r e , S70 2)Y SHEFFIELD 'WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB PLC whose
      r e g i s t e r e d o ffice i s s it u a t e a t : — Hillsborough,.; S h e f f ie ld , South Y o rksh ire, S6 1SW
SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL whose a d d r e s s for s e r v ic e ’, is.:- Town Hall, Sheffield, South .

                            This W r it o f S u m m o n s has been:* issued/ against you by the above-named
                            Plaintiff in respect of the claim set out'orrthe back.

(       )                  Within 14 days after the service of this Writ on you, counting the day of service, you
                            must either satisfy the claim or return to the Court Office mentioned below the
                           ^accompanying Acknow ledgm ent of Service stating therein whether you intend to
                            contest these proceedings.

                            If you fail to satisfy the claim or to return the Acknowledgment within the time stated,
                            or if you return the Acknowledgment without stating therein an intention to contest the
                            proceedings, the Plaintiff may proceed with the action and judgment may be entered
                            against you forthwith without further notice.

(3| Complete                Issued from the P) [Cenirar e f flce]      [       L iverpo ol                    District Registry
and delete as               of the High Court this      29th                 day of June
necessary.



                            NOTE:—This W rit m ay not be served later than 12 calendar months beginning with that date
                                    renewed by order of the Court.




                                                                           IM PORTANT
                            Directions for Acknowledgment of Service are given with the                a c c o m p a n y in g   form.
                                                                   THE   PLAINTIFF is the W i d o v a n d Administratrix.

                              q£         estate of Raym o n d Thomas C h a p m a n deceased a n d claims

                              damages on behalf of the Estate and on behalf of the Dependants

                             of the said deceased under the L a w Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions)

                            Act 1934 and the Fatal Accidents Act 1976 as a m e n d e d in consequence

                            of the death of the said deceased on 15th April 1989 from the fatal

                            injuries received in an accident at Hillsborough, Sheffield,

                            South Yorkshire due to the; negligence and/or breach of statutory

                            duty of the Defendants, their servants or agents.




 (1) If this W rit- ’
 was issued out of
 a District Registry,   ebhm —
 this indorsement       irrtfTe-dhstricfof the District Registry named-oveiieafr] 7
 as to place where
 the action arose
 should be              (4)This Writ was issued by                  Brian Thcrrpson and Partners
completed.
 (2) Delete as          of         Richmond House,            Rumford Place, Liverpool, L3 9SW. .
necessary.'
(3) Insert name of      [Agent             .for
place.
(4) For phrase­         o r
ology of this»
indorsement where
the Plaintiff sues in   Solicitor s           for the said Plaintiff              whose address                   (2) [is] [-am]
person, see
Supreme Court
Practice, vol. 2,                                                  Birkenhead, Merseyside.
para 1.




                                     The Solicitors' Law Stationery Society pic, Oyez House, 27 Crimscott Street. London SE1 5TS   F5I98   12.85
                        m     m
                                                                                                                                    I 50440191
                                                                           High C o u rt A1
     THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE                                     1989-C-No. 89 5925

 QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION

 LIVERPOOL DISTRICT REGISTRY

 (Writ issued cn the 29th day of June 1989)




B E T W E E N



                                              JOAN CHAPMAN
                                WIDOW AND ADMINISTRATRIX CF THE ESTATE CF
                                     RAYMZND TH 3& .S CHAPMHi DECEASED
                                                                                         Plaintiff

                                                         -an d -


                            THE CHIEF CONSTABLE CF SOUTH TOKKSIIKE POLICE
                                                                                   First Defendant

                                                          and


                                     SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB PLC
                                                                                 Second Defendants

                                                          and


                                                 91EFFIELD CITY COUNCIL
                                                                                 Third Defendants

                                                          and              •••    -v V-t "


                                EASTWOOD & PARTNERS (Consulting Engineers)
                                                 (a firm)             -• '                "
                                                                           Fourth Defendants

                                                  STATEMENT OF CLAIM



!•         c           The Plaintiff is the widow and Administratrix of the estate of
'i:':£ r   r   l   L    y   &    l   -   o   x                                               ^   -
Raymond Thcmas Chapman deceased (who is hereinafter referred to as "the

deceased") and brings this action in respect of her bereavement and for the

benefit of the dependants of the deceased under the provisions of the Fatal
 Accidents Act 1976 (as amended) and for the benefit of the estate of the

 deceased under the provisions of the Lav Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions)

 Act 1934.   Letters of Administration were taken out of the Liverpool

 District Probate Registry on the 29th day of June 1989.




 2.          The First Defendant is the Chief Constable of the South

 Yorkshire Police.   The Police Officers hereinafter referred to were at all

material times members of the said Force acting under the direction and

 control of the First Defendant in purported performance of their duties as

police officers.




3.           The Second Defendants are and were at all material times the

owners and occupiers of the football ground premises known as The

Hillsborough Stadium in Sheffield, South Yorkshire.




4.           The   First Defendant's police force was at all material times the

force responsible for policing at the said stadium on the occasion of

football matches, in particular the football match on the 15th April 1989

hereinafter referred to, being the Match between Liverpool Football Club and

Nottingham Forest Football Club in the semi-final round of the Football

Association Challenge "Cup (Kereimfter referred to as the F.A. Cup).




5.           The Third Defendants were at all material times the local

authority responsible for the issue and/or continuance of the Safety

Certificate and the conditions thereof, as issued to the Second Defendants

in respect of the said stadium pursuant to the provisions of the Safety of

Sports Ground Act 1975.   By their officers, their servants or agents the
         Defendants made periodic visits to the stadium and directed and/or

 approved the carrying out of all works thereto.     In the premises the Third

 Defendants at all material tiroes owed a duty to all lawful visitors to the

 ground, in particular the Deceased, to take all reasonable care to ensure

 that the Certificate and its conditions, and any works which they directed

 and/or required and/or approved wculd ensure the reasonable safety of

visitors to the stadium.




 6.           The Fourth Defendants were at all material times retained       by the

 Second Defendants to advise them on all matters relating to the safety of

the said stadium and its compliance with the Safety Certificate referred to;

Pursuant to the retainer, the Fourth Defendants by themselves their servants

or agents regularly inspected the stadium and designed advised and approved

the carrying cut of works therecn;     In the premises the Fourth Defendants       at

all material times owed a duty to the lawful visitors to the stadium,         in

particular the Deceased, to take all reasonable care to ensure that the

Stadium and the works which were so designed approved and/or-carried out

were reasonably safe.            '                  .v-.




7*            The Deceased cn the 15th of April 1989 was at all material times

a lawful spectator in the said stadium cn the occasion of the-said"'

semi-final and as such was the lawful visitor of the Second Defendants

within the meaning of the Occupiers' Liability Act 1957.      He was at all

material times' cn'the standing ••terrace ^at'the Leppihgs^Eane:,end*of'the

ground   (hereinafter referred to as the West Terrace) in the area known as

pen three.
                                                                                                u.      «
                                                A


                                                                                                \
 8.          At a time between about 2.45 p m and about 3.10 p m the Deceased

•while cn the West Terrace -was subjected to crushing owing to the

 overcrowding of spectators in the said pens and/or the collapse of a barrier,

 therein as a result •whereof he sustained injuries fran -which he died the

 same day.




9.           The said accident and resultant injuries and death to the

Deceased were caused by the negligence of the First Defendant and/or his

police officers and/or by the negligence and/or breach of statutory duty an

the part of the Second Defendants their servants or agents.




                              PARTICULARS OF NEGLIGENCE OF

                 THE FIRST DEFENDANT AND/OR HIS POLICE OFFICERS




The First Defendant and/or his police officers were, negligent in that they:-

(a)          Failed •when devising a plan for the policing of the crowd to

             ensure that clear arrangements were made with the Seccnd .

             Defendants Sieffield Wednesday Football Club (S.W.F.C.) for the

             ccntroL of the numbers entering each separate pen in the West


             Terraces;.,.-.                    - v      •:   •? :•/:   '■ •• ;r ::>••••••




(b)          Requested the installation of radial fences cn the West Terraces

  u          without..ensuring-that.by separate turnstiles or otherwise the                 .       .

             safe capacities of each pen wculd not be exceeded;




(c )         Failed to ascertain and/or brief Ground Ccmranders of the flow

             rates through the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end;
a>
n
s
0»
&

      Failed adequately or at all to brief police officers in

      attendance at Hillsborough in Police Ccntrol, Club Control, and

      West Stand and cn the perimeter at the West end that it -was

      their duty to monitor the nuirbers of spectators in the separate

      pens cn the West Terraces and in particular to observe and

      report to Police Ccntrol if and •when any particular pen -was

      approaching capacity, particularly ■when they knew or ought to

      have known that SWPC had ignored a police warning that the

      capacity of the West Terraces as a whole was too high;




(e)   Failed adequately or at all to monitor the numbers of spectators

      in the separate pens cn the West Terraces from the Police

      Ccntrol Roan, and/or the Club Control Roan and/or by Police

      Officers in the West Stand and/or by Police Officers cn or near

      the perimeter fence, but to the contrary operated a policy of

      allowing spectators ”to find their own level" cn the whole

      terrace, and cn the basis that so long as spaces existed in any

      part of a pen, that pen could not have reached capacity;




(f)   Failed to appreciate or ignored the fact that brick walls at the

      exit from the tunnel into pens three and four and. the position

      and size of gates at the rear of the pens hindered in practice

      "self levelling" of spectators throughout the whole terrace.




(g)   Failed as early as at 2 p m when informed that 8,000 fewer were

      in the ground than the previous year (cn the occasion of the

      equivalent semi-final between the self same teams) and that the

      majority of those were expected at the Leppings Lane end to
 appreciate that a crowd problem at the Leppings Lane turnstiles

 •was likely to occur and failed to -warn Superintendent Marshall

 accordingly;




 By his Police Officers as aforesaid failed to observe and report

 that by 2.45 pro at the latest, pens three and four were for all

 practical purposes full to, or at the very least were

 approaching, capacity;




 By his officers in Police Ccntrol or otherwise failed to report

 to S.W.F.C. by their proper officers -whether the Head Steward or

 otherwise and/or to the Stewards in the area between the

turnstiles and the tunnel that by 2.45 at the latest pens three

and four were for all practical purposes full to, or at the very

least, were approaching capacity;




Failed to warn the F.A.. and/or the Sheffield.City Council and/or

S.W.F.C. that in the event of as few as cne third of the total

capacity of the North and West Stands and t h e West Terraces

arriving in Leppings Lane within a period of fifteen minutes,

the police would not be capable of controlling the crowd and

that a dangerous crushing situation was likely to o r might,

develop;




By his Superintendent, Nkrshall




(i)        Failed at 2.17 p m cn requesting the closure of Leppings

           Lane, or at any material time thereafter, to seek
r-*   re
      cn

                     i nf o m at i c n from Police Control as to the approximate

                     nunfcers still expected thrcugh the Leppings Lane

                     turnstiles;




            (ii)     Failed between 2-17 p m and 2.30 pm, or at any material

                     time thereafter to respond to a situation -which he

                     believed to be unprecedented (namely the arrival in

                     Leppings Lane, including the turnstiles area, of

                     sufficient nunfcers to justify the closure of the road

                     and -which had caused sane six to sane eight thousand

                     people to be in the lane with more expected) by

                     evaluating the situatiai and by giving orders for the

                     control of the nuirbers joining the already stationary

                     crowd in the bottleneck of the turnstile area;




            (iii)    Failed prior to 2.35 p m to inform Police C m t r o l that a

                     dangerous situation was developing and to seek advice

                     an d guidance fran Ccntrol and in particular fran Chief

                     Superintendent Duckinfield;




      (i)   By his officers patrolling the turnstile area and/or Leppings

            Lane, both mounted and cn foot




            (i)     Caused or permitted the area between the turnstiles and

                     the blue perimeter fence to beccme janmed with

                     spectators thereby causing crowd pressure and rendering

                    movement through the turnstiles insufficient;




                                                                                    \
                                       8




        (ii)     Failed after 2.25 pm to ccntrol the crowd approaching

                 the turnstiles area fran Leppings Lane from both

                 directions adequately or at all, if necessary by

                 cordcns across the road and the use of horses on

                 Leppings Lane nearer the roundabout than the

                 turnstiles;




        (iii)    Permitted the build up of several thousands of

                 spectators with forward inpetus -when those at the frcnt

                were liable to be crushed either against the perimeter

                 fence or against the turnstiles -wall;




       (iv)     Permitted horses to became trapped within the

                turnstiles area -where their presence was

                counterproductive or at least useless     when they were

                needed cn Leppings Lane;




(m)   Failed at 2.17 p m or at any time thereafter to inform Chief'

       Superintendent \fa.rshall of the hunbers still expected to arrive

      at the ground at the Leppings Lane-end,-1                  •- •••'•




(n)   By his Chief Superintendent, Duckinfield:-




       (i)      Having at 2.47 p m been warned by the said Ifershall that

                a dangerous situation existed outside the turnstiles

                and that "the gates" should be opened, failed, despite

                two intervening and urgently expressed identical

                requests, to give an answer until 2.52 pm;
                                  9


                Failed between 2.47 p m and 2.52 p m to evaluate the

                consequence inside the ground of opening the gates and

                in particular the danger that those entering by Gate C

                would be likely to or might enter pens three and four

                via the tunnel;




       (iii)    Having correctly decided at 2.52 p m to order the

                opening of the gates failed prior to transmitting such

                an order to -warn S.W.F.C. and his own officers in the

                area of his intended action in order to prevent further

                ingress into pais three and four;




      (iv)      Failed to inform the Ground Ccramnder, Superintendent

                Greenwood that he had ordered the opening of the gates

                and that there was a likelihood (or even cnly a

                possibility) that further spectators might have entered

                the alreacfy packed pens three and four;




      (v)       By causing or permitting the opening of Gate C at 2.52

                p m without taking any measures; to-seal the tunnel,,

                caused or permitted a large inf lux. of spectators into

               ■ the already packed pens three and four;.



(o)   By his officers in Police Control,. Club Ccntrol, in the West

      Stand and/or cn or near the West perimeter fence, to appreciate

      sufficiently quickly that the problems- obviously, existing in

      pens three and four were not due to hooliganism,or an attempted

      ’pitch invasion' but were to the contrary due.to over er o d i n g
 and in consequence failed in time to take action to save further

 crushing;




 Failed to train instruct and/or brief his officers cn or near

 the perimeter fence adequately in the dangers of and consequent

 upon overcrowding, but to the contrary so concentrated their

 minds cn the problems consequent cn hooligaxiism and pitch

 invasions that their judgement -was likely to be clouded;




Failed, by tanncy and/or signals or otherwise to order or

arrange for the imnediate evacuation through the tunnel of

spectators at the rear of the pens three and four to relieve

pressure to enable those at the front to ccnply with otherwise

inpossible densnds by police cn the perimeter fence to move

backwards;




Failed at 2.15 p m or at any other material time to arrange for

the postponement of the kick-off;



By his senior officers cn or near the perimeter fence failed in

the period between it becoming apparent to them that there was

overcrowding resulting in injuries and the arrival of

C.S. Nesbitt, to organise a rescue operation;




Failed to institute    a system of hand a nd arm signals to enable

his officers cn- the ground to c c m m n i cate-with’Pol ice Ccntrol in

the event of crowd noise or breakdovm causing the radios to be

inaudible;
By his officers both outside the ground and cn or near the

perimeter fence failed to appreciate that where crowi pressure

had developed, the proper way to relieve such pressure nas to

achieve it frcm the rear forwards and not from the frcnt

backwards;




Operated a general policy of crowd ccntrol cn the false

assumptions




(i)    That a crowd arriving in large nunfrers at a football

       xratch in 1989 would be ■wholly sober, patient and self

       disciplined, all with tickets and with a desire for

        'policing by consent' and that in consequence little

       control by police officers would be called for, and




(ii)   That because no problems had arisen fran their policing

       plan in the past, no problems would arise in the future;




Failed together with the Second Defendants before the 1989

semi-final properly to review, evaluate; ancLheed the available

data concerning-vthe nunbers attending the 1988 semi-final, in

particular the data that more than the permitted capacity

entered the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane End, so as to avoid

a recurrence-of such excess entry in 1989.   >
                                                 12




                                 PARTICULARS OF NEGLIGENCE                                    ^

                             AND/OR BREACH OF STATUTORY DUTY

                                 OF THE SECOND DEFENDANTS

The Second Defaidants were negligent and/or in breach of statutory duty in

that they



(a)           Failed to provide at the Leppings Lane end adequate turnstile

              facilities to accaimodate a crowd of 24,000; such facilities

              ■would have included




              (i)        A t least 30 turnstiles.




              (ii)       Turnstiles acccomodated on a straight -wall or on two               or

                         more straight vails to enable spectators to queue

                         parallel to each other;




              (iii)      Adequate space between the turnstiles and the public

                         p a r t of Leppings Lane to permit longer parallel queueing

                      .t . than', at: present, possible, and.to a c c o m o d a t e in the

                         region, of 7,000 spectators, but-certainly more than

       •' -           - 5,000;     :                      -



              (iv)       The provision: of parallel rails at right angles to the

                         turnstiles to delineate the queues at each turnstiles;



            (v)         Clear signs, plainly visible to approaching spectators

                         indicating the separate turnstiles for the North and

                        West Stands and the West Terraces.




                                                                                                  N
Failed within the ground at the Leppings Lane end to sign

clearly the existence of, and way to, pens cne/two and

 six/seven;



Failed to provide any mechanical or any other means of

mcnitoring the nunbers in the individual pens cn the West

Terraces (in breach of the Green Guide);




 Ignored a warning fran the police that the designated capacity

of the West Terraces as a v&ole -was too high for safety;




Failed to co-ordinate with the police and agree a clear divisicn

of responsibility for the visual monitoring of the nunbers in

the pens cn the West Terraces and for spreading spectators

evenly through the pens cn those terraces;




Obtained a Safety Certificate cn the false representation to the

City CounciL that they had agreed a system of crowd ccntrol with

the police; ... .                          .     __



Failed to appreciate that by reascn of the existence of the

radial fences,.the projecting walls at the rear of pens three

and four and the size and position of the gates in the radial

fences,. the crowi requires assistance from stewards and/or

police to enable even spread to be achieved;




Failed to inform the police of the estimated flow rate through    ,

the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane End;
 Failed to observe that by 2.45 p m at the latest pens three and

 fcur were full or at least approaching capacity;




 Failed to institute any or any adequate system for informing

 stewards and/or police in the conccurse between the turnstiles

 and the West Stand wall that pens three and four were

 approaching capacity;




 Failed to station any or sufficient stewards in the concourse

 between the turnstiles and the West Stand Vfe.ll to enable if and

when necessary to direct spectators fran any pen which was

approaching or had reached capacity, and failed to formulate any

plan for the closing of the tunnel (by closing cne or both doors,

by moveable barriers or by a cordcn of police or stewards or

otherwise);



Failed to inform stewards and/or police between turnstiles and the

West Stand wall that by 2.45 p m at the latest pens three and four

were full or at least approaching capacity, and when this was or

ought to have been visible cn the Tllubs C.C.T.V. monitors;




Placed in the'perimeter fence, in particular in pens three and

fcur gates which were too small to be exit gates, in breach of the

Green G u i d e;




Failed to place stewards at the gates in the perimeter fence, with

clear instruction as to when to open them, in breach of the Green

Guide;



Failed to ensure that the crush barriers in pens three and four
§
                                            15
rl
ft

    %
    a-            were of adequate strength and permitted the removal of barrier

                   144;.



        (p)       Failed together with the Police before the 1989 semi-final

                  properly to review, evaluate and heed the available data

                  concerning the numbers attending the 1988 semi-final, in

                  particular the data that more than the permitted capacity entered

                  the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane End, so as to avoid a

                  recurrence of such excess entry in 1989;



        (q)       Failed to possess and/or have readily available bolt cutters or

                  other adequate means to enable the perimeter fence to be opened up

                  to allow emergency escape of spectators;




        (r)       In the premises failed in breach of their duty under secticn 2 of

                  the Occupiers' Liability Act 1957 and/or negligently to take aLl

                  reasonable care for the safety of the Deceased while upcn their

                  said premises for the purpose for v*hich he was invited namely as a

                  match spectator;




        (s)   ■   By reason of the matters aforesaid the Deceased during his

                  lifetime suffered from his said injuries prior to death, including

                  pre-inpact terror pain and suffering, and his Estate has suffered

                  loss and damage.




                  Further or in the alternative the said accident and resultant

    injuries and death to the Deceased were caused by the negligence of the Third

    Defendants their servants or agents and/or by the negligence of the Fourth
Defendants their servants or agents.      The Plaintiff repeats the matters set

 cut in paragraphs 5 and 6 hereof.




                          PARTICULARS OF NEGLIGENCE OF THE

                    THIRD DEFENDANTS THEIR SERVANTS OR AGENTS




 (a)        Failed to ensure that the Safety Certificate granted to the Second

            Defendants contained and/or continued to contain adequate

            conditions for the safety of spectators, that is to say conditions

            providing for:-




            (i)         suitable   exit gates   in the perimeter fences;




            (ii)        adequate   stewardingand signing to prevent uneven      spread

                        of spectators and overcrowding;




            (iii)       separate   entrances for each separate section of the

                        ground;




(b)        Permitted the erection of radial fences without the sinultanecus

            installation of separate turnstile entrances and/or without

            amending the Safety Certificate to give designated capacities to

            each pen;                                                  ,




(c)        Failed adequate timeously or at all to review the Second

           Defendants1 Safety Certificate to ensure its conditions were

           adequate having regard to works carried cut since the original

           grant of the Certificates; and thereby permitted the Certificate
 to continue in its original form ■when its conditions therein were

 inadequate and did not contain conditions as set out in (a) above;




 Failed to convene meetings of the Officer Working Party;




Permitted the removal of barrier 144 notwithstanding the danger to

 spectators created thereby in the event of a large influx of

persons into pen three;



Permitted the removal of barrier 144 without considered advice

considered advice from the Officer Working Party and without

having analysed and considered the views of the First Defendant

and the Fourth Defendant.




           PARTICULARS OF NEGLIGENCE OF THE

      FOURTH DEFENDANTS THEIR SERVANTS OR AGENTS



Failed as the Second Defendants' Safety Consultant to advise

against the erection of radial fences without the installation of

separate turnstiles to each pen created thereby;




Failed vihen their: owi plans for new turnstiles had been abandoned,

to advise the Second Defendants of the necessity* to remove the

radial fences;       .                             .




Accepted assurances that the Second Defendants and the Police had

agreed a system of monitoring the nunbers entering' the pens at the

Leppings Lane end, vihen on a proper analysis, it should have been

clear that no such system could operate efficiently, particularly
 if the pens were not filled aie by cne;




 Regarded the pens formed by the radial fences as still

 constituting one individual terrace;




 Failed to advise against the removal of barrier 144 and failed to

•warn the Second Defendants, the Officer Working Party, and/or the

Third Defendants of the dangers thereof;



Failed to advise the Second Defendants against the placing of

and/or continuing to have in place in the perimeter fence, gates

which were too small to be exit gates in breach of the Green Guide

and/or failed properly to advise the Second Defendants as to the

failings of the_-gatesp




Failed properly to test the. crush :barriers'.in. pen three to ensure

they were of adequate strength and/or failed :to ^advise the Seccnd

Defendant of the weaknesses in. the barrier which collapsed;




Failed to-advise the Seconds Defendants, that the existing turnstile

facilities, at- the Leppings Lane* end:were inadequate to acccnmodate

a crowd of 24,000 and that for such facilities-to-be-adequate they

should include the matters set out. in sub-paragraph (a) above of

the Particulars of Negligence and.Breach of Statutory Duty against

t h e * S e c c n d . D e f e n d a n t s 3 ’^




Failed to advise the Seccnd Defendants of their failure within the

ground to sign clearly the existence of and the way to pens
                                          ±3




               one/two and six/seven;




 11            By reason of the natters aforesaid the Deceased during his

 lifetime suffered from his said injuries prior to death, including pre-inpact

 terror pain and suffering, and his Estate has suffered loss and damage.



                              PARTICULARS OF INJURIES




 Crushing and bruising injuries, pain and distress and terror leading to

 Traumatic Asphyxia.    Full details -will be available following the release by

 H M Corcner of the postmortem report.



                          PARTICULARS PURSUANT TO STATUTE



              The person for whose benefit this action is brought is the

deceased's dependant, namely the widow, Joan Chapman, -who was b o m cn the

           and \*ho married the deceased cn the 10th June 1961.



              The nature of the claim is that the deceased,.who was 50 years of

age, was a man \»ho worked more or less continually.       At the time of the death

he had been in continuous employment for nany years with

        lompany Limited and earned in the region of £          per annum- Also, he
was a                    in the                                  and in such
capacity received payments, of £               in 1988 and £      to the first

quarter of 1989.    The deceased was a genercus man and spent a substantial part

of his inccme for the benefit of his dependants.       The deceased was a handyman

in the matrimonial home and cculd decorate, maintain and repair the family

car, garden, install central heating, in addition to the dependancy relating
to the loss of earnings the dependant claims additional ccnpensatian for the

loss of the services of the deceased as a handyman in respect of which

expenses will new have to be met out of her income.

              The funeral expenses were £



AND the Plaintiff claims



Under the Fatal Accidents Act 1976 (as amended) damages for the aforesaid

dependant and for the Plaintiff's said bereavement..



Under the Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1934 damages for the

benefit of the estate of the deceased.



Interest pursuant to Section 35a of the Supreme Court Act 1981;at such rate

and for such period as the Court deems fit.




SERVED this              day of               1989 by

Brian Thompson: &. Partners,- Richmond^House, Rumford'Place,

LiverpoolL3 9SW      Solicitors for the Plaintiff

M1/CHAPJMN/A89V228 .
            1989-C-No . 89 5925

 IN THE HIGH COJRT OF JUSTICE

 QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION

 LIVERPOOL DISTRICT REGISTRY

              JOAN CHAPMAN
 WIDOW AND ADMINISTRATRIX CF THE ESTATE
   CF RAYJO© 1HHAS CHAPVftN DECEASED
                              Plaintiff

                   -and-

      THE CHIEF CCNSTABLE CF 9CUTH
            YORKSHIKE POLICE
                        First Defendant

                    and

 SHEFFIELD WDNE3JAY FOOTBALL CLUB PLC
                     Seccnd Defendants

                    and

         SHEFFIELD CITY QOUNCIL
                        Third Defendants

                    and

          EASnCCD & PARTNERS
         (C o n su ltin g E n g in e e r s)
                    (a fir m )
                            Fourth Defendants




           SIATEJtNT OF CLAIM




BRIAN THCMPSCN & PARTNERS
Richnmd Hcuse,
Rumford Place,
Liverpool.
L3 9SW

Solicitors for the Plaintiff

\fi/CHAPMAN/A89V228/KA
                                               W. I. Murray, LL.B.
                                               City Solicitor, Secretary to the Council
                                               P.O. Box No. 88
LIVERPOOL                                      Municipal Buildings
                                               Dale Street
                                               LIVERPOOL L69 2DH
                                               Telephone: 0 5 1 - 227 39 11 Ext: 2 2 5 24 3 '
                                               Fax: 236 2047
                                               DX 14206 LIVERPOOL

 TO:   The Chief Executives -                  Y our ref

       St. Helens M.B.C.                       Our ref      SS/GPD/KH
   v   Knowsley M.B.C.
       Wirral M.B.C.                                        16th August,                1989
       Sefton M.B.C.
       Sheffield M.B.C.
       Cheshire C.C.                                                 CHIEF EXEOtjVlVS
                                                         C.P.UJ
       Lancashire C.C.
                                                                          SHF^in
       Nottinghamshire C.C
       Nottingham City Cot
                                                                    1 1 AUG 1989
                                                                   k.fc.ti. IP.E.C.U
 Dear Sir,
                                                                  / t C   -   £L< < .
                        Hillsborough Disaster                                 F<2
         I have been requested by the Leader of the City Council
 (Councillor Keva Coombes) to invite your Authority to be
 represented at a meeting of leading Members of Authorities
 concerned with, the Hillsborough disaster, to be held at
 2 . 0 0 P.M. on WEDNESDAY, 6TH SEPTEMBER, 1 9 8 9 in the Town Hall,
 Castle Street, Liverpool, 2.

      The purpose of the meeting is to review progress made
 since the last meeting of representatives (on 29th April)
 when various agreements were reached, in principle, about the
 need for continued co-ordination of services.  A report
 should be available in time for the meeting on progress in
 attracting financial support.

      I am attaching a copy of the reply of the Secretary of
 State for Social Services to the joint letter from our
 Authorities seeking financial support. The ^approach
 suggested in the response of using the Bellwin Scheme has
 been examined and would not appear to be feasible.   Other
 attempts by Officers to obtain financial assistance from the
 E.E.C. and other bodies have not been any more successful.

      There is, however, some commitment of resources and it
 may be that during the course of discussion, the meeting can
 consider alternative ways of maintaining the co-ordinated
 response to Hillsborough.

      I look forward to confirmation that Members of your
 Authority will be able to attend the meeting.

                             Yours faithfully,




                             City Solicitor.
B M /9 9 2 6 0
                                      D E PA R T M E N T OF BJEALTH A K D SOCIAL S E C U R IT Y
                                           Richmond House, 7 9 W hitehall, London SWiA 2 N S
                                                           Telephone 01-210 3000

                                               From me Secretary of State fo r Social Services




POH(l)1659/153


K Coom bs E s q
L ead er L iv e r p o o l C ity       C o u n c il
PO B o x 8 8
M u n c ip a l B u i l d in g s
L IV E R PO O L
L 6 9 2BH




T h a n k y o u f o r y o u r l e t t e r o f 6 M ay a b o u t a d d i t i o n a l f i n a n c i a l
s u p p o r t f o r d i r e c t s e r v i c e p r o v is io n and f o r t h e R e g io n a l u n i t you
p r o p o s e t o e s t a b l i s h t o p r o v i d e a n d c o - o r d i n a t e c o n t i n u i n g c a r s ’* i n   -
th e a fterm a th o f th e H illsb o r o u g h tr a g e d y .               You a l s o w r o te t o
J o h n M oore# S e c r e t a r y o f . S t a t e f o r S o c i a l S e c u r i t y an d t o
N i c h o l a s R i d l e y S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e f o r th er E n v ir o n m e n t .      P le a se .
a c c e p t t h i s as a r e p ly to a l l th r e e l e t t e r s .

T h e D e p a r t m e n t ’ s S o c i a l S e r v i c e s I n s p e c t o r a t e h a v e k e p t me in f o r m e d
o f th e a c t io n ta k en by t h e l o c a l s o c i a l s e r v ic e s d ep a rtm en ts
t o g e t h e r i n t h e w ake o f t h e t r a g e d y and I know t h a t t h e C h ie f
In sp e c to r h as w r itte n p e r s o n a lly to a ll th e S o c ia l S e r v ic e s
D i r e c t o r s i n a p p r e c i a t i o n o f t h e r e m a r k a b le e f f o r t s m a d e b y th em and
th e ir s t a f f .                                                           *

The p r e c i s e • r e sp o n se to a tr a ^ e^ y o f t h is s o r t n eed s to be d e c id e d
on th e s p o t , on th e b a s i s o f a c a r e f u l e x a m in a tio n o f n e e d s .                  Ky
D e p a r tm e n t h a s no p o w er t o m ake a d d i t i o n a l r e s o u r c e s a v a i l a b l e tff
lo c a l a u th o r itie s fo r t h i s p urpose.             H o w ev e r, I u n d e r s t a n d fro m
N ic h o la s R id le y , S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e fo r E n v ir o n m e n t, t h a t u n d er a
m o d e l s c h e m e d e s i g n e d t o d e a l w i t h e x t r a - o r d i n a r y c o s t s a r i s i n g ■fro-rr
e m e r g e n c ie s (t h e B e llw in Schem e>, th e G overnm ent h as p r o v id e d
s p e c ia l f in a n c ia l a s s is t a n c e to lo c a l a u th o r itie s in c e r t a in
c ir c u m sta n c e s.

T he B e llw in Schem e w as d raw n up a f t e r d i s c u s s i o n s w it h t h e L o c a l
A u th o r ity A s s o c ia t io n s and p r o v id e fo r a s s is t a n c e tow ard s th e .
im m e d ia te an d a d d i t i o n a l c o s t s o f d e a lin g w it h an em erg e n c y o n c e
e x p e n d i t u r e e x c e e d s a t h r e s h o l d b e y o n d w h i c h l o c a l a u t h o r i t i e s w o u ld
n o r m a lly be e x p e c te d to b u d g et fo r .              in th e c a s e o f th e la s t u se o f
t h e S ch em e, f o l l o w i n g t h e G r e a t S to rm o f 1987* t h a t t h r e s h o l d was
( f o r C o u n t ie s and M e t r o p o lit a n D i s t r i c t s ) s e t a t t h e e x c l u s i v e
product o f a l.o p r a te .                    '                                                          JP
If you consider that you have a case for assistance of this kind,
Nicholas Ridley is prepared to consider a detailed and fully costed
application (though at first sight it looks as if the level of
expenditure needed would be substantially below the likely threshold
for- the authorities involved), I know that he will keep me informed
of events if you do decide to pursue this possibility.

The Government has, of course/ as you mention, already made a
contribution o£ £500/000 to the Disaster Fund to help those rcost
closely affected by the Disaster

C o p ie s   of   th is   le tte r   go   to . Joh n M oore   and N i c h o l a s    R id le y .




                                                                                    KENNETH CLARKE
Sheffield Wednesday
              Football Club pic                                                                             CHIEF pIoUTlVE
                                                                                              C.P.U.
Our Ref:           GHM/JB/D34                                                                     M-.T.
                                                                                                              SHETO.D          C.P.O.

16th August 1989                                                                             **>rr
                                                                                                   R"S      1 6 AUG 1989
                                                                                                                                PUB
                                                                                              :~:QAT
Mr. I.L. Podmore,                                                                                          R.E.U. P.E.C.U.
                                                                                                U.P.
Chief Executive,
City of Sheffield,
Town Hall,
Sheffield.
SI 2HH


Dear Sir,

Re;      Safety Certificate - Hillsborough

I am in receipt of your letter dated 11th August 1989.

W ith r e g a r d t o t h e i t e m s i n A p p e n d ix 2 w h e r e a r e s p o n s e h a s              been req u ested :

No. 3)         A copy of a report from Mayor Turnstiles is enclosed. A replacement
               for TUrnstile 50 which is situated at Penistone Road is on order.

No. 4)          A copy of the                   Agreement is enclosed.

No. 7)          A copy of the                   necessary letter from Dr. Eastwood is                            enclosed.

No. 8 )        Amendments t o               t h e s i g n p o s t i n g o f t h e g ro u n d and       th e      p r in t in g o f th e
               t i c k e t s h a v e b e e n u n d e r t a k e n t o t h e s a t i s f a c t i o n o f t h e S o u th
               Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e and F i r e S e r v i c e .

I would point out the amended ground capacity figures are, in fact, incorrect.
The a r e a o f t h e Lower N o r th W est T e r r a c e i s i n f a c t Pen 6 , p a r t o f t h e W est
T e r r a c e w h ic h i s e x c l u d e d fr o m u s e (A p p en d ix 2 N o. 10) The c a p a c i t y f o r t h e
N o r th w e s t T e r r a c e s h o u l d t h e r e f o r e b e 2,300.

Finally, I would refer to the penultimate paragraph of myletter dated 28th July
1989 to your Administration and Legal Department. Last week the Working party
approved the police request that access to the North Stand should be via
Penistone Road using turnstiles 77-88. Our concern over this policy was
confirmed in the findings of the Interim Report (para 290). I would therefore
confirm my request for a written ruling on this matter prior to Saturday's match.

Ymirs faiBifnllv-



u . h . Mackreir
TSocrctai'y---
Hillsborough, Sheffield S6 1SW. Telephone: (0742) 343122
Telegrams: Wednesday Sheffield 6. Telex No.547709 WEDNES
Fax No. 0742 337145 Registered in England No. 62478

Chairman: H.E. McGee, Secretary: G.H. Mackrell, F.C.C.A. Manager: R. Atkinson
Directors: M. Sheppard, J.P., F.C.A. (Vice-Chairman), S.L. Speight, O.B.E.,
C. Woodward, K.T. Addy, E. Barron, G.K. Hulley.
                                                                                           No,. MTL           2 1 8 6 1
I                                                                                          MAYOR TURNSTILES LTD



I              Mayor
               TURNSTILES LTD
                                                                                           Optimus, Bellbrook Business Park,
                                                                                           Uckfield, East Sussex TN22 1QU


                                                                                           Telephone: (0825)61022
                                                                                           Telex: 95663 Mayor G
                                                                                           VAT No. 388 4556 96
I              An Expamet International P.L.C. Company                                     Fax; (0825) 3835




1                   CUST0MER                                                V X
                    SITE/DELIVERY ADDRESS-^                       INVOICE ADDRESS                                        DATE ^TARTED

                                                                                                                         l e h U i
1 —--------------------------- ----------------------------
                                                                                                                         DATE COMPLETED
                                                                                                                       ---------- 1------ t   -----
1
■
                    INSTALLATION          JOB REF
                                                                  modelC)U *       u / l ' k                             MAINTENANCE
|                   SERVICE               JOB REF                                                                        CONTRACT DETAIL!
                    MAINTENANCE           JOB REF                                                                        REQUIRED YES/NO
    |               -EAIIIT' (IWffiplicable)       v              WORK UNDERTAKEN:                 -               V       '          jk




                                                                  ^    \
                                                                  v h      ^      <■                                                  ^
                                                                   V\o^) UU                                        ^           V2/vjA\A^
    1                                                             V-^VvCwn^vA      .                           -                              \       ^
                                                                  VV <U<i ’ va cA ^                                                               **»»^
    1              PART NOS FITTED             DESCRIPTION                                 QTY         EACH                      TOTAL
                     REPLACEMENT


    i
                                               V Vo                                       V
                                                                                           I
    L          . .                                       \
                                                                                          a
    I

    j


    i.
                   ON SITE TIME                                             ENGINEERS SIGNATURE
                                           1*5
                   TRAVEL TIME
                                               b
                   TOTAL HOURS             3L
                   THE ABOVE HAS BEEN C/ XRRIFD OUT TO MY SATISFAl pTION
                CUSTOMER SIGNATURE:                                                            POSITION:
                                                                                                   DATE:
                COMMENTS/FURTHER PARTS REQUIRED

                                 ft-                              L t*V .    Jy)

                                    •   %          *>6
         , _   W


                                                             i-

                                                             =
       AGREEMENT BETWEEN

SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB

             AND THE

      SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
This document is a written agreement between South Yorkshire Police (hereafter

referred to as 'The Police') and Sheffield Wednesday Football   Club (hereafter

referred to as ’The   Club’).




This agreement signed on behalf of both parties is created in pursuance of

recommendation four of the Interim Report of the Inquiry held by The Rt Hon

Lord Justice Taylor into the Hillsborough   Stadium Disaster of 15 April 1989.




The agreement between The Police and The Club is as follows




Maximum Capacities for Terraces

The Club will be responsible for limiting the number of spectators entering

each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity figure assessed in

accordance with recommendation two of the Interim Report.




The Club will do this by means of the computerised system which records the

number of persons passing through each turnstile.




The Club will inform the police control room when a particular pen or area is

approaching capacity.   The Club will be responsible for closing off further

access to a pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.      The

Police accept The Club may on occasions have difficulties in this regard,

therefore, The Police will provide assistance if necessary.




The Police accept that denial of access to any part of the ground may create

public order problems in respect of spectators so excluded and The Police will

prepare contingency plans to deal with siuch situations.




Filling and Monitoring Terraces

The Club will provide on the perimeter track a steward for each pen or

terraced area during such times that there are spectators in that pen :or
terraced area.    The sole duty of these stewards, who will be in addition to

any other stewards employed by The Club, will be to check crowd conditions in

the pen or terraced area to which they are assigned for possible overcrowding

or distress.     The Club will provide The Police with a plan of the ground

showing where the stewards with this responsibility will be situated.




The Police will provide in respect of each gate in the perimeter fence (or

group of gates if they are close together) police officers authorised to

decide whether or not to allow spectators through a gate to relieve

overcrowding.




All police officers deployed at perimeter gates which will be kept fully open

at all times when spectators are on the terraces, will be authorised as above.

Each will be in possession of a police radio in direct contact with police

ground control and will be identifiable by a distinctive coloured tabard.




The stewards checking the crowd for overcrowding or distress will not be

issued with police radios but the police officers on the gates and perimeter

track will communicate to police ground control any relevant matter brought to

their attention by these stewards.




Cutting Equipment

The Club will provide and make readily available suitable and sufficient

cutting equipment to permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release

numbers of spectators if necessary.     This cutting equipment will be operated

by employees of The Club who will be trained in its use.     The use of such

equipment will be at the discretion of the nominated senior police officer who

will be the officer in charge of policing the event.
Liaison

Before each match both parties to this agreement will liaise in respect of the

following matters

     i)   the anticipated number of spectators expected having regard

          to the separate supporter groups;




    ii)   the method of crowd segregation (if any) intended to be used;




   iii)   any information in relation to crowd problems;




    iv)   the number and location of turnstiles to be made available

          to each group;




     v)   an estimation of the time it will take each group to pass

          through the turnstiles;




    vi)   where tickets are used, that the information on those tickets

          corresponds with the planned arrangements for admitting

           spectators to the ground.




Postponement of kick-off is at the discretion of the police officer in command

at the ground.      It is therefore essential The Club provide a telephone link

between the referee's room and the police control room.




The Police have prepared contingency plans-for the event of emergency services

being called to the ground.      These include routes of access, rendezvous

points, accessibility within the ground and routes of egress.      The Police will

liaise with The Club concerning these arrangements whenever these plans are

amended or as otherwise appropriate.
    The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police has nominated his Deputy,

    Mr Peter Hayes QPM LLB MA, as the Chief Officer with responsibility for

    liaison with the management of each football club and local authority

    concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.




    Any variation of this agreement in respect of a particular match will be

    agreed by the parties in advance in writing.




    SIGNED                         .. on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday
                                      Football Club




    SIGNED                           >n behalf of South Yorkshire Police




    DATE     ...   .7.   .T




(
         EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                                                                                                                                   S t. A n drew s H ouse
                       (Consulting Engineers)                                                                                                                  23     K in g fie ld   R oad
         Directors :
                                                                                                                                                               S h e ffie ld S 11 9 A S
                                                                                                                                                               T el.: (0 7 4 2 ) 5 5 4 5 5 4
         W . E a s tw o o d               F .E ng ., B . E n g . . P h . D . . D . E n g . ,
                                         C . E n g . , F . I . C . E . , P . P . I . S t r u c t .E . ,                                                        Fax: (0 7 4 2 ) 5 5 4 3 3 0
                                         F .I.M ec h .E ., F .G .S., M .C on s.E .

         A .A .W o o d                   B.Eng., P h.D ., C .E ng., F.I.C.E.,
                                          F.I.S tru ct.E ., M . I . W . E . M . , M .C o n s .E .
                                                                                                                                                                                       and at :
         R .C . A .E a s tw o o d        B .S c ., C .E ng., M .I . C . E . , F.I.Struct.E .

         G .S p ir                        C.E ng., F.I.C .E., M .I.M e c h .E .                                                                                   P re m i e r     House
         C .S .G re a v e s               B .E n g .. C . E n g . , M . I . C . E . , M . I . S t r u c t . E .
                                                                                                                                                                  12/13 Hatton Garden
                                                                                                                                                                  London EC1N SAN
         S . P reston                     B.Eng.. C .E ng.. M .I.C .E ., M .I.S tru c t.E .
                                                                                                                                                                  Tel.: (01) 2 4 2 7436
         G .M . S e a m a n               B .S c ., C .E ng., M .I.C .E ., F.I.S tru ct.E .                                                                       Fax.: (01) 4 0 4 5424
         D .S . S te p h e n s            C.Eng., F.I.C .E., F .I.Stru ct.E ., F.B .I.M .


                                                                                                                             Our R e f:
                                                                                                                                                        WE/KB/11789
                                                                                                                             Your R e f:



         The Secretary,                                                                                                                                 15 August 1989
         Sheffield Wednesday Football Club,
(   ')   Hillsborough,
v        Sheffield S6 1SW



         Dear Mr. Mackrell,
                                                                                 Hillsborough Stadium
                                        Amendment of General Safety Certificate
                       I understand that under Appendix 2, item 7, which contains
         additional conditions to the Safety Certificate, there are
         requirements under sub-paragraphs                                                                         (a) and (b) regarding
         inspection of crush barriers and a review of the layout.
         I am pleased to report to you as follows


( ) Condition 7 (a)
                       Following Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations, M r . John
         Strange immediately carried out a visual inspection of all crush
         barriers for signs of corrosion.                                                                          Indeed, the inspection was
         much more thorough than required by Lord Justice Taylor's
         report because it included scraping with a sharp instrument
         immediately inside the ends of tubes so as to better reveal the
         true extent of corrosion. As a result of Mr. Strange's inspection
         I am able to report that none of the barriers was found to be
         sufficiently affected by corrosion for it to be necessary for
         it to be repaired or replaced by 16 August, 1989.




         Associates:
         J . A . S tra n g e     A . J . Clough                                            R .T an d y             J. M . W ood               C .M . Pollard              R. K. Goddan
         C.Eng., F.I.Struct.E.      B.A., C.Eng., M.C.I.B.S.E.,                            C.Eng., F.I.Struct.E.   B.Sc., C.Eng., M.I.C.E.,   B.Eng., C.Eng., M.I.C.E.,   F.S.C.A. (Accountant
                                    M.I.Mech.E.                                                                    M.I.Struct.E.              M.I.Struct.E.               & Administration
                                                                                                                                                                          Manager)

                                                            An U nlim ited C o m p a n y . R eg istered in E n g land - No. 1833144
EASTWOOD fr PARTNERS                                    SHEET   2.




  Condition 7 (b)
       The layout of all barriers in the ground has been
  reviewed.   As you will know, variations from the Green
  Guide were reported and were accepted at the time when the
  original Safety Certificate was issued in 1979.    Since then,
  various other modifications have been requested by South
  Yorkshire County Council or Sheffield City Council.       There are
  further departures from the criteria contained in chapter 9
  of the Green Guide.   We are currently preparing scheme
  drawings for re-arrangement of the various barriers so as
  to satisfy the guidelines.   When tenders are invited for the
  necessary works, we will also include such alterations or
  strengthening as may be necessary to cure incipient corrosion
  or other defects.
       As soon as the scheme drawings and specification are
  complete, we shall, of course, be submitting them on your
  behalf to the Sheffield City Council as licensing authority
  for their approval.


                                  Yours sincerely,
TELEPHONE:                                                         SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
SHEFFIELD (0742) 768522                                             POLICE HEADQUARTERS
TELEX: 547996                                                         SNIG HILL
FAX: (0742) 523243                                                     SHEFFIELD S3 8LY


P HAYES QPM LLB MA
DEPUTY CHIEF CONSTABLE                                                  DCC/JEL
                                                                        15 August 1989

I L Podmore Esq LLB
Chief Executive
City of Sheffield Metropolitan
  District
Town Hall
Sheffield SI 2HH




                                                  »v

Dear

INTERIM REPORT OF LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR

In pursuance of recommendation 26 of the above Report, the Chief Constable,
Mr Peter Wright CBE OStJ CBIM, has nominated me as the Chief Officer who is to
liaise with the management of each of the South Yorkshire football clubs and
local authorities concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.

I have formed an implementation team comprising senior police officers who
regularly have the responsibility for policing football grounds in the County,
to discharge those of Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations which fall to the
police. This important task requires of the police a consistent policy across
the Force area.

The primary concern of the South Yorkshire Police in this review, is to ensure
the safety of the public who attend football matches in South Yorkshire. I
know you share these concerns and I look forward to continued co-operation and
liaison between ourselves to this end.

 In consultation with each club I have had prepared a document which proposes
 an agreement between the police and the clubs, setting jDut the respective
 responsibilities of both parties for crowd safety and control. I have written
 to the clubs asking that the Club Secretary on behalf of his Chairman signs
 the agreement at the earliest opportunity thus enabling the police and the
 club to jointly fulfil their respective responsibilities as set out at
 recommendation four of the Report, namely, that such an agreement is
 established before the start of the 1989/90 football season.

 The timescale for implementing these interim recommendations has not allowed
 me to meet personally with members of the two football clubs in your area . I
 look forward to meeting with delegates of the clubs together with the local
 authority at the earliest opportunity.

 Yours sincerely




 Enclosure                         '
                                        ( A   A        c   c   )
                                                                                                     Sch 91 60
            " .   '   4              C IT Y O F S H E F F IE L D
                          <)-;■* ■                       ”VM ■■
            The Building Surveyor,        •                        70     Acting Head of Administration arid
            Department of Land and Planning                               Legal Department

    Date    11th''August, 1989                                     For the attention of Mr. D. M. Bownes
    Rsf     BSD/AB/JB
    Tel Ext       - Mr. Butler                                     Ref.



                                        Sheffield Wednesday F.C. PLC
                                         Estimated Terrace Capacity

            I refer to the telephone call between Mr. Bownes and my Principal District
            Surveyor, Mr. Butler, earlier this afternoon.

            The approximate holding capacities produced for the standing 'terrace
            areas do not take account of any turnstile ingress limitations, or
            those of egress or emergency egress limitations since it is my understanding
            that the Fire Authority will consider all these matters being that they
            have the primary function of estimation of terrace capacity.

            These figures therefore need to be carefully checked with those produced
            by the Fire Authority to ensure that account is taken of the need for
            any further limitations for the purposes of the proposed certificate
            amendment.

            My calculations based on the "green guide" modified by the Taylor Inquiry
            recommendations give the following

            1.    Spion Kop                                 18,200
            2.    North West Terrace (Upper)                 2,300
            3.    North West Corner (Lower)                    680          (Pen   7)

            In accordance with our consultations, figures have not been produced for
            Pens one to six of the West Terrace.

            I would appreciate the sight of the Fire Authority figures before the
            Certificate is amended.


o
                                                                        /   (   h   /V*   A   m   *   - "


                                CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM

From    The Building Surveyor,                    To      Acting Head of Administration and
        Department of Land and Planning                   Legal Department

Date      11th August, 1989                               For the attention of Mr. D. Bownes
Ref.      BSD/AB/JAB
Tel. Ext. 4162 - M r . Butler                      Ref.
                                                                                                            9 /1 8 1




                        Sheffield United Football Club, Bramall Lane Stadium
                                     Estimated Terrace Capacity

        I refer to my telephone call with your Mrs. Woodhead yesterday, and reiterate
        that my understanding is that the function of estimating Terrace capacity is
        performed by the Fire Authority.

       My principal staff have, however, burnt the 'midnight oil' to produce approximate
       holding capacities for these areas. Please note that the figures do not take
       account of any turnstile ingress limitations, or those of egress or emergency
       egress limitations.

        These figures, therefore, need to be carefully checked with those produced by
        the Fire Authority to ensure that account is taken of the need for any further
        limitations for the purposes of the proposed certificate.

       My calculations based on the Green Guide modified by the Taylor Inquiry
       recommendations give the following

        1.   Southern end of kop                               3,700
        2.   Main kop area                                    10,850
                Total For Kop                                 14,550


              John Street Terrace

       3.     Bramall Lane end                                 1,340
       4.     Kop end                                          2,050

                Total For John Street Terrace                  3,390

o       5.    Bramall Lane Terrace                             5,660

        Total Terrace Capacity:

                                    1.                         3,700
                                    2.                        10,850
                                    3.                         1,340
                                    4.                         2,050
                                    5.                         5,660
                                                              ”23,600


        x would appreciate the sight of the Fire Authority figures before the certificate
        is issued.
                                                        mm            mm         gmg       M M                                A A.
                                              Ths Fmnfy dub                                                                           \^
                          BmmMi Lane, Sheffield SB 4SU Telephone: 0742) 738958
                                                             Fax: 0142 133030




                                                                   I A. :A !«A A



                y   . E                                                                               .




         m M : 1 > A \ m i;a          C f i f JP £ M     -         c .c V iP           ^         a:


         «vrE:, A » f:H c u y , r                      i°i!55i...                                •Li.vih


         ra j




                                  f ‘M        i


                                            , ,iA.            K-        iV^!t,iL
                                                                                                                                             M,

                                         ■ i :.. 4.-A <*' '. *' ■
                                                                ; ■' ’ . r'

                                                             ' .,;•■». T. ,       f.




Qirccton : l,f,            (Ch*j:*iw*a;, A. Doo^y ■          - ,           ' :    AM L*v*«; M a                       iAWmgg,        P,G. WoolheuM
             Company S # s » i « | ;                   Tw          :-\u 3^<« . D.T,                        E n g lw d i * f . Mo, 81SI4
                                   •The Family Club"
     Bramall Lane, Sheffield S2 4SU Tel: 0742 738888 Fax; 0142 723030

     UC/DMF


     10 A lig n s !    1/Ja9



     M, Webster,
     A c t i n g Head ot Department,
     A d m i n i s t r a t i o n S Legal Department,
     Town Mali,
     Sheffield,
     SI 21ill

     Dear air,

     Srt•HiV 11f ^r)orH L 'irnijna

    T- ' [ J ±1 ■              l m m r y - l a t e r i ra   Roport RecDtrtrienda i ion

     F u r t h e r to your l e t t e r d a te d 0 August, I s e t out below n ur .'onmpms
     on trie H i i i s b r o u g h i n q u i r y In t e r i m Recommendation*!;-

     i,    l e r r a c e s a t Bramal1 Lane Stadium a r e d i v i d e d in fo the followin g
           a r e a s ; - Bramail Lane T e r r a c e , John S t r e e t T e r r a c e I'East
           John S t r e e t T e r r a c e i,Weatt and Sp ia n Kdp.            Those areafi aro
           not d i v i d e d i n t o pens arid a l r e a d y have t h e i r own eapaci t i e s .

     -*             5sstwocd and P a r t n e r s a re c u r r e n t l y a s s e s s i n g m a x im a
                    c a p a c i t y f i g u r e s in accordance w ith fiv» recommendations.

           (bj Assuming t h a t the c u r r e n t maximum c a p a c i t i e s f a i l w i t h i n
               the g u i d e l i n e s s p e c i f i e d in the Green Guide, the r e s p e c t i v e
               t'vij r e d u c t i o n s in c a p a c i t y would be as f o l l o w s : -

                                                                city        R o v C a o a o i tv
                Spion Kop                                                          ‘1, flu2
                John Hireei{East                      1 ,fi;n                      1 ,392
                        " (Westi                      2.832                          ,40?
                Bramaj i Larw                         7,354                        5,251

            ai n ‘e number of spectators entering each terrace area atovo
               ts aiready controlled hv a camptiteriwi counting svsfeni.




R.J. Brwa«y (Chairm an j, D. O eolny          .D ,r« rtw , AH. U v « r, M.A. Wtmgq, S . W r t g g, P,G, W cwlhowe
 Com pany S ecretary : D. C apper,        T m M m ® q m : D.T. Bmw«nt,       England Rag. Mo. $1564
(bj When the number of spectators admitted to any of the terrace
    areas reaches within 104 of the capacity figure the computer
    m on it or o p e r a t o r w i l l inform P o l i c e Con tro l who w i l l take
    the a p p r o p r i a t e a c t i o n to c l o s e down the n e c e s s a r y t u r n s t i l e s .

S h e f f i e l d United        Football Club accepts that i t i s responsible
for the f i l l i n g           of self-contained pens and terraced areas.
The m o n it o r in g o f       s p e c t a t o r s in each such pen or a r e a to avoid
overcrowding will                be undertaken by stewards employed by the
CillD,

A w r i t t e n agreement between the Club and the Police i s c u r r e n t l y
           prepared..

S h e f f i e l d United Football Club will provide an adequate number
of s te w a rd s to be solely responsible for monitoring the crowd
f o r overcrowding or distress from the perimeter                            track.P o l i c e
O f f i c e r s w i l l a l s o be deployed on the p e r i m e t e r track to comply
w ith the requiremen t of Recommendation 8,                      Such o f f i c e r s w i l l
be in p o s s e s s i o n of a p o l i c e r a d io and w i l l use ihisi to communicate
w ith the police c o n t r o l room, any m a t t e r brought to their
a t t e n t i o n by the perimeter           tracK stewards.

The p e r i m e t e r tr a c k stew ards w i l l be c l e a r l y ide nt i r'labie
by the wearing of b ib s of a d i f f e r e n t c o l o u r to that of the
nurLiini    :i   frHvdi iIs ;

As you ore aware the gates in the perimeter fences have been
removed, ^ We a r e , however, p a i n t i n g the frame of m e gate
in a d i f f e r e n t c o l o u r to the p e r i m t e r fence              and    erecting
Bnergeney E x it s i g n s above e ver y su ch g a te .

As referred tu above, aii gates to the pitch have been removed.

South Y o rk sh ire P o l i c e w i l l provide o f f i c e r s as r e q u i r e d and
ensure t h a t t h e i r i d e n t i t i e s a r e known to the s te w a rd s and
o t h e r o f f i c e r s in the v i c i n i t y , These o f f i c e r s w i l l in p o s s e s s i o n
of radios,

Sheffield United F o o tb a ll Club w i l l p ro v id e sufficient cutting
gear as r e q u i r e d . We would welcome advice on what can be
considered suitable cutting equipment.                 At p r e s e n t we are
considering the use of Bolt C roppers which c ou ld be stored
in our Groundsman ‘s office in the c o r n e r of the New South
S ta n d/B ram ail Lane and e a s i l y a c c e s s i b l e . We would su g g est
our three groundsmen and maintenance e n g i n e e r would be suitable
to use this equipment bur would welcome any o t h e r suggestions.

A ll barriers have been visual.lv inspected by Eastwood ft Partners
and. we a re awaiting their report.
12 Likewise, Eastwood 6 P a r t n e r s a r e review ing the la y o u t or
   t o r l e r s t Q e n s u r a th a t I t com pllM « t h U » c r i t e r i a c o n ta in e d
   in a chapter of thfl Green Guide,
18. An independent T u r n s t i l e S e r v i c i n g Company, Mayor T u r n s t i l e s
        insoertine our turnstiles early next week and w i l l meabure
    the' p o t e n t i a l rate ot flow. Regular inspections w i l l be organised
    th e re afte r,

IQ t>ice flip p o t e n t i a l flow rate has been measured we will be able
   to'accurately assess whether all spectators intended to be admitted
   to a particular viewing area can pass through the t u r n s t i l e s
   s e r v i n g th a t area within one hour.    If this cannot be achieved
    in any particular area the capacity will be reduced accotdingly.

 20       As already indicated in 3 ( b ) arrangements nave oeen made w ith
          the Police to close down turnstiles when the number o f s p e c t a t o r *
          a dmitted to t h a t p a r t i c u l a r a r e a approaches t h e c ct pa citv ,

 0'2      Signposting outside and inside tne ground i» c u r r e n t l y being
          reviewed and will comply with the requirements of this
          rtJCQHinendaf ion.
 ^        we b e l i e v e t h a t the i n f o r m a t i o n c u r r e n t l y p r i n t e d on ou r matcn
          t i c k e t s compiles w ith t h i s recomoanaatioti.

 34, We do n o t , a t p r e s e n t , r e q u e s t s u p p o r t e r s th ro ug h i m o m A t i u n
     on t i c k e t s , to ta ke t n a i r p la c e s by a s p e c i f i e u                     *ne
     pfiiino agree t h a t i t would be unwise 10 do

  M       Arrangements have been a i d e w ith the b t . John's,
          Briaarin to omoire th a t at l e a s t o w t r a i n e d t i r s t a i d e r                pe.
          1000 spectators is In Attendance.
  41       Sheffield United Football Club already employ a m ed ical p r a c t i t i o n e r
           to be p r e s e n i at each natch. in addition^ we a c t u a r y nave
           a t l e a s t one. and sometimes, two o t h e r m e dical p r a c t i t i o n e r s
           in a t t e n d a n c e . Ue note the requiremen t to a r r i v e a t i e a s .
           one hour b e f o r e the a p p o in te d k i c k o f f time and rema in u n t i l
           a t l e a s t h a l f an hour a f t e r the end of the game.    H i s whereabouta
           w i l l be made known to thos e in the p o l i c e room.

     42    Arrangements have been made w ith the South Y o r k s h ir e M e t r o p o l i t a n
           Ambulanee s e r v i c e to p ro v id e the n e c e s s a r y ambulance cover
           in a d d i t i o n to t h a t a l r e a d y provide d by S t . J o h n ’ s Ambulance.

     Numburo and Du tie.? o f Stowards
     We a n t i c i p a t et h a t the number of stewards used a t Bramali i-ane
     w i l l be ap p ro x im a te ly 80.   These w i l l be used f o r the -Oa ow i
     du ties: ■

            1.                of each oxih
            2.    Control ana direction of spectators entering ana leaving
                   th« o*.ndi^r..
          3.     Sector Stewards who will patrol th e Stadium and deal with
                 any emergency including raising alarm and extinguishing
                  any f i r “ ,

          4.      P e rim ete r t r a c k stewards to monitor the crowd for overcrowding
                  u r d.i f, : l/BhK ,

          5.     Manning o t internal gates which constitute part of the
                 means to escape from the ground.


We are currently p r e p a r in g Steward Deployment Sheets which w i l l
specify each area of the ground to be covered bv a b toward. Each
area w i l l co rre sp o n d to a numbered stew ards bib to i d e n t i f y e a s i l y
w hether o r not th a t steward1a duties a r e b e in s performed c o r r e c t l y .

Copies of these deployment s h e e ts »iil be forwarded to you early
n 6 X f    vV tii-r. .



If you r e q u i r e              any    further   informal ion   p le a s e   «io nui   htrSj.tai.fi
to cnnf,-:'- me.

Yours                         ,




 >\v; y i.-vr; ,
 y)rpr!dj5v
                           cc
                                       ^ x x > j\d 3 r
    EASTWOOD & PARTNERS                                                                                                                       A n d re w s H o use
                  (C o n s u ltin g E n g i n e e r s )                                                                                       K in g fie ld R o a d
    Directors:                                                                                                                                f f ie ld S 1 1 9 A S
    W . E a s tw o o d                                                                                                                        : (0 7 4 2 ) 5 5 4 5 5 4
                                   F.Eng., B.Eng., Ph.D., D.Eng.,
                                   C.Eng., F.I.C.E., P.P.I.Struct.E.,                                                                         : (0 7 4 2 ) 5 5 4 3 3 0
                                   F.I.Mech.E., F.G.S., M.Cons.E.
    A .A .W o o d                  B.Eng., Ph.D., C.Eng., F.I.C.E.,
                                   F.I.Struct.E., M .I.W .E.M ., M.Cons.E.
                                                                                                                                                                and a t :
    R.C. A . E a s tw o o d        B.Sc., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., F.I.Struct.E.

    G .S p ir                      C.Eng., F.I.C.E., M.I.Mech.E.                                                                            emier     House
                                                                                                    O.S.M ..    I   LIB
    C .S .G re a v e s             B.Eng., C.Eng., M .I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                                                          [13 Hatton Garden
                                                                                                                                       Condon EC1N 8A N
    S . P resto n                  B.Eng., C.Eng., M .I.C.E., M .I.Struct.E.
                                                                                                                                       T el.: (01) 2 4 2 743 6
    G .M . S e a m a n             B.Sc., C.Eng., M.I.C.E., F.I.Struct.E.                                                              Fax.: (01) 4 0 4 5 4 2 4
    D .S . S te p h e n s          C.Eng., F.I.C.E., F.I.Struct.E., F.B.I.M.


                                                                                                Our R e f:
                                                                                                                             WE/KB/11789
                                                                                                Your R e f:

    Administration and Legal Department,                                                                                     7 August 1989
    Town Hall,
    Sheffield Si 2HH.



O   Dear Sirs,
                                           Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
                                 Recommendations of Interim Taylor Report
                At a meeting with directors of the Club which was held
    yesterday (Sunday, 6 August) we were asked to liaise with the
    licensing authority in carrying out all Lord Justice Taylor's
    recommendations as speedily and effectively as possible.
                I understand that a meeting has now been arranged at the
    ground for 10 a.m. on Wednesday, 9 August, at which the various
    matters for action can be discussed.
                Although there have already been discussions with the Police
    regarding the use of the Leppings Lane end terraces, no agreement
Q   has yet been reached.                                    However it is assumed that the Kop will be
    in normal use for matches and that subject to any works which
    are required not interfering with the safety and comfort of
    spectators, the capacity from now on will                                                             be downgraded by 15%
    from 21,000 to 17,850.


                                                                               Yours faithfully,


    c.c.          Mr.      G.   Mackrell
                  Mr.      K.   Addy
                  Mr.      E.   Barron
                  Mr.      C.   Woodward

    Associates:
    J. A . S tra n g e      A . J. C lough                   R. Tandy                J, M . W ood                   C. M . Pollard                R. K. G odden
    C.Eng.,F.I.Struct.E.    B.A., C.Eng., M.C.I.B.S.E.,      C.Eng., F.I.Struct.E.   B.Sc., C.Eng., M.I.C.E.,       B.Eng.,C.Eng.,M.I.C.E.,       F.S.C.A. (Accountant
                            M.I.Mech.E.                                              M.I.Struct.E.                  M.I.Struct.E.                 & Administration
                                                                                                                                                  Manager)

                                            An U nlim ited C o m p an y . R e g is te re d in E ng lan d - No. 1833144
        cc_ U x                   T        <3)1 %
                  '^OAj\d      <J




                                                                                 HOME OFFICE
                                                                        Q ueen A nne’s G ate L ondon SW 1H 9 A T
                                                                                 Direct line: 01-273
                                                                               Switchboard: 01-273 3000



Our reference:      FEP/89 35/48/88
Your reference:


       The C h ie f E x e c u tiv e                                                           7 AUG 1989
       C ou n ty C o u n c ils
       M e tr o p o lita n D i s t r i c t C o u n c ils                                  | K.fc.U. IP.E.C.U.
       L ondon B orou gh C o u n c ils
       C om m on C o u n c i l o f t h e C i t y o f L o n d o n
       F ir e and C i v i l D efen ce A u t h o r it ie s

       C h ie f    O ffic e r s       of   P o lic e

       C h ie f    F ir e   O ffic e r s

       C h i e f A m b u la n c e O f f i c e r s
                                                            ^ O M l N i S T R




                                                                                            ugust     1989
                                                                                 tfcAD

                                                                                89

                                                                                  CONV

       D e a r S ir /M a d a m

       HOME O F F I C E CIRCULAR 6 8 / 1 9 8 9

       I N T E R I M REPORT OF THE HILLSBOROUGH IN Q U IR Y
       In tr o d u c tio n
       T h e I n t e r i m R e p o r t o f t h e I n q u i r y s e t u p b y t h e H ome S e c r e t a r y
       in t o th e t r a g ic e v e n ts a t H ills b o r o u g h f o o t b a ll ground S h e f f ie ld
       o n 1 5 A p r i l h a s now b e e n p u b l i s h e d .          A copy o f th e R eport i s
       a tta ch ed .      F u r t h e r c o p i e s a r e a v a i l a b l e f r o m HMSO b o o k s h o p s .

       2.        T he p u r p o s e o f t h i s c i r c u l a r i s t o in fo r m r e c i p i e n t s o f t h e
       c o n t e n t s o f t h e R e p o r t an d t o u r g e th em t o t a k e r e q u i r e d a c t i o n
       w it h o u t d e la y in o r d e r t o im p le m e n t, a s n e c e s s a r y , t h e I n q u ir y 's
       r e c o m m e n d a tio n s t o im p r o v e s a f e t y a r r a n g e m e n ts a t s p o r t s g r o u n d s .

       G overn m en t: r e s p o n s e

       3.      ' T h e Hom e S e c r e t a r y h a s w e l c o m e d t h e t h o r o u g h n e s s o f t h e
       R e p o r t a n d i t s r e c o m m e n d a tio n s w h ic h h e b e l i e v e s s h o u ld b e d e a l t
       w it h w it h o u t d e la y p e n d in g t h e lo n g e r term f in d in g s o f t h e
       I n q u ir y w h ic h w i l l b e p u b lis h e d in i t s F in a l R e p o r t.
E.R.



       Scope o f       -th e r e c o m m e n d a t io n s

       4.       A lt h o u g h t h e s c o p e o f r e c o m m e n d a t io n s i s w i d e t h e y a r e a im e d
       p r im a r ily a t f o o t b a ll le a g u e grou n ds and th e in t e r n a t io n a l
       sta d iu m s u s e d f o r s o c c e r and ru gb y w h ere t h e r e a r e l i a b l e t o b e
       la r g e , d e n s e ly p ack ed crow ds on t e r r a c e s .            R e c ip ie n t s sh o u ld
       n o n e th e le ss c o n sid e r t h e ir a p p lic a tio n t o o th e r d e sig n a te d sp o r ts
       g r o u n d s and s p o r t s g r o u n d s a t w h ic h l a r g e c r o w d s a r e i n
       a tten d a n ce.

       5.       T he 43 r e c o m m e n d a tio n s a r e i n p a r a g r a p h 3 1 6 .         T hey a r e in
       tw o c a t e g o r i e s :    t h e 28 a s t e r is k e d a r e t h o s e r e q u ir in g
       im p le m e n t a t io n b e f o r e t h e s t a r t o f t h e new f o o t b a l l s e a s o n o r
       im m e d ia te ly t h e r e a f t e r ;   t h e r e m a in in g 15 a r e t h o s e w h ic h ,             ( ,
       a lth o u g h r e q u i r i n g im m e d ia te a c t i o n a r e l i k e l y t o t a k e lo n g e r t o
       put in to e f f e c t .         T h e H om e S e c r e t a r y n e v e r t h e l e s s u r g e s
       r e c ip ie n ts to ta k e u rg en t a c tio n on b o th c a te g o r ie s so a s to put
       i n t o e f f e c t a s m any o f t h e r e c o m m e n d a tio n s a s p o s s i b l e b e f o r e t h e
       sta r t o f th e season .

       The g u id e      to    sa fety        at   sp o rts   grounds

       6.        I t i s a n t i c i p a t e d t h a t t h e G u id e w i l l b e am ended t o r e f l e c t
       t h e I n q u i r y ' s f i n d i n g s g in d u e c o u r s e a f t e r c o n s u l t a t i o n w ith
       a p p r o p r i a t e b o d i e s . v"“T'iAhyv' c h a n g e s w i l l t a k e a c c o u n t o f t h e F i n a l
       R e p o r t 's r e c o m m e n d a tio n s.        If. t h e r e i s a n y d o u b t a s t o t h e
       n a t u r e o f c r u s h b a r r i e r t e s t i n g d e s c r i b e d i n A n n e x C o f t h e G u id e
       a d v i c e c a n b e o b t a i n e d f r o m t h e H om e O f f i c e 0 1 - 2 1 7 5 3 5 2 .

       The S a f e t y    of      S p o rts    G rounds A c t    1975

       7.        C o n sid e r a tio n i s a ls o b e in g g iv e n t o any n e c e s s a r y
       e n fo r c e m e n t o f t h e R e p o r t 's r e c o m m e n d a tio n s b y m ean s o f a                  ("\
       S t a t u t o r y I n s t r u m e n t u n d e r s e c t i o n 15A o f t h e S a f e t y o f S p o r t s
       G rounds A c t 1 9 7 5 ( t h e 1975 A c t) r e q u i r i n g s a f e t y c e r t i f i c a t e s t o
       in c lu d e m a n d a to ry te r m s and c o n d it i o n s .         C o n s u lta tio n a s r e q u ir e d
       u n d er s e c t i o n 18 o f t h e 1975 A c t w i l l f i r s t b e c a r r ie d o u t b e f o r e
       an y su ch O rd er i s m ade.

       F o o tb a ll   c lu b s

       8.       A copy o f t h i s c ir c u la r to g e th e r w ith th e R ep ort h a s been
       s e n t t o a l l 92 f o o t b a l l le a g u e c lu b s and t h e i n t e r n a t i o n a l
       sta d iu m s in t h e e x p e c t a t io n t h a t th e y w i l l c o - o p e r a t e f u l l y .
       S h o u ld c o - o p e r a t i o n n o t b e fo r th c o m in g l o c a l a u t h o r i t i e s a r e
       re m in d ed o f t h e i r p o w e r s u n d e r s . 10 o f t h e 1 9 7 5 A c t f o r u s e i f
       th e r e i s j udged to b e a s e r io u s r is k to s p e c ta to r s in any p a r t                       of
       th e ground.

       R esou rce      im p lic a tio n s

       9.       W h ils t a c k n o w le d g in g t h a t l o c a l a u t h o r i t i e s w i l l n eed t o
       e x a m in e c u r r e n t p r i o r i t i e s i n o r d e r t o a c t i o n t h e I n q u i r y ' s
r e c o m m e n d a tio n s, i t i s n o t e n v is a g e d t h a t t h    e r e sh o u ld be
s i g n i f i c a n t lo n g -te r m r e s o u r c e im p lic a t io n s   f o r th em .      The c o s t
o f any a d d it io n a l p o lic in g a n d /o r p r o v is io n          o f a m b u la n c e
s e r v ic e s a t fo o tb a ll grounds i s ex p e c te d to               b e m et by th e c lu b s
o r ground o p e r a to r s th e m se lv e s.

O th er

10.     Any e n q u ir ie s a b o u t t h i s c i r c u l a r e x c e p t b a r r ie r t e s t i n g
( s e e p a r a g r a p h 6 a b o v e ) s h o u l d b e a d d r e s s e d t o Mr A B r o w n
(0 1 -273 2 7 6 5 ).

11.       C o p ie s   a lso   go to   th o se    b o d ie s   on th e   a tta ch ed       lis t.

                                         Y ours      fa ith fu lly




                                         F ir e    and E m ergency         P la n n in g    D ep a rtm en t
E.R.



       Association of County Councils

       Association of Metropolitan Authorities

       London Boroughs Association

       Association of London Authorities

       Association of District Councils

       Welsh Counties Association

       Association of Chief Police Officers

       Clerks to Police Authorities

       Regional Managers, Health Authorities

       Chief and Assistant Chief Fire Officers' Association

       National Association of Fire Officers

       Fire Brigades Union

       Police Federation

       Police Superintendents' Association

       Association of Chief Ambulance Officers

       Football Association

       Football Association of Wales

       Football League

       Football Trust

       Football Grounds Improvement Trust

       Rugby Football Union

       Welsh Rugby Football Union

       Rugby Football League

       Speedway Control Board

       Cricket Council

       Jockey Club

       National Greyhound Racing Club
E.R.



       Lawn T e n n i s       A sso c ia tio n

       A ll    E n g la n d   T e n n is     and C ro q u et       C lu b

       R oyal      a n d A n c i e n t G o l f C lu b

       RAC M o t o r      S p o rts    A sso c ia tio n

       B r itish       B oard     o f A m ateu r A t h l e t i c s

       H ockey      A sso c ia tio n

       B r itish       S h ow J u m p in g A s s o c i a t i o n

       N a tio n a l    F e d e r a tio n     of   F o o tb a ll    S u p p o rters   C lu b s

       F o o tb a ll    S u p p o rters A s s o c ia tio n

       St     Johns     A m b u la n c e

       S p o rts    C o u n c ils     fo r    E n g la n d    an d W a le s

       C en tra l      C o u n c il   fo r    P h y sic a l    R e c r e a tio n
                                 I y ui- dntt-t-tcLU — m e m u H A r a u u m

 From
                                                        ° Admin, and Legal Dept.
        Hillsborough Task Team                            Land and Planning Dept.
                                                          Design and Building Dept.
Date 4th August 1989
Ref.
Tel. Ext. 4666                                         Ref.


        The Hillsborough Task Team has been established to offer professional services
        to those involved with the Hillsborough disaster and inquiry. Staff in several
        council departments were directly and indirectly involved in the-3 subsequent
        inquiry. It is generally recognised that professional staff connected with
        such events need to be given the opportunity to describe the tasks they undertook
        and share their experience.

        Emergency services workers have already had such de-briefing sessions. Undertaking
        this process within one's own department can be difficult, so it has been agreed
        with Occupational Health that we should offer this service. We therefore invite
        anyone who may have been involved with the inquiry to a de-briefing meeting on
        Wednesday 9th August at 3.30.pm. This will be held in room 3 on the top floor
        at Hillsborough Library.

        Other de-briefing meetings are being arranged for later in August, should anyone
, \     wishing to attend not be able to come on the above date please contact me should
        you require further information or details.
                            u i i y   u r   a n c i-i-ic L U   —   m tm u K A iv u u iv r


From
                                                                   Admin, and Legal Dept.
       Hillsborough Task Team                                      Land and Planning Dept.
                                                                   Design and Building Dept.
Date 4th August 1989
Ref;
Tel. Ext. 4666                                                 Ref.


       The Hillsborough Task Team has been established to offer professional services
       to those involved with the Hillsborough disaster and inquiry. Staff in several
       council departments were directly and indirectly involved in the'3 subsequent
       inquiry. It is generally recognised that professional staff connected with
       such events need to be given the opportunity to describe the tasks they undertook
       and share their experience.

       Emergency services workers have already had such de-briefing sessions. Undertaking
       this process within one's own department can be difficult, so it has been agreed
       with Occupational Health that we should offer this service. We therefore invite
       anyone who may have been involved with the inquiry to a de-briefing meeting on
       Wednesday 9th August at 3.30.pm. This will be held in room 3 on the top floor
       at Hillsborough Library.

    Other de-briefing meetings are being arranged for later in August, should anyone
    wishing to attend not be able to come on the above date please contact me should
  ! you require further information or details.
A a t i n g Hoad o f D e p a r t m e n t                               Mrs E B a s h f o r t h
                                                                       P r in c ip a l S o lic it o r -
                                                                       Mrs P W oodhead
3 A ugust 1909                                                         S o lic ito r
ah / gw
                                                                       Mr D H B o w n es f
4 0 1 0 - Mr W e b s t e r                                             L ic e n sin g O ffic e r




rot HILLSBOROUGH REPORT

F u r th e r t o o u r c o n v e r s a t io n o f e a r l i e r to d a y # a s so o n a s t h e r e p o r t i o
r e l e a s e d t o L aw yers a t 9 . 0 0 a o to m o rro w , c o u ld y o u e n s u r e t h a t im m e d ia te
c o p i e s a r e t a k e n , s o f a r a s i s p r a c t i c a b l e , (d e p e n d in g on t h e o i s e o f
th o r e p o r t ) and p a s s e d t o C o u n c i l l o r s B e t t s , K n ig h t and F io r e *

It      is     a ls o   n ecessary,     at    th e   o a r lie st       o p p o r tu n ity , to       g iv e som a
c o n s id e r a t io n a s t o th e s o r t o f p r e s s s ta te m e n t t h a t th o C o u n c il c o u ld
o r s h o u l d m ake i n r e s p o n s e t o t h e i t e m s i n t h e r e p o r t , p a r t i c u l a r l y a s
i t i s g o i n g t o b e m ade p u b l i c , I u n d e r s t a n d , a t 1 1 . 0 0 am t o m o r r o w .

I t h i n k , t h e r e f o r e , t h a t we n e e d t o h a v e a s h o r t d i s c u s s i o n          som ew here
b etw een 9 .0 0 and 1 1 .0 0 t o g o o v e r t h e s e a s p e c t s o f th o m a tte r .

I n a d d i t i o n , m em bers o f t h e MEGS C o m m it t e e who s a t o n t h o S u b - C o m m it t e e
g r a n tin g th o o r ig in a l l i c e n c e , have in d ic a te d a d e s ir e t o have p a ssed
t o th e m t h e r e l e v a n t p o r t i o n s o f t h e r e p o r t , i e t h o s e d e a l i n g w i t h t h e
C i t y C o u n c i l , a t t h e e a r l i e s t o p p o r t u n i t y a n d I w o u ld b o g r a t e f u l i f
y o u w o u ld       a ls o ensu re     th a t    th a t   occurs        as   soon     as   is      r e a so n a b ly
 p r a c tic a b le .
           C eh                m    i




[IV fo   / I f i i /H r i Pa ' i




                                   I k f i l
                                   EASTWOOD & P A R T N E R S ,
                                   C O N S U L T IN G E N G IN E E R S
                                   S T . ANDREWS H O U S E ,
                                   2 3 , K IN G F IE L D ROAD,
                                   S H E F F IE L D S 1 1 9A S
                                                                                   B A R R IE R       TESTS
                                '2 4 3 1        l a/ n                             RECORD SH E E T

                                  COM PLETED B Y             y ,^

 . j \R R IE R   B A R R IE R S I Z E               MAXIMUN T E S T LOAD              ALL P I m e n s ;
                 ft N o . O F S P A N S
                                                                    A P P L IE D     T E flT      I
                                                                    LOAD
                                                    K N /M          TO N N ES      REST        LOAD       U

                               2 -L ,.
                                                         A w v W ilj: :    5 n V f L^5b        6 v ia I




                     IO   2 - * - f- ‘




 :               jLf. L \ ' U            I 4Q        (e.
i. i—      1 ______                              I v

                                    2* 3            AvaiLagLu ‘bpAczl ySo &HAII
                                   3     iu




                 2    <d> \ ' L p
J MERVYN JONES MSc                                          MEDICO LEGAL CENTRE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                   Watery Street
IHlLLSBOROUGH;JNQUlBYlTEfAMg                                Sheffield S3 7ET
                                                            Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 6 1 0 5
W EST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ                                     KNOWSLEY HALL
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                      Prescot
Colmore Circus Queensway         _                          Merseyside L34 4AF
Birmingham B4 6NQ                                           Telephone: 0 5 1 -4 4 9 3871
Telephone: 021-236 5 0 00, extn. 2 0 2 5

IMECHELLS GREEN POLICE STA TION                             Your Ref:
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA                                           Our Ref:            JMJ/VSC
Telephone: 021-359 333 2
                                                             Date:              3. August 1989


             Head of Department                         )            ■Or-i ftLEGAL
             Administration and Legal Department                       ’;:FLD
             City of Sheffild
             Metropolitan District
             Town Hall
                                                            0 7. AUG 3 9             paa
             Sheffield
             S1 2HH
                                                                                     CL

             Dear Sir

             I refer to your letter of 28 July in respect of Sheffield Wednesday
             Football Club. You raised two aspects.

            Firstly, I am not in a position to indicate the barriers which were
            found to be corroded as this is a general observation of some and cannot,
            under any circumstances, be a difinitive statement on the general
            condition of barriers at the groud. The purpose of my includig that in
            the letter was to ensure that Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, their
            Consultant Engineers and Sheffield City Council were aware that there
            were difficulties and that a thorough check should be made before the
            ground was taken back into use. My advice would be that the Club, their
            Engineers and you should make a thorough examination of all barriers and
            draw your own conclusions and take appropriate action as you see fit.
            The onus must, therefore, rest with you and the other parties to make
            sure that the ground is safe, for I cannot, nor can West Midlands Police,
            nor the Health and Safety Executive take any responsibility for proper
            safety inspection of the ground. This is not intended to be unhelpful,
            for the purpose of my origin! letter was merely to tender that advice.
            I have spoken to Mr Mackrell about this at the ground this morning and
            he indicated to me that he understood his responsibilities.

            The second aspect you raise is enquiring when you can have the return of
            your department's original files. At this stage we are still bringing
            together all details for the Coroner's Inquests and until these have been
            concluded, or until our enquiries have established that your records are
            of no further relevance, then I must retain the originals. Having said
            that I am quite happy for you to have free and regular access and if
            needs be for copies to be taken.  Perhaps you would be so good as to let
            me know if you would like to take copies so that we can put
            arrangements in hand to our mutual satisfaction.




   PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE A T          Birmingham
                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE
                                          AMBULANCE SERVICE HEADQUARTERS
                                               FAIRFIELD, MOORGATE ROAD,
                                                  ROTHERHAM S60 2BQ.
                                          TELEPHONE: ROTHERHAM (0709) 828820

                                    AP/RM/MDS/112:3
                  OUR REF:                                                                 Mr. A. PAGE, JP, F.A.S.I.
                  YOUR REF;                                                                     CH IEF M ETR OPOLITA N
                                                                                                A M B U LA N C E OFFICER
                  Please ask for;
2 August 1989
                                                        ADMINISTRATION & LEGAL
                                                           DEPT. SHEFFIELD
                                                           HEAD OP- 1 ASSISTANT
                                                      A     DEPT    | HEAD      ILS
Mr Bownes
Chief Licensing Officer
Administration and Legal Department                   B      o 4.      /DG 89      •   PAA
Town Hall                                             C
SHEFFIELD
                                                          O SM .   |   US   |   CONV
                                                                                       n
                                                    GS
SI 2HH


Dear Mr Bownes

In reply to your recent letter and meeting at my Headquarters, I would like
to elaborate on points which have direct bearing on the involvements of
this Service in playing its part to ensure that places of public activity
are made as safe as possible.    Should this Service be required to attend
such specified activities, it will do so in the knowledge that that the
preparation for its part has been undertaken by the only professional
organisation in South Yorkshire, with the expertise and resources to do so,
The South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service.

The South Yorkshire Ambulance Service should be involved in the formal
planning stage in any function and have a right to be represented at
committee stages if there is a need to raise formal objections.

This service would expect involvement with the Certification Authority to
any public gathering which they licence, i.e. Pop Concerts,        Sports
Complexes, World Student Games etc.

SYMAS would not automatically accept Police or any other                               organisation's
decisions on Ambulance requirements at specified activities.

There is a positive need to identify inadequacies in communication systems
and satisfy ourselves that they are up to the required standard.

The South Yorkshire Ambulance Service would most certainly expect to be
consulted regarding the location and accommodation for casualties, i.e
First Aid Rooms, and the standard, quality and quantity of medical
equipment retained on-site.   SYMAS is able to supply and replenish stocks
of medical equipment at reasonable rates, and can assess the need for each
individual stadium or area of specified activity.

SYMAS would be able to offer advice on the most suitable access and egress,
Casualty Clearing and Temporary Mortuary Points.

If the Club Doctor is there specifically to treat players then it is
recommended that another named doctor be identified who is available to
treat spectators.    It is imperative that the doctor is trained in
resuscitation skills to the National Health Service Training Authority
Paramedic standard.




                                                                                                           CP65/32586
    2

    2 August 1989

    Mr Bownes


    The British Red Cross Society and St John's Ambulance Brigade will need to
    be informed of any activity in which SYMAS has a role to play.  SYMAS will
    take overall charge of the situation and the voluntary organisations will
    work under SYMAS directions.

    The South Yorkshire Ambulance Service have mass evacuation, crowd situation
    and civil disorder training and have practical experience in all these
    problem areas.   SYMAS staff are NOT first aiders - Ambulance aid is the
    function of this Service.

    Any provision   stipulated by   the Licensing Authority will   be provided   by
    this Service.

    Any alteration to plans and planning for Football Stadiums and specified
    activities must be noted to the Statutory Ambulance Authority. The Service
    would also require plans of changes to the surrounding area.

    SYMAS should be automatically included on all mailing lists with particular
    emphasis on FLANS, OFFICIALS and MEETINGS.    The Service may then take the
    decision as to whether or not they will attend specified meetings.

    SYMAS will be the organising authority for its resources.  The charges for
    such resources will be levied at the certificate holder, who will only pay
    for the initial resources, requested in writing to SYMAS.

    SYMAS is an accredited Health and Safety training organisation and would
    very much like to be involved with the training of all support staff to
    Football Stadiums and specified activities.

    I feel sure that with regard to the areas I have covered, you         will be
    convinced that this organisation can be of valuable assistance        to your
    department   on  the  annual  inspection   for  the   granting   of     Safety
    certificates.   Should you feel this     is the case, my services     to   the
    Licensing Authority will be free from any charge.    I look forward   to your
    reply.

    If I can be of any further assistance       please do not hesitate to contact
    either myself or my Staff Officer, Mr R    Morley, at theabove address.

    Youi/s^ sincerely




i   A Page 5 ______________________________
    CHIEF METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE OFFICER
                                                     “The Family C M "
                                  Bramall Lone, Sheffield S2 4SU Telephone: (0742) 7389SS




                                                                   FACSIMILE



                   TO:         MR. M. WEBSTER, l.RGAf, AND ADMINISTRATION P A X NO: 735QQj_




                   PROM:       DAVTD CAPPER, COMPANY SF-CRKTARY.




                   Q/VTE:       1 AUGUST 1989                                           TIMB:          it.4s   a .m   .
jk;



                   NO. O F PAGES:


                   MESSAGE;
                                                          COPY OP A LETTER RE SAFETY IN
                                                   SPORTS GROUNDS POSTED 31-7.89 AND ATTACHED FOR
I t                                                            YOUk WORMATi.ON.



 I




 Stlv. ■
       .
                         : B.I. I m l i r (Chsintuta), D, D«ol*y (Mw»»in*r PU*#ctoi), A.H. U v* r, M.A. W rtgg, R.         ^ C'
     K&iifc;' .n            n o m o u v S * e r* tu v : D. GffiHR   T«wn M u w g w : D.T. B u attt,     EngUnd K#g. No. 618B4
                               ‘The FamUy dub"
  BraxnaU Lane, Sheffield 52 4SU Tel: 0742 738955 Fax: 0742 723030



       DC/AB?

       31 July 1989


       Mr. M. Webster,
       Acting Head of Department,
       Administration and Legal Department,
       The Town Hall,
       Sheffield SI 2HH


       Dear Sir,

       SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - THE SHEFFIELD UNITED SPORTS GROUND

       With reference to .your letter of 27 July, I set out below our
       comments on the issues you have raised therein;

       STEWARDINC AND CROWD             CONTROL AT FOOTBALL MATCHES

       Our stewarding and crowd control procedures have been
       discussed at some length with the Police during the close
       season. Among the matters under consideration have been:

       a)        Steward deployment, draft plans have been prepared
                  showing each stewards area of responsibility.
       b)        Numbered bibs will be provided to identify each steward
                 indiv id u a l l y .
        c)       The feasibility of providing sector stewards with radio
                  control facilities linked to the Police Control centre.
        d)       Plans for the provision of a new Police Control room,
        e)       The improvement of the Internal public address system and
                 the possibility of providing an external public address
                 system.
        f)       Evacuation Route, The Police, Fire and Ambulance
                  services have agreed an emergency access and
                  egress route from Cherry Street to the New South Stand.
                  This route will be clearly marked by a painted hatched
                  area. The Police would prevent any parking in the
                 -streets around the ground to afford unhindered access
                  to the emergency vehicles.

        n
        c. ■'*



R.J. Br««lay (Chairman), D, Dooloy (M/unfcgmg Dir^cta*!, A.H. U v«t, M.A. Wr*gg, R. Wrttgg, P.G.
 Company Sacrataxy : D. Capper,         Tijain Mftmgar i D,T,             England R<fsg. No. 61 §64
g)   A joint exercise involving ail Emergency Services has
     been arranged for Saturday, 5 August at 3.00 p.m.when
     Emergency Drill will take place.
h)   Training and supervision programmes for stewards.
     A meeting of all stewards has been arranged for Tuesday,
     8 August at BramalX Lane when the Police and fire
     Authorities will give instruction an evacuation and
     fire fighting procedures, etc.

The Clubs Management ReaponsibilieB

We can confirm that the Club fully intends to observe and
perform its management responsibilities as laid down in the
gi-i'-rn guide.

A Safety Officer will be appointed to ensure that these
responsibilities are correctly discharged.  In addition to the
proper training and supervision of stewards in evacuation and
fire fighting procedures, training will also be provided by
the St. John's Ambulance in First Aid treatment,  it is also
hoped chat a number of stewards will take part in a First Aid
course arranged by the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance
service .

We will continue to observe all other management
responsibilities as laid down in paragraph 29 of the Green
Guide.

Football Association Interim Recommendations

I note the points raised re the Football Association Interim
Recommendations to the Hi11 a borough Inquiry.  I have received
a copy of this submission only this morning and wo'uld wisn to
study it in detail before commenting fully.    However,
paragraph 19 would seem to relate only to those grounds wiiero
terracing is divided into self contained pens. As you will
be aware, thia situation does not exist at Brafliaii Lane and 1
would not think that a reduction in capacity would be applicab

Action Proposed to be taken in the light of the Inquiry

You will appreciate that as a Club we have not been involved
in the Hillsborough Inquiry and our knowledge of any evidence
submitted and matters raised has been limited to Press Reports
It would be unwise for us to make any comments or
observations* until the first part of the Taylor Report 13
published.   However, we do feel that all necessary steps Have
been taken and reported on in the proceeding paragraphs of
this letter.

We will, of course.; submit any further proposals which may
become necessary as a result of the Taylor Report, as soon as
possible,
Sheffield Wednesday                                                                 c o         Li-2 -.       <


              Football Club pic



Our Ref:           GHM/JB/D34/3640

1st August 1989


Mr. M. Webster,
Acting Head of Department,
City of Sheffield,
Administration and Legal Department,
Town Hall, u
Sheffield.
SI 2HH


Dear Mr. Webster,

Re:      Safety Certificate

At a meeting I had with the South Yorkshire Police earlier this week it was
noticed that the wording of the Emergency Evacuation Procedure in the Safety
Certificate is different to that which is in effective use.

The revised wording was drawn up by the South Yorkshire Police and South
Yorkshire Fire Service, and I understand is in use at all five South Yorkshire
Football League Clubs.

I have no record of whether the Local Authority have ever been notified and
therefore I enclose a copy in order for you to amend your records.




                                                                                    W lS T R A T m
secretary                                                                                     .SHEEP
                                                                                    head of
                                                                                     dept       If ~




                                                                                                       CONV




Hillsborough, Sheffield S6 1SW. Telephone: (0742) 343122
Telegrams: Wednesday Sheffield 6. Telex No.547709 WEDNES
Fax No. 0742 337145 Registered in England No. 62478

Chairman: H .E. McGee, Secretary: G.H. Mackrell, F.C.C.A. Manager: R. Atkinson
Directors: M. Sheppard.   J.P., F.C.A.   (Vice-Chairman),   S.L. Speight, O.B.E.,
C. Woodward, K.T. Addy, E. Barron, G.K. Hulley.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURE

All Match Day Staff must be aware of the following procedure:

In the event of an emergency situation arising in the ground (ie. fire or bomb
call) which require evacuation of all or part of the ground, the following
procedure will be followed:-

    a) Police Control Roan will pass the following message "The attendance of
    Mr. Meadows is urgently required at Police Control", This will be over
    the P.A. System and will indicate to Police Officers and Stewards that
    emergency evacuation procedures are in force. Stewards will take up
    positions at their exits and gates, and the gates will be opened.

    b) In the event of an emergency evacuation being necessary, an oral
    message will be passed by the Police Officer in charge giving specific
    instructions as to action to be taken by the public.

    c) In the event of an all clear situation the following message will be
    passed "Mr. Meadows is no longer required at Police control".

Be on the alert to recognise potential fire hazards and suspect packages.
Such findings to be reported to the nearest Police Officer or in his absence
the Chief Steward or designated Club Official.
                        "The Family Chib''
       Bnm all Ltne. Sheffield S3 4SU Telephone: (074ZJ 738955




                                          P A C S i M iM--                                                    ‘




      MR. M,     WEBSTER,   LEGAL AND       ADMlNI 3TRATTf,N


      DAVID CAPPER, COMPANY SECHi:nAR¥_                                                                      ~........




                                                                                       T IM E :              .
      1 AUGUST 1989



jjr   PA G 1S:          imeiua.uR          uu«     o.:e




                              ,             ,r         ! r i m : sr. ;’ Ai                          k   :>    in   ......... .
                                  AiR^f          r’C      j.     }'. •;       ■>   .    I   ,   r'9 ^N l! AT 1AL,Hiii,>
                                                       . . . .            .        •    -       ,




                                                                                                        W.        W a ff,   H-Wneft   f.G .W to iW «
                                                                              D.T.BwHwtt,                . • ftw ta ri. * • * Mq..«is «*
DC/ABP

31 July 1989


Mr, M. Wehiitei',
Acting Head cl' Ut pnrtrvt^
Administration and Legal Department
Tlie Town Hall,
Sheff’3fit’d SI THH


Dear S i r ,

fiAI''F,TY OF SPORTS OBOjQTDS ,-JTHE

With r e f e r e n c e t o y o u r l e t t e r yt                     ■“• ije’'
c o m m e n ts 011 t h e >5 s w h y < u , w e r a t n e a



 Our s ta v a r d i ii R <wi            ^ , r)r r o i prtfedureu u*ve
 discussed nt some length with tht H e n c e diianj i,.«
 s e a s o n .. h m .* * th«- uoI«=r • -.»j ■.r r t i t * .'•!■ -t-.^..


 a)      St ewerrt d r c ' o y m e n i , d r a f t »;uarte ha v e Dee:, p r e p a r e *
         allowing r s c t                 tir^a t l    ; v m ' ' - ft» i ^ » - - Ti -   ■
         Numbered M b s        will be provides to identify <**ch stowuru
 b)
         indiviA'inlly

 c)      th. feasibility of                            s-^o,                      a, .lin r u d ^
         control      fflcil {tie- .links-l      ^0   tnt* tr;;ee v o n U u A
  ,,,    Plans for the p r o v sinti of a new Police wuntrox ruu.fi-
  d)
  e 'i   The improvement of the internal public adareee system                                    ana
          tha p o s s i b i l i t y of providing      an external              putule w u r « w
          system.
  r)      Evacuation Route,        The Police, tire and Ambulance
          ^ r v i r * a have* agreed an emergency attests an4     .
          egress route fro* Cherry iiti'ce- tu the New woutn atana.
          T h i s r o u t e w i l l be c l e a r l y marked by a p a i n t e d natcheci
          area          t h p Pol i r e would p r e v e n t any pai'King i n t h e
         - s t r e e t s around, t h e g ro un d t o a f f o r d unhindered access
           t o the ef t er g an t y v ? j f u r i e s .
g)    A joint exercise involving ail Emergency Services has
      been arranged for Saturday, 5 August at 3-00 p.m.when
      Emergency Drill will take place.
h)    Training and supervision programmes for stewards.
      A meeting of all stewards has been arranged for Tuesday,
      8 August at Bramall Lane when the Police and Fire
      Authorities will give instruction on evacuation and
      fire fighting procedures , e t c .

The Clubs Management. Respongibilies

We can confirm that the Club fully intends to observe and
perform ita management responsibilities as laid down in the
green guide .

A Safety Officer will be appointed to ensure that these
responsibilities are correctly discharged.   in addition to the
proper training and supervision of stewards in evacuation and
fire fighting procedures, training will also be provided by
the St. John's Ambulance in First Aid treatment.   It is also
hoped that a number of stewards will take part in a First Aid
course arranged by the South Yorkshire .Metropolitan Ambulance
servi c e .

We will continue to observe all other management
responsibilities as laid down in paragraph 29 of the Green
Guide.

Football Association_ 1nt,erl;n Recommendations

I note the points raised re the Football Association Interim
Recommendations to the Hillsborough Inquiry.   I. have received
a copy of this submission only this morning and would wish to
study it in detail before commenting fully.   However,
paragraph 19 would seem to relate only to those grounds where
terracing is divided into self contained pens.    As you will
be aware, this situation does not exist at Brsjna.il Lane ana I
would not think that a reduction In capacity would be applicabl

Action Proposed to be taken in the light of the Inquiry

You will appreciate that as a Club we have not been involved
in the Hillsborough Inquiry and our knowledge of any evidence
submitted and matters raised has been limited to Press Reports.
It would be unwise for us to make any comments or
observations until the first part of the Taylor Report is
published.   However, we do feel that ail necessary steps have
been taken and reported on in the proceeding paragraphs of
this letter.

We will, of course, submit any Further proposals which may
bftcom *   n e o e a s a ry   a   r e e u i t   o f   the,   T a y lo v   R tiy y rl f   ww   buuii   ae
      *hi * .
Other Matters

I note your comments regarding the extent of Dr. Eastwooda
authority in relation to Safety of Sports Ground matters.

If you require any further information, please do not
hesitate to contact run.

Yours t'aj.!itfui 1y ,




DAVID CAPPER,
Company Sec1re tary
                                       ‘The Family Club
             Bramall Lane, Sheffield S2 4SU Tel: 0742 738955 Fax: 0742 723030
                                                                                                          CC   AJcl.   \
                                                                                                               ^bcuadJ
                  DC/ABP

                  31 July 1989

                                                      [■ I 0 1 AJG 89                               'A|
                  Mr. M. Webster,                     0  | o . s ! T ~ T ~ Ru r " T '  co m   v
                  Acting Head of Department,         GSi                                          jjOUl
                  Administration and Legal DepartmeffTT
                  The Town Hall,
                  Sheffield SI 2HH


                  Dear Sir,

                  SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - THE SHEFFIELD UNITED SPORTS GROUND

                  With reference to your letter of 27 July, I set out below our
                  comments on the issues you have raised therein:

                  STEWARDTNG AND CROWD           CONTROL AT FOOTBALL MATCHES

                  Our stewarding and crowd control procedures have been
                  discussed at some length with the Police during the close
I                 season. Among the matters under consideration have been:

                   a)   Steward deployment, draft plans have been prepared
                         showing each stewards area of responsibility.
                  b)    Numbered bibs will be provided to identify each steward
                         individually.
                   c)   The feasibility of providing sector stewards with radio
                         control facilities linked to the Police Control centre.
                   d)   Plans for the provision of a new Police Control room.
                   e)    The improvement of •the internal public address system and
                         the possibility of providing an external public address
                         system.
                   f)   Evacuation Route. The Police, Fire and Ambulance
                         services have agreed an emergency access and
                         egress route from Cherry Street to the New South Stand.
                         This route will be clearly marked by a painted hatched
                         area. The Police would prevent any parking in the
                         streets around the ground to afford unhindered access
                         to the emergency vehicles.

                   2-

Directors: R.J. Brealey (Chairman), D. Dooley (Managing Director), A.H. Laver, M.A. Wragg, R. Wragg, P.G. Woolhouse
            Company Secretary : D. Capper,        Team Manager : D.T. Bassett,      England Reg. No. 61564
                              -2-


g)   A joint exercise involving all Emergency Services has
     been arranged for Saturday, 5 August at 3.00 p.m.when
     Emergency Drill will take place.
h)   Training and supervision programmes for stewards.
     A meeting of all stewards has been arranged for Tuesday,
     8 August at Bramall Lane when the Police and Fire
     Authorities will give instruction on evacuation and
     fire fighting procedures, etc.

The Clubs Management Responsibilies

We can confirm that the Club fully intends to observe and
perform its management responsibilities as laid down in the
green guide.

A Safety Officer will be appointed to ensure that these
responsibilities are correctly discharged.  In addition to the
proper training and supervision of stewards in evacuation and
fire fighting procedures, training will also be provided by
the St. John's Ambulance in First Aid treatment. It is also
hoped that a number of stewards will take part in a First Aid
course arranged by the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance
service.

We will continue to observe all other management
responsibilities as laid down in paragraph 29 of the Green
Guide.

Football Association Interim Recommendations

I note the points raised re the Football Association Interim
Recommendations to the Hillsborough Inquiry.  I have received
a copy of this submission only this morning and would wish to
study it in detail before commenting fully. However,
paragraph 19 would seem to relate only to those grounds where
terracing is divided into self contained pens. As you will
be aware, this situation does not exist at Bramall Lane and I
would not think that a reduction in capacity would be applicable.

Action Proposed to be taken in the light of the Inquiry

You will appreciate that.; as a Club we have not been involved
in the Hillsborough Inquiry and our knowledge of any evidence
submitted and matters raised has been limited to Press Reports.
It would be unwise for us to make any comments or
observations until the first part of the Taylor Report is
published. However, we do-feel that all necessary steps have
been taken and reported on in the preceeding paragraphs of
this letter.

We will, of course, submit any further proposals which may
become necessary as a result of the Taylor Report, as soon as
possible.

                                                                  -3-
                           - 3 -

    Other Matters

    I note your comments regarding the extent of Dr. Eastwoods
    authority in relation to Safety of Sports Ground matters.

    If you require any further information, please do not
    hesitate to contact me.

    Yours faithfully,




    DAVID CAPPER,
    Company Secretary.




1
