         ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                                      17

  ( n o t e : That (a) Councillors Harthman and Wigfield left the meeting for a short time following
  consideration of the City Hall and did not participate in the decision relating to Rebels, Dixon
  Lane, (b) Councillor Mrs. Midgley left the meeting following consideration of the City Hall and
  Councillor Webster occupied the Chair for the remainder of the meeting and (c) Councillor Mrs.
  Walton left the meeting during consideration of The Leadmill, Leadmill Road and did not speak
  or vote thereon.)


   Meeting of the Licensing Sub-Committee held 18th February, 1994. Present— Councillors
  Mrs. Fleming, Harthman, D. Jones, Mrs. Leek, Mrs. Midgley, Miss Mitchell, Ms. A. G. Smith,
  Mrs. E. Smith, Mrs. Walton, Webster and Wigfield.
  ( 1 ) APPOINTMENT OF CHAIR
    Resolved: That in the absence of the Chair of the Sub-Committee (Councillor Mrs. Midgley) at
  the commencement of the meeting Councillor Webster be appointed Chair.
★ (2)   SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
  Policing Football Matches
    The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report which summarised a
  document which had been compiled by the Association of Chief Police Officers on policing
  football matches. The City Solicitor and Head of Administration stated that although the
  contents of the report were still being studied, there would clearly need to be amendments made
  to the General Safety Certificates issued by the Council, but more importantly the Association of
  Chief Police Officers were recommending a shift in their general policy for policing football
  matches to one of public order policing. Other than their constitutional duty, they would take no
  responsibility for ensuring the safety of persons in the stadium. This proposed alteration to the
  role of the Police would necessitate an alteration being made to the membership of the Safety of
  Sports Grounds Advisory Group which had been established by the Council to advise on matters
  of safety and included representatives from the Police, Fire and Ambulance Services and Officers
  of the Council but excluded representatives from designated sports stadia.
    Resolved: That (a) the contents now reported of the document compiled by the Association of
  Chief Police Officers, so far as they relate to the safety of the public in football stadia, be noted
  with grave concern; and
    (b) the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested to submit reports to this
  Sub-Committee on the other provisions contained in the report of the Association of Chief Police
  Officers as soon as possible.
    (At this point in the proceedings Councillor Mrs. Midgley entered the meeting and occupied
  the Chair for the remainder of business.)
★ (3) CONSTITUTION OF THE SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ADVISORY GROUP
    Further to his report in item (2) above, the City Solicitor and Head of Administration
  submitted a report recommending that in the light of the proposals contained in the report of the
  Association of Chief Police Officers relating to public safety at football grounds, the membership
  of the Council’s Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group should be reviewed to reflect that
  change in policy and should include, where appropriate, the nominated Safety Officer from
  Sheffield Wednesday and Sheffield United Football Clubs. The City Solicitor and Head of
  Administration stated that when the Advisory Group was originally constituted, it was felt that
  the Group should be seen to be independent of the Football Clubs and for that reason, the
  Advisory Group considered that it would be advisable to retain the power to exclude Football
  Club representatives if it believed it was necessary to do so. So far as the Don Valley and
  Sheffield Sports Stadia were concerned, the Advisory Group would wish to continue with its
  current system until at least the end of the year.
    Resolved: That approval be given for the Safety Officers of Sheffield Wednesday and Sheffield
  United Football Clubs to be invited to participate, where appropriate, in meetings of the Safety
  of Sports Grounds Advisory Group on the lines now discussed.
  (4) FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY—CODE OF PRACTICE
    The Sub-Committee received and noted a report submitted by the City Solicitor and Head of
  Administration which attached a Code of Practice issued by the Football Licensing Authority.
18         ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

★ (5) FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY-CONSULTATION DOCUMENT
     The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report, together with a letter from
  the Chief Executive of the Football Licensing Authority, which outlined conditions which the
  Football Licensing Authority proposed to introduce in some or all licences in respect of sports
  grounds where professional football was held. Those conditions were that (a) spectators should
  only be admitted/permitted to watch football matches from seated accommodation, (b) the Club
  should indicate on the tickets and/or at the point, of sale where seats had restricted views or (in
  extreme cases) that tickets were not sold for such seats and (c) Clubs should indicate on the
  tickets or at the point of sale where seats were uncovered and (where this amounted to a
  substantial number) that they make suitable arrangements to manage them safely. The City
  Solicitor and Head of Administration stated that the Secretary of State for Heritage was
  considering making an Order requiring the Football Licensing Authority to include certain
  conditions in the licences issued in respect of Sheffield United and Sheffield Wednesday Football
  Clubs, which were due for renewal on 1st August, 1994. The Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory
  Group had been advised of the proposed changes and their comments were included in the
  report.
        Resolved: That (i) the comments of the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group and the
     letter from the Football Licensing Association now submitted on the proposal to introduce
     conditions to the licences issued in respect of professional football clubs be noted;
        (ii) the assumption now reported that there is a substantial improvement in crowd behaviour in
     all seated stadia be viewed with concern; and
       (iii) the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested to prepare, in consultation
     with Members of this Sub-Committee, a response outlining the concerns now expressed about
     certain assumptions in the Consultation Document to the Football Licensing Authority.
★    ( 6 ) SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB-PROPOSED GROUND DEVELOPMENT
       The City Solicitor and Head of Administration reported orally on proposals by Sheffield
     United Football Club to develop the Bramall Lane Stadium. He stated that the plans had not yet
     been finalised but it was proposed to build a new stand at the John Street side of the ground and
     seat the Bramall Lane terrace area. Other improvement works were also planned.
       Resolved: That (a) the information now imparted be noted; and
       (b) the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested to report back to this
     Sub-Committee with a copy of the decision of the City Centre and West Sub-Committee
     (Planning and Economic Development Programme) once the final plans in respect of the
     development now reported at Sheffield United Football Club have been received.
★ (7) PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENTS AND THEATRE LICENSING—CITY HALL
    Pursuant to the decision of this Sub-Committee of 17th February, 1994, the City Solicitor and
  Head of Administration reported orally on work which had been carried out overnight to the City
  Hall, Barkers Pool in order to remedy the defects which had been identified by the Inspecting
  Authorities. The City Hall Manager addressed the Sub-Committee and stated that the work on
  the roof had been completed, the defective seats had either been repaired or taken out of
  commission to await permanent repairs being carried out by the upholsterer, the means of escape
  had been secured and a team of electricians had worked throughout the day and night to make
  safe the electrical faults highlighted by the Zurich Insurance Company. The Chief Environmental
  Health Officer confirmed that the electrical defects that had been identified had now been
  rectified to his satisfaction.
      Resolved: That the public and press and Officers of the City Council involved in the application
    relating to the City Hall, Barkers Pool, be excluded from the meeting before further discussion
    takes place on the grounds that, in view of the nature of the business to be transacted, if the
    public and press were present there would be a disclosure to them of exempt information
    described in paragraphs 12 and 13 of the Local Government Act 1972, as amended by the Local
    Government (Access to Information) Act 1985 relating to (a) legal matters and advice and (b)
    proposed actions under any enactment by the Authority.
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration reported orally giving legal advice on various
    aspects of the application in respect of the City Hall, Barkers Pool.
      At this point in the proceedings the meeting was re-opened to the public and press.
