                   MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

                                                        Meeting held 19th March, 1990

Present— Councillors Ms. Fiore (Chair), Butler, Crowder, Godber, Griffiths, Lamb, Moore, Mrs.
Mulheam, Mrs. Nelson, Saunders, Mrs. E. Smith, Mrs. Walton and White.

1 Exclusion of the Public and Press
          : That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before discussion takes place on
    reso lv ed
item 3 on the agenda relating to the specification for catering other than school or welfare catering,
on the grounds that in view of the nature of the business to be transacted, if the public and press
were present there would be a disclosure to them of exempt information as described in paragraph 9
of Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act 1972, as amended, relating to terms proposed by the
Authority for the supply of goods and services.

-fr-2 Catering other than School or W elfare Catering




3 General Purposes Panel
r e s o l v e d : That, except so far as they relate to matters delegated to the General Purposes Panel,
the following minutes, which incorporate the alteration now made at this meeting, be approved—
        Meeting of the General Purposes Panel held 5th March, 1990. Present— Councillors Butler
      (Chair), Hussain, Mrs. Mulheam, Mrs. Nelson, Mrs. E. Smith, Mrs. Walton and White.
      (1 )       e x c l u s io n o f t h e p u b l ic a n d t h e p r e s s

        Resolved: That (a) Items 4, 5 and 7 on the agenda under the headings Public Entertainment,
      Hackney Carriage and Private Hire Licensing and Ruskin House, Meersbrook Park, be taken at
      the beginning of the meeting; and
         (b) the public and press be excluded from the meeting before discussion takes place on such
      items on the grounds that, in view of the nature of the business to be transacted, if the public and
      press were present, there would be a disclosure to them of exempt information as described in
      Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act, 1972 as amended, as follows—
      Item                       Paragraph               Reason
      4                          12                      Relating to legal matters and advice.
      5                          7 and 12                Relating to the financial or business affairs of other persons
                                                         and legal matters and advice.
      7                          8                       Relating to expenditure proposed for the acquisition of goods
                                                         and services.

★         (2 )   p u b l ic e n t e r t a in m e n t
         The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on (a) matters relating
      to the general standards of repair and maintenance found during official inspections of nightclubs
      in the City and (b) three applications to renew public entertainment licences in respect of
      nightclubs.
        MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

    Cairo Jax Nightclub
       Representatives of First Leisure Corporation PLC, the proprietors of Cairo Jax Nightclub,
    attended the meeting with their Solicitor to support their application and representatives of the
    South Yorkshire County Fire Service, the Building Surveyor and the Director of Health and
    Consumer Services attended the meeting to speak on the application.
      Having considered the report of the Head of Administration and Legal Department and the
    representations made by the representatives of the proprietors, the South Yorkshire County Fire
    Service, the Building Surveyor and the Director of Health and Consumer Services, the P a n e l-
       Resolved: That (a) the application now submitted for the renewal of the public entertainment
    licence issued in respect of Cairo Jax Nightclub, Bank Street, be granted for the three months’
    period ending 31st May, 1990, subject to the following additional conditions—
          (i) the licensee shall arrange for a responsible person of not less than 21 years of age to
          inspect the whole of the premises, including means of escape, prior to the public being
          admitted and immediately after any public entertainment takes place;
          (ii) the responsible person shall record in a book kept on the premises for that purpose the
          date, commencement time and duration of each inspection referred to in these conditions;
          (iii) the responsible person shall also record in the book any defects which are apparent at
          the time of an inspection and make a note of the action taken to correct those defects;
          (iv) if the responsible person referred to discovers any defect which could significantly affect
          the safety of the public on the premises, the premises shall not be used for a public
          entertainment until such time as the defect is remedied; and
          (v) the licensee shall give the City Council written notice of the defect within 48 hours of it
          being detected; and

      (b)   any application for renewal of the licence at the end of the three months’ period be
    submitted for consideration by this Panel.
    Charlie Parkers Nightclub
      The Solicitor for the prospective proprietors of Charlie Parkers Nightclub attended the
    meeting to support their application for the renewal of the public entertainment licence issued in
    respect of the premises. The report of the Head of Administration and Legal Department
    indicated that the premises concerned had been closed for some considerable time and no
    indication had been received as to when it was intended to reopen them.

     Resolved: That consideration of the application now submitted be deferred to the next
    monthly meeting of this Panel.
    The Locarno
      The Panel (a) received a letter from the Solicitor acting for the applicants for the renewal of the
    public entertainment licence issued in respect of The Locarno Nightclub, London Road, and (b)
    considered the report of the Head of Administration and Legal Department on the application,
    consideration of which application had been deferred at their meeting held on 5th February, 1990
    (page 1221 of the printed minutes).

      Resolved: That, as there is no indication that the works required at the premises are to be
    completed and the premises reopened in the near future, the application now submitted be not
    granted.
★    (3) HACKNEY CA RRIA G E AND PRIV ATE H IR E LICENSING
      The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported verbally on a case relating to a
    hackney carriage vehicle licence and a private hire and hackney carriage driver’s licence both
    held by the same individual. The licensee attended the meeting to speak on his case.
      Resolved: That (a) in the circumstances now reported, the hackney carriage vehicle licence
    now mentioned be revoked on the grounds that the vehicle has not been maintained in a
    reasonably safe condition; and
         MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

    (4) RUSKIN H O U SE , M EERSBROOK PARK
      The Panel received and noted a statement of final cost of the Director of Land and Planning in
    respect of the carrying out of an extension and alterations to offices at Ruskin House,
    Meersbrook Park.
       At this stage in the proceedings, the public and press were readmitted to the meeting.
★    (5) SAFETY O F SPORTS GROUNDS
    Safety o f Sports Grounds Advisory Group
      The Panel received and noted the minutes of a meeting of the Safety of Sports Grounds
    Advisory Group held on 22nd January, 1990.
    Final Report o f Lord Justice Taylor
      The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on the publication of
    the Final Report of Lord Justice Taylor on the Hillborough Stadium Disaster, together with his
    report to the Policy Committee at its meeting held on 27th February, 1990.
      Resolved: That (a) the reports of the Head of Administration and Legal Department now
    submitted be noted; and
      (b) the Sheffield Wednesday and Sheffield United Football Clubs be requested to paint in a
    conspicuous colour to the satisfaction of the City Council and by 31st March, 1990, gangways,
    whether sunken or not, at the Hillsborough and Bramall Lane Sports Grounds, respectively.
    Regulations for the Production o f Plans o f Sports Grounds
      Pursuant to the request made by the Panel at its meeting held on 27th November, 1989, (page
    945 of the printed minutes), the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a
    report on proposed regulations for the production of plans of sports grounds which he had
    prepared in consultation with the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group.
      Resolved: That (a) the plans regulations contained in Schedule 1 to the report now submitted
    be approved;
       (b) the Head of Administration and Legal Department be authorised to take appropriate steps
    to amend the General Safety Certificates issued in respect of the Hillsborough (Sheffield
    Wednesday) and Bramall Lane (Sheffield United) Sports Grounds and the Sheffield Sports
    Stadium (Owlerton) so as to include conditions giving the Council power to require the respective
    clubs to submit appropriate plans to the Council as and when required;
      (c) on the amendment of the General Safety Certificate, the proprietors of the three sports
    grounds concerned be requested to submit plans to the Council without delay and as prescribed in
    Schedule 2 to the report now submitted; and
      (d) the Director of Design and Building Services be requested to submit to the Head of
    Administration and Legal Department, a set of plans for the Don Valley Athletics Stadium as
    prescribed in Schedule 2 to the report now submitted.
    The Responses o f the South Yorkshire Police to the Interim Report o f Lord Justice Taylor
      Further to the receipt by the Panel at its meeting on 2nd January, 1990, (page 1088 of the
    printed minutes) of the first of two general reports of the Head of Administration and Legal
    Department on the responses of the South Yorkshire Police to the Interim Report of Lord Justice
    Taylor on the Hillsborough Disaster, the Panel received and noted the second of the two reports.
    Hillsborough Sports Ground (Sheffield Wednesday)—Fire Precautions
      With reference to the decisions made by the Panel at its meeting held on 27th November, 1989
    (page 947 of the printed minutes), the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted
    reports on proposals of the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to improve the fire protection and
    exits and the fire detection system at the South Stand at the Hillsborough Sports Ground. The
    reports enclosed copies of letter from Messrs. Eastwood and Partners, Consulting Engineers,
    giving details of the proposals and letters from the South Yorkshire County Fire Service
    commenting on the proposals.
      Resolved: That approval be given to the proposals referred to in the reports now submitted for
    the carrying out before the 1990/91 football season of works of improvement to (a) the fire
    protection and exits for the South Stand at the Hillsborough Sports Ground in accordance with
     MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

the letter from the Consulting Engineers dated 22nd December, 1989, and Plan No. 12237/36
referred to therein, subject to the compliance of the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club with the
recommendations of the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group detailed in Section 3 of the
relevant report now submitted; and
  (b) the fire detection system for the South Stand at the Ground in accordance with a letter from
the Consulting Engineers dated 8th January, 1990, and Plans Nos. 12247/200—Sheets 1 and 2,
12247/201—Sheets 1 and 2,12247/202 and 12247/203 and subject to the requirements of the South
Yorkshire County Fire Service as detailed in their letter of 12th January, 1990, and of the
Building Surveyor as set out in paragraph 3.2 of the relevant report now submitted.
Hillsborough Sports Ground (Sheffield Wednesday)—West Stand
   With reference to the decision made by the Panel at its meeting held on 22nd December, 1989
(page 1086 of the printed minutes), the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted
a report on a proposal of the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to widen gangways and remove
seating in the West Stand at the Hillsborough Sports Ground. The report enclosed copies of
letters from Messrs. Eastwood and Partners, Consulting Engineers and the South Yorkshire
County Fire Service and a memorandum from the Building Surveyor.
   Resolved: That (a) approval be given to the proposal detailed in the letter from the Consulting
Engineers dated 9th January, 1990, and Plans Nos. 12267/1,2 and 3, subject to the compliance of
the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club with the comments of the Building Surveyor as detailed
in his memorandum of 16th January, 1990, and the requirements of the South Yorkshire County
Fire Service as set out in their letter of 30th January, 1990; and
  (b) the crowd capacity of the West Stand at the Ground remain at 3,840 persons.
Bramall Lane Sports Ground (Sheffield United)—Facilities for the Disabled
  The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on a proposal of the
Sheffield United Football Club for the provision of additional facilities for the disabled at Bramall
Lane Sports Ground. The report enclosed copies of letters from Messrs. Eastwood and Partners,
Consulting Engineers, and the South Yorkshire County Fire Service and a memorandum from
the Building Surveyor.
  Resolved: That approval be given to the proposal contained in the letter from the Consulting
Engineers dated 12th June, 1989, for completion before the start of the 1990/91 football season,
subject to compliance by the Sheffield United Football Club with the recommendations of the
Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group as detailed in Section 3 of the report now submitted.
Bramall Lane Sports Ground (Sheffield United)—Family Enclosure
  The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on a proposal of the
Sheffield United Football Club for the provision of a family enclosure in the South Stand at the
Bramall Lane Sports Ground. The report enclosed copies of letters from Messrs. Eastwood and
Partners, Consulting Engineers and the South Yorkshire County Fire Service and a memoran­
dum from the Building Surveyor.
  Resolved: That approval be given to the proposal contained in the letter from the Consulting
Engineers dated 21st July, 1989, for completion before the start of the 1990/91 football season,
subject to compliance by the Sheffield United Football Club with the recommendations of the
Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group as detailed in Section 3 of the report now submitted.
Visits to Sheffield Sports Stadium (Owlerton) and Hillsborough and Bramall Lane Sports Grounds
   Pursuant to the request made by the Panel at its meeting held on 2nd January, 1990 (page 1089
of the printed minutes), the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report
on proposed arrangements for the members of the Panel to visit the Sheffield Sports Stadium
(Owlerton) during dog-racing events. The Head of Administration and Legal Department also
reported on the position regarding the payment of members allowances in respect of authorised
visits to dog-racing events and football matches.
  Resolved: That (a) approval be given to the proposed arrangements contained in the report
now submitted; and
  (b) authorised attendances at dog-racing events at the Sheffield Sports Stadium (Owlerton) and
football matches at the Hillsborough and Bramall Lane Sports Grounds be recognised as
approved duties for the purposes of the payment of allowances under Section 177(2) (b) of the
Local Government Act, 1972.
          MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

   Sheffield Sports Stadium (Owlerton)—New Means o f Escape
     The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on a proposal of
   Owlerton Sports Stadium Limited to provide a new means of escape from the hare controller’s
   box over the main stand at Sheffield Sports Stadium. The report enclosed copies of letters from
   Messrs. Eastwood and Partners, Consulting Engineers, and the South Yorkshire County Fire
   Service and a copy of a memorandum from the Building Surveyor.
     Resolved: That approval be given to the carrying out by Owlerton Sports Stadium Limited at
   the earliest opportunity of the works detailed in the letter from the Consulting Engineers dated
   25th October, 1989, and drawing 11404/6 referred to therein, subject to compliance by the
   Company with the recommendations of the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group detailed in
   Section 3 of the report now submitted.
   Sheffield Sports Stadium (Owlerton)—Video Camera Platform
     Resolved: That approval be given to the proposal described in the report of the Head of
   Administration and Legal Department now submitted and detailed by Messrs. Eastwood and
   Partners, Consulting Engineers, in their Plans Nod. 11404/1, 2 and 3 for the erection of a new
   video camera platform at the Sheffield Sports Stadium (Owlerton), subject to compliance by
   Owlerton Sports Stadium Limited with the recommendations of the Safety of Sports Grounds
   Advisory Group as set out in Section 3 of the report.
   (6 )   REVIEW O F LICENCE FEES
     The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report reviewing the fees
   charged by the City Council for the issue of licences relating to hackney carriages and private hire
   vehicles.
     Resolved: That (a) the fees to be charged for the issue of licences as detailed below be
   increased as follows—
                                                 Existing       Proposed
   Licence Type                                    Fee            Fee         Remarks
   Hackney Carriage and Private Hire               £64             £72        Plus cost of test at DOT
   Vehicle                                                                    rates.
   Hackney Carriage and Private Hire               £37             £42        Plus cost of medical at
   Driver                                                                     BMA rates.
   Private Hire Operator                          £100             £115       —
     and (b) the Head of Administration and Legal Department be authorised to take any necessary
   action to bring the new licence fees into effect on 7th April, 1990.
   (7) SHEFFIELD COMMUNITY H EALTH COUNCIL
     Resolved: That (a) Mrs. Lynne Smithers of 28 Falstaff Road, Sheffield, be appointed to serve
   on the Sheffield Community Health Council for the period ending 31st August, 1992, to fill a
   vacancy arising from the resignation of Mrs. J. Hamlyn; and
     (b)    the Head of Administration and Legal Department be authorised to act on this resolution
   prior to its confirmation by the Municipal Enterprise and General Services Programme
   Committee and the City Council.

4 Trading Services Panel
r e s o l v e d : That, except so far as they relate to matters delegated to the Trading Services Panel, the

following minutes, which incorporate the alteration now made at this meeting, be approved—
     Meeting of the Trading Services Panel held 6th March, 1990. Present— Councillors Ms. Fiore
   (Chair), Butler, Crowder, Godber, Moore, Moscrop, Mrs. E. Smith and White.
   (1 )   UPPERTH O RPE MUNICIPAL LAUNDRY
     Pursuant to the request made by the Panel at its meeting held on 6th February, 1990 (page 1223
  of the printed minutes), the Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer submitted a report on the
  situation regarding the budget for the Municipal Laundry and on the likely future financial
  position of the Laundry up to the financial year 1991/92.
       MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

  Resolved: That no action be taken at present to close the Upperthorpe Municipal Laundry and
the situation regarding the future of the Laundry be reviewed in six months’ time.
(2) EXCLUSION O F TH E PUBLIC AND T H E PRESS
  Resolved: That (a) items 2(a) and 3(b) on the agenda relating to taxi contracts and a rent
review of 28 Exchange Street be considered next; and
   (b)    the public and press be excluded from the meeting before discussion takes place on such
items on the grounds that, in view of the nature of the business to be transacted, if the public and
press were present, there would be a disclosure to them of exempt information as described in
Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act, 1972, as amended, as follows—
Item         Paragraph         Reason
2(a)         7                 Relating to the financial or business affairs of other persons.
3(b)         9                 Relating to terms proposed for the disposal of property.
(3)    TAXI CONTRACTS




  At this stage in the proceedings, the public and press were readmitted to the meeting.
(5) CENTRAL SUPPLIES ORGANISATION
Major Energy Users Council
  The Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer reported on the proceedings at a meeting of the
recently-formed Major Energy Users Council held in London on 6th March, 1990, and on a
proposal that the City Council takes up membership of the Major Energy Users Council.
  Resolved: That (a) authority be given for the City Council to take up membership of the Major
Energy Users Council for a period of one year and at a membership fee of £900 to be funded from
the Central Supplies Organisation budget for 1990/91;
  (b) the Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer, or his representative, be requested to take an
active part in the work of such Council;
  (c) the Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer be requested (i) to investigate the possibility of
the City Council taking the lead in joining with other neighbouring Authorities with a view to
sharing costs; and (ii) to report back to this Panel periodically on developments in the field of
energy supply; and
  (d) the report now submitted be referred for the information of the Technical Services Panel of
the Policy Committee.
Contract for the Supply o f Meat
The Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer submitted a report on the situation regarding the
Contract awarded by the City Council to J. W. Young of Sheffield for the supply of meat to the
Council Departments for the two-year period ending 31st March, 1990. The report indicated that,
although tenders had been invited for the period commencing 1st April, 1990, discussions were in
          MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

    progress with Officers of the Council’s Catering Service and the Central Transport Service on a
    specification which would meet the Council’s requirements and comply with existing and
    anticipated statutory regulations, and that it would, therefore, be appropriate to extend the
    existing contract to enable such specification to be completed.
★    Resolved: That (a) the current contract for the supply of meat be extended for a period of not
    more than six months from 1st April, 1990;
      (b) the Officers of the Central Transport Service be requested to submit to the Chief
    Purchasing and Supplies Officer, as early as possible, their proposals and estimated costs for the
    distribution of meat to the Council Departments; and
      (c) the Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer be requested to report back in due course on
    proposed arrangements for the supply of meat for the period commencing not later than 1st
    October, 1990.
★ Tenders for Supplies and Services
    The Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer submitted reports on tenders received for the
  supply of commercial motor vehicles and typewriters and the provision of typewriter
  maintenance for the Council Departments.
      Resolved: That (a) the tenders now submitted by the Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer of
    the under-mentioned firms for the provision of the following supplies and services be accepted—
    For the Two-Year Period Commencing 1st April, 1990
    c o m m e r c i a l m o t o r v e h i c l e s — Charles Clark and Sherwood Leyland DAF of Sheffield.

    For the 12-months Period Commencing 1st April, 1990
    T y pewr i t e r a n d T y p e w r i t e r M a i n t e n a n c e — S. Clough Ibbotson (Sheffield) Limited, J.
    Wylde and Co. Limited, B. & B. Office Machines Limited, Crosby and Hayward and Wilding
    PLC, all of Sheffield; Yorkshire Business Equipment of Rotherham and H. W. Dansie of
    Chesterfield; and
      (b) the Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer be authorised to negotiate with T. C. Harrison
    Group Limited of Sheffield and Polar Truck Centre of Barnsley on terms for the supply of
    commercial vehicles and after-sales support and to accept the better offer in terms of value for
    money.
★ Selection o f Tenderers
    Resolved: That (a) tenders for the provision of the following supplies and services be invited
  from the firms indicated in the report of the Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer now
  submitted, as follows—
    g r o c e r ie s a n d p r o v is io n s —       Four Firms;
    t a x i s e r v ic e —   Five Firms;
    m in ib u s   (w   it h d r iv e r   )   s e r v ic e —   Thirteen Firms;
    MILK (INCLUD IN G BEVERAGE MILK IN TH IRD O F A PINT BOTTLES) — Five         Firms.
    Revenue Budget Monitoring and Progress Report
      The Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer submitted a report on the monitoring of the revenue
    budget and on progress and recent developments in the Central Supplies Organisation.
       Resolved: That (a) the report now submitted be noted;
      (b) authority be given for the Central Supplies Organisation to trade under the name “Sheffield
    Purchasing Organisation”;
       (c) the Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer be requested to report back on proposals to hold,
    in conjunction with the City Treasurer and the Department of Trade and Industry, a follow-up
    Seminar to the successful Seminar on Purchasing in the European Market held recently by the
    Central Supplies Organisation; and
      (d) the Chief Purchasing and Supplies Officer be authorised to continue with preparatory work
    on a proposed seminar for purchasing staff of local authorities with a view to costs of such
    seminar being covered by the charging of fees.
    MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

( 6 ) MARKETS
Report on Action Taken
  The Panel received and noted a report of the General Manager, Markets, on action taken
under delegated powers.
The Market Place, Crystal Peaks Shopping Centre
   The General Manager, Markets, submitted a report on proposals for increases in the basic
licence fee and existing licence fees for stalls at The Market Place, Crystal Peaks Shopping
Centre.
  Resolved: That (a) with effect from 2nd April, 1990 (i) the basic fees and existing licence fees
for stalls at The Market Place, Crystal Peaks Shopping Centre, be increased by £6 per week in all
cases where the licensee has been in occupation for 12 months or more; and (ii) where licensees
have not been in occupation for 12 months, the basic fees and existing licence fees be increased by
£6 per week upon completion of 12 months’ occupation; and
  (b) the General Manager, Markets, be authorised to take all necessary steps to implement this
resolution prior to the confirmation of these minutes by the Municipal Enterprise and General
Services Programme Committee and the City Council.
Monitoring o f the Revenue Budget
  The Panel received and noted a report of the General Manager, Markets, on the monitoring of
the Revenue Budget for the Markets undertaking.
Administration Fees
  The Panel deferred consideration of a report by the General Manager, Markets, on a review of
the administration fees charged in respect of assignments and changes of use of stalls in the
indoor markets, pending the submission of a joint report on the matter by the General Manager,
Markets, and the Director of Land and Planning.
(7) SHEFFIELD DESIGN & PRIN T
Staff Training and Development
  The Principal Training Officer submitted a report on a proposed staff training and
development plan for Sheffield Design & Print for the financial year 1990/91.
  Resolved: That the staff training and development plan contained in the report now submitted
be approved.
Monitoring o f the Revenue Budget
  The Panel noted a verbal report of the Manager of Sheffield Design & Print on the monitoring
of the revenue budget for his trading service.
Office Services Manager
  The Manager of Sheffield Design & Print submitted a report on a proposal for the appointment
of an Office Services Manager to undertake the services formerly provided by the Central
Administration Section at Staniforth Road Depot.
  Resolved: That (a) the proposal contained in the report now submitted for the creation of a
post of Office Services Manager on Scale 6 in Sheffield Design & Print be approved; and
  (b) the Manager of Sheffield Design & Print be authorised to advertise the post in accordance
with the appropriate Council procedures.
( 8 ) CATERING SERVICE
  The Panel received and noted a report of the Senior Assistant Head of Administration and
Legal Department (Administration) on the monitoring of the revenue budget for the Catering
Service for the financial year 1989/90.
(9) ACCESS FO R COMMUNITY GROUPS TO COUNCIL-M ANAGED VEHICLES
  The Panel received and noted a report of the Director of Land and Planning on proposed
arrangements for access by Community Groups to Council-managed vehicles.
( n o t e : It was pointed out at the meeting that the Central Transport fleet was no longer the
responsibility of the Administration and Legal Department but operated as a trading service, and
that vehicle maintenance was now the responsibility of the Cleansing Services Department.)
         MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

5 Direct Services Organisation Panel
r e s o l v e d : That the following minutes be approved—


    Meeting of the Direct Services Organisation Panel held 7th March, 1990. Present—
   Councillors Mrs. Nelson (Chair), Mrs. J. Barton, Butler, Ms. Fiore, Hattersley and Lamb.
   ( 1 ) TERMS O F REFERENCE
     The Panel received and noted a report of the Head of Administration and Legal Department
   on the terms of reference of the Panel.
   (2)   C O N S U L T A T IV E /N E G O T IA T IN G A R R A N G E M E N T S F O R D E PA R TM EN TS W ITH C O N TR A C TIN G
   RESPONSIBILITIES TO TH E PANEL
     The Chief Personnel Officer submitted a report setting out proposed interim arrangements for
   discussion with the in-house trade unions on consultative/negotiating arrangements for those
   Council Departments with contracting responsibilities to the Panel.
     Resolved: That, subject to appropriate consultations with the trade unions concerned,
   approval be given to the adoption of the interim arrangements proposed in the report now
   submitted which provide for the continuation of—
     (a) the existing procedural arrangements in respect of staff grievances and disputes, on the
   understanding that the nature of the issues involved will determine whether such grievances and
   disputes are heard by members of the Programme Committee concerned, as clients, or this Panel,
   as contractor; and
      (b) the current negotiating/consultation arrangements, except where Departments are involved
   in both the client/agent role and contracting activities in which circumstances a single consultative
   body should be established comprising members from both Programme Committees and this
   Panel to meet appropriate trade union representatives together with appropriate officers from
   each of the Departments concerned, any necessary negotiations to take place within the separate
   divisions/organisations between management and trade unions and to be reported back through
   the consultative body.
   (3) CLEANING O F BUILDINGS
     The Director of Cleansing Services reported verbally that only one tender, that of the
   Cleansing Services Department, had been received by the closing date for tenders for the
   cleaning of buildings and that the tender would be considered by the Cleansing Sub-Committee
   of the Health and Consumer Services Programme Committee and the Premises Working Party of
   the Education Programme Committee in April, 1990.
   The Panel noted the report and expressed their warm appreciation of the efforts made by the
  workers concerned in preparing the tender.
  (4) CLEANSING SERVICES DEPA RTM EN T— STAFF RESIGNATION
    The Director of Cleansing Services reported verbally on the resignation of Mr. R. C. Cordock,
  Senior Assistant Director (Operations), who had left his Department to take up a post in
  Manchester.
     The Panel expressed their appreciation of the valuable work carried out by Mr. Cordock in
  connection with the preparation of his Department’s successful tenders for refuse collection and
  street cleansing.
         In accordance with the provisions of Section 100B(4)(b) of the Local Government Act,
  (n o t e :
  1972 as amended, the Chair of the Panel (Councillor Mrs. Nelson) decided that this item should
  be considered as a matter of urgency in view of the fact that the Panel was not likely to meet again
  for another two months.)

6 Uniform Lettings Policy
  The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on the annual review of
charges made under the Council’s Uniform Lettings Policy relating to the use by various
organisations of halls and rooms in Council premises. The report drew attention to proposals of the
Premises Working Party of the Education Programme Committee for an increase of 7% in the basic
charge for such use.
       MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

reso lv ed: That this Committee (a) concurs with the decision made by the Premises Working Party
of the Education Programme Committee at its meeting held on 2nd March, 1990, in approving
revised charges for the hire of halls and rooms in Council premises;
  (b) authorises such charges to be brought into effect on 1st April, 1990, prior to the confirmation
of these minutes by the City Council; and
  (c) requests the Chief Education Officer to ensure that the revised charges conform to the system
of local financial management of schools and colleges.

7 Road Safety Plan
   The Panel received a joint report of the Directors of Land and Planning and Design and Building
Services to the Planning and Transportation Programme Committee at its meeting held on 22nd
February, 1990 (page 1252 of the printed minutes) on proposed arrangements for the implement­
ation of the Road Safety Code of Good Practice recently published by the Local Authority
Associations.
reso lv ed   :   That (a) the contents of the report now submitted be noted; and
  (b) Councillor Mrs. Nelson be appointed as this Committee’s representative to attend meetings of
the Road Safety Sub-Committee.

8 Revenue Budget-Monitoring
  The Committee received and noted reports on the monitoring of the Revenue Budget submitted
by the Head of Administration and Legal Department and the Chief Publicity Officer and by the
Director of Land and Planning in respect of the Town Hall and annexes.

9 Registration Service—Proposals For Change
  Further to his report to the Committee at its meeting held on 13th February, 1989 (page 1251 of
the printed minutes) on the Government Green Paper “Registration—A Modem Service” , the
Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on the subsequent White Paper
which gave the Government’s firm proposals for the reform of the Registration Service.
reso lv ed: That (a) the proposals now reported and contained in the White Paper for the reform of
the Registration Service be noted; and
  (b)    the Head of Administration and Legal Department and the Superintendent Registrar be
requested to investigate and report back on the feasibility of the provision of additional facilities
within the Registration Service, with particular regard to marriages.
