-   5-

         Additionally, there were insufficient funds remaining in the Urban Action
         Activities fund to purchase a suitable vehicle, convert, equip, maintain,
         provision and run it. There were also further considerations of
         administration, training and staffing to consider.
         RESOLVED - That, after taking into account all of the details now
         reported, it be the decision of the Committee not to proceed with the
         purchase and conversion of a coach-based mobile outdoor pursuits centre.
10.      LIST OF OUTSTANDING AND/OR REQUESTED REPORTS
         In accordance with Minute 1.2 of 9th June 1989, a joint report of.the
         Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable was submitted on
         outstanding and/or requested reports.
         The Committee discussed in particular Minute 6 of 24th April 1987
         (Maintenance and Repair Work to Police Authority Premises) and Minute 6 of
         29th May 1987 (Doncaster Airport Development - Police Facilities).
         The Clerk and Financial Officer reported the reasons for the apparent
         delay in submitting further reports to the Committee, and pointed out that
         it was hoped that reports relating to both matters would be able to be
         submitted to the next meeting of the Committee.
         RESOLVED - That the contents of the report be noted.
11.      ITEMS TO BE CONSIDERED IN THE ABSENCE OF THE PUBLIC
         RESOLVED - That, under Section 100 (A)(4) of the Local Government Act
         1972, the public be excluded from the meeting for the following items of
         business on the grounds that they involve the likely disclosure of exempt
         information as defined in paragraphs 1, 5, 9, 12 or 14 of Schedule 12A of
         the Act as appropriate.
12.      CIVILIAN STAFF - 0   &   M STAFF - WORK STUDY ASSISTANT
         In accordance with Police Authority Minute 22.2 of 24th June 1988, a joint
         report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable was
         submitted on the sole Work Study Assistant who continued on a protected
         grade and conditions of service basis.
         RESOLVED - That approval be given to the continuation of the protection of
         the existing Work Study Assistant in question, subject to a further report
         back to the Committee in twelve months' time.
13.      HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER
a.       Claims for Compensation
         In accordance with Police Authority Minute 75.2 of 18th August 1989, the
         Clerk and Financial Officer submitted a report recalling the views
         expressed by the Authority's Insurers at the deferred meeting of the
         Authority held on 18th August 1989 and referred to this meeting of the
         Committee for detailed consideration.
-   6-



          RESOLVED: That, in view of the potential expenditure which the Authority
          may be involved in, and as agreed by the Municipal Mutual Insurance Co
          Ltd, officers of the Authority be requested to "shadow" the Insurers in
          the conduct of the claims for compensation and report back to the
          Committee on developments as they arise.
b.        Cost of the West Midlands Police Investigations
          The Clerk and Financial Officer submitted copies of correspondence with
          the Home Office dated 21st, 23rd and 31st August on the payment of the
          costs of the various investigations undertaken/being undertaken by the
          West Midlands Police.
          A copy of a further letter from the Home Office dated 12th September
          giving further clarification of the views of the Secretary of State was
          circulated to each Member present.
          RESOLVED - That the contents of the correspondence be noted.
c.        Summary of Financial Situation
          The Clerk and Financial Officer submitted a report on the financing of the
          currently identifiable costs of the various investigations
          undertaken/being undertaken by the West Midlands Police.
          Circulated to each Member present was a supplemental report of the Clerk
          and Financial Officer on the outcome of a meeting held on 14th September
          with officers of the West Midlands Police Authority and an official of the
          Home Office.
          RESOLVED - That as the terms of the Police Authority's Minute 75B of 18th
          August 1989 (with the exception of interest payments) have now been met:-.
          (i)    the Authority agree to reimburse the West Midlands Police
                  Authority for the costs of the police inquiries into the
                  Hillsborough Stadium Disaster (excluding interest) subject to
                  urgent agreement with West Midlands at Member level, and
          (ii)   claims be made on the Home Office, together with a formal approach
                  regarding future year consequential costs.
    14.   INVITATION AND ACCEPTANCE OF TENDERS
          Joint reports of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief Constable
          were submitted on the invitation and acceptance of tenders.
a.        Barnsley Divisional and Sub-Divisional Headquarters - Improvements to
          Security at the Rear of the Buildfng'
          RESOLVED -
          1.     That approval be given to a capital estimate of 18,302 in respect
                  of improvements to security at the rear of the Barnsley Divisional
                  and Sub-Divisional Headquarters.
-   7-



         2.     That the single tender submitted by the Director of Works of
                Barnsley MBC in the sum of 17,001.23 be accepted for the work
                following checking and evaluation by the Director of Architecture
                of Barnsley MBC.
b.       Additional VHF Radio Channel
         RESOLVED - That, in view of the necessity of being able to dedicate one
         Forcewide channel entirely to the policing of some events, approval be
         given to the invitation of tenders for the purchase and installation of an
         additional VHF Radio Channel, subject to:-
         (i)    the scheme being included within the Capital Programme for 1990/91
                when approved, and
         (ii)   consideration of an application for a capital estimate before
                any tender is accepted.
c.       Intergrated Voice and Data Communications Network
         RESOLVED - That, following previous approvals given by the Committee and
         consultations with and in accordance with recommendations made by the
         Director of Finance and Economic Development of Doncaster MBC (as lead
         Authority for Computers) after evaluation, the tender from British Telecom
         with Option 2 now detailed be accepted for an Integrated Voice and Data
         Communications Network for the South Yorkshire Police, and that a further
         capital estimate of 1727,100 be approved in consequence.
d.       Radio Installations at Football League Grounds
         RESOLVED - That, in order to upgrade the Police communications facilities
         at Football League Grounds in the Force area in accordance with the
         Interim Report of Lord Justice Taylor, a capital estimate of 125,000 be
         approved to enable the purchase and installation of permanent base
         stations at the Grounds, and that the necessary order be placed through
         the Directorate of Communications with Phillips Radio Communications
         Systems Ltd.
e.       Vehicle Replacement Programme 1989/90 - Offer of Evaluation Vehicles
         RESOLVED - That approval be given to the purchase, direct from the
         respective manufacturers, of the following vehicles currently on extended
         suitability trials at the discounted prices indicated:-
         Renault 21 GTX             18,155.00
         Montego 2.Oi               17,221.68
         Vauxhall Nova 1.2         14,810.92
         Ford Sierra 2.9 4x4       111,975.00
15.      FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
         The Chief Constable submitted a report recalling the contents of Home
         Office Circular No 77/1987. This circular provided guidance to Police
         Authorities on the exercise of their discretion in considering
-   8-

         applications, on behalf of police officers, for financial assistance
         towards the cost of legal advice and representation arising from
         involvement in legal proceedings which resulted from the pursuance, in
         good faith, of their duties or where the interests of the Force as a whole
         were involved.
         The Clerk and Financial Officer reported on recent discussions with the
         Authority's Insurers and confirmed in a letter received that morning.
         RESOLVED - That consideration of the report now submitted be deferred,
         pending the further discussions with the Authority's Insurers now
         reported.


CHAIRMAN




DOC781
