ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE


           An officer from the Directorate of Environmental Services and Standards stated that the
 premises had been inspected that day and were found to be in a satisfactory condition.
           Representatives of the Club addressed the Sub-Committee and stated that (a) a member of
 the Management Committee of the Club had been given responsibility for all matters relating to
 health and safety and would undertake any necessary training and be implementing a number of
 measures to improve health and safety procedures at the Club, (b) the Club was keen to ensure that
 the premises were kept in good order and were safe for its customers, (c) the Club was seeking the
 help and advice of Officers of the City Council in ensuring that it met the conditions of the
 Certificate and (d) it considered that it had incurred unnecessary costs in respect of its applications
 and sought the remittance of part of the application fees incurred.
          At this point in the proceedings members of the Club and the officers of the City Council
 involved in the case left the meeting.
          The City Solicitor and Head of Administration reported orally giving legal advice on
 various aspects of the case.
          At this point in the proceedings the members of the Club and the Officers of the City
 Council re-entered the meeting.
 RESOLVED: That (i) in the circumstances now reported, the Certificate of Suitability be granted
 for six months in respect of the premises named in the report now submitted; and
          (ii) the Sub-Committee (A) welcomes the change to the management of the Club, (B)
 notes the measures taken by the Club in relation to the appointment of an individual with
 responsibility for health and safety matters and the measures to be taken by the Management
 Committee in respect of the premises and training and expects those measures to be in place as
 soon as possible, (C) gives a warning to the applicant that its primary concern is the safety of
 persons on the premises and that the Certificate can be revoked at any time if there is evidence of a
 breach of the Certificate’s conditions and (D) considers that it would not be appropriate to remit
 any of the application fees in the light of the circumstances now reported.

 (NOTE: (1) Councillor D. Jones declared an interest in Case No. 23/97 and the application for a
 Certificate of Suitability and left the meeting during their consideration, upon which Councillor
 Mrs. Smith occupied the Chair;
          (2) Councillor K. Walayat entered the meeting following consideration of Case No. 23/
 97;
          (3) Councillor Mrs. E. Smith left the meeting prior to the consideration of Case No. S13/
 97 and re-entered the meeting during consideration of that case and did not speak or vote thereon;
 and
          (4) In accordance with the provisions of Section 100B(4)(b) of the Local Government Act
 1972, as amended by the Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985, the Deputy Chair
 (Councillor Mrs. E. Smith) decided that the item in respect of the Certificate of Suitability should
 be considered as a matter of urgency in view of the need for the Sub-Committee to receive further
 information before its next meeting, although it had not been possible to give three clear days’
 notice of the item prior to the meeting.)



 Meeting of the Licensing Sub-Committee held on 15th May, 1997. Present: Councillors M. C.
 Brelsford, Mrs. Chadwick, Colk, ffinman, Mrs. Leek, Nazir, Mrs. Newton, Mrs. E. Smith and M.
 Smith.



 Appointment o f Chair o f Meeting
 RESOLVED: That in the absence of the Chair and Deputy Chair of the Sub-Committee
 (Councillors D. Jones and Mrs. Walton respectively), Councillor Mrs. E. Smith be appointed Chair
 of the meeting.

 Apologies for Absence
         Apologies for absence were received from Councillors D. Jones, MacFarlane, P. Moore
 and Webster.
28

             ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE


      (3)     Football Licensing Authority - Annual Report and Accounts 1996
                       The Sub-Committee received and noted a report of the CitySolicitor and Head of
              Administration indicating that he had now received the Football Licensing Authority’s 1996
              Annual Report and Accounts.

      §(4)    The Guide to Safety o f Sports Grounds - Fourth Edition
                        The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report referring to the receipt
              of the Guide to Safety of Sports Grounds - Fourth Edition (Commonly known as the Green Guide)
              and to the effects of the proposals contained within the new Guide which applies to major open air
              sports venues in the City and to venues that are temporarily constructed. The report also referred to
              a meeting between the Council’s Chief Licensing Officer (Sports Grounds) with the Football
              Licensing Authority’s Inspector for the South Yorkshire Area which had resulted in the Inspector
              indicating that the City Council needed to undertake, in conjunction with the Stadia owners in the
              City, a full audit of the grounds taking account of the requirements of the new Guide.
              RESOLVED: That (a) the information contained in the report now submitted, be noted; and
                        (b) the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested to write to the Department
              of National Heritage requesting the introduction of legislation in order to enable local authorities
              to recover the cost of administering the Safety of Sports Ground Licencing System.

     §(5)     Safety o f Sports Grounds - Proposed Large Scale Concerts at the Don Valley Stadium 1997
                        The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report referring to the receipt
              of three applications for the grant of Outdoor Public Entertainment Licences for large scale
              concerts to be held at the Don Valley Stadium in July and August, 1997. He stated that the
              Council’s Chief Licensing Officer, Sports Grounds, had given advice to the Stadium Owners on
              the staging of the concerts. A provisional capacity for each concert had been set at 50,000
              spectators and a licence fee in respect of each licence granted would be levied in order to recover
              the full cost of the licence.
              RESOLVED: That (a) the information contained in the report now submitted be noted; and
                        (b) delegated authority be granted to the City Solicitor and Head of Administration to
              grant, subject to all necessary licensing requirements being met and to any other conditions as are
              appropriate, a licence in respect of each concert with the following headline acts:-

              Concert/Headline Act                                                        Date

              Michael Jackson                                         Wednesday, 9th July, 1997
              Paul Weller                                             Saturday, 26th July, 1997
              Wet Wet Wet                                             Saturday, 23rd August, 1997

     §(6)     Safety o f Sports Grounds - Transfer o f General Safety Certificate for Hillsborough Stadium
                        The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report outlining the action
              taken by him in approving a Notice of Application to transfer/amend the General Safety Certificate
              issued in respect of the Hillsborough Stadium from Sheffield Wednesday Football Club PLC to the
              Middlewood Development Company Limited which has now changed its name to Sheffield
              Wednesday Football Club Limited.
              RESOLVED: That (a) confirmation be given to the action of the City Solicitor and Head of
              Administration in (i) transferring the General Safety Certificate issued to Sheffield Wednesday
              Football Club PLC in respect of the Hillsborough Stadium to the Middlewood Development
              Company Limited which has now changed its name to Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
              Limited and (ii) raising an appropriate account to recover the full cost of dealing with the transfer/
              amendment of the General Safety Certificate; and
                       (b) authority be given for an appropriate advertisement to be made in accordance with the
              Safety of Sports Ground Regulations with respect to the Certificate’s transfer/amendment.

     §(7)    Public Entertainments Licensing
             The Pulse and Vogue Nightclubs. Arena Leisure Park. Attercliffe Common
                      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report to vary the Public
             Entertainments Licence in respect of the Pulse and Vogue Nightclubs, Arena Leisure Park,
