           S H E F F I E L D   C I T Y      C P U   N C I L   *



                         POLICY COMMITTEE

                Meeting held 26th September, 1989


PRESENT:   Councillors Betts (Chair), Mrs. Barton, Chadwick, Ms.
           Fiore, Godber, Heath, Heslop, Jones, H. Knight, Mrs.
           Nicholson, Price and Wigfield.,
           Also in attendance - the Deputy Chairs of the Family
           and Community Services and Municipal Enterprise and General
           Services Programme Committees (Councillors Steinke and
           Mrs. Nelson (respectively) and the Chair of the Police
           and Community Safety Panel (Councillor Cromar).




INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS AND PROMOTIONS PANEL
RESOLVED: That the following minutes be approved:-
(Copy minutes of the meetings of the Information, Communications
and Promotions Panel held on 31st July and 18th September, 1989.)

DISABILITY LIAISON PANEL
RESOLVED: That the following minutes be approved:-
(Copy minutes of the meeting of the Disability Liaison Panel held
on 10th August, 1989.)

SPECIAL SUB-COMMITTEE RE BOUNDARY REVIEW
RESOLVED: That the following minutes be received and noted:-
(Copy minutes of the meeting of the Special Sub-Committee held
on 31st August, 1989.)

URBAN STRATEGY PANEL
RESOLVED: That the following minutes be approved:-
(Copy minutes of the meeting of the Urban Strategy Panel held on
4th September, 1989.)

CONTRAcW PANEL
RESOLVED: That the following minutes be approved:-
(Copy minutes of the meeting of the Contracts Panel held on 7th
September, 1989.)

POLICE AND COMMUNITY SAFETY PANEL
RESOLVED: That the following minutes be approved:-
(Copy minutes of the meeting of the Police and Community Safety
Panel held on 11th September, 1989.)

PERSONNEL SERVICES SUB-COMMITTEE
RESOLVED: That the following minutes be approved:-
(Copy minutes of the meeting of the Personnel Services Sub-Committee
held on 12th September, 1989.)
Policy Committee    26.9.89                               Page ?


8.       SHEFFIELD AND DISTRICT JNC FOR TEACHING STAFFS IN
         TERTIARY COLLEGES
         RESOLVED: That, with reference to item (1) of the minutes of the
         meeting of the Personnel Services Sub-Committee of 12th September,
         1989, Councillor Jones be appointed to serve in place of Councillor
         Betts as a representative of this Committee on the Sheffield and
         District.JNC for Teaching Staffs in Tertiary Colleges.

9.       RACE EQUALITY PANEL
         RESOLVED: That the following minutes, which incorporate the alteration
         made at this meeting, be approved:-
         (Copy minutes of the meeting of the Race Equality Panel held on
         12th September, 1989.)
         (NOTE: In item (7) of the minutes of the Race Equality Panel relating
                 to the draft Yemeni Community Profile, the words "refused
                 to consider" were substituted for the words "gave consideration
                 to" in the first line.)

10   .   TECHNICAL SERVICES PANEL
         RESOLVED: That the following minutes be approved:-
         (Copy minutes of the meeting of the Technical Services Panel held
         on 14th September, 1989.)

11   .   WOMEN'S PANEL
         RESOLVED: That the following minutes be approved:-
         (Copy minutes of the meeting of the Women's Panel held on 15th
         September, 1989.)

12 .     FINANCE SUB-COMMITTEE
         RESOLVED: That the following minutes, which incorporate the alteration
         made at this meeting, be approved:-
         (Copy minutes of the meeting of the Finance Sub-Committee held
         on 19th September, 1989.)
         (NOTE: In that part of item (2) of the minutes of the Finance
                 Sub-Committee relating to Programme Committee Cash Allocations,
                 the word "approved" was substituted for the word "noted"
                 in the last line of paragraph (a) in the resolution under
                 the sub-heading "(b) Carry Forward of Under and Overspendings
                 from 1988/89".)

13.      SOUTH YORKSHIRE JOINT AUTHORITIES
                   The Committee received and noted the minutes of the under­
         mentioned meetings of the South Yorkshire Joint Authorities:-

         Joint Authority                   Date of Meeting
         Fire and Civil Defence            7th July, 1989
           Authority
         Passenger Transport Authority     5th July, 1989
         Police Authority                  30th June, 1989

14.      EDUCATION PROGRAMME COMMITTEE
         RESOLVED: That Mr. D. Cox be appointed to serve as a non-Council
         member of the Education Programme Committee as the representative
         of the Workers' Educational Association in place of Mr. J. R. Fisher.
Policy Committee . 26.9.89                               Page 3


15.    POLICY COMMITTEE - CAPITAL OUT-TURN
                  The City Treasurer submitted a report giving details
        of the actual capital spending of the Policy Committee for the
        financial year 1988/89 totalling £846,000 (including leasing),
        as compared with the final estimate of £1,190,000.
        RESOLVED: That (a) the information contained in the report now submitted
        concerning the capital out-turn of the Policy Committee for 1988/89
       be noted; and
                  (b) the revised estimates for 1989/90 as detailed in
        the report be accepted, subject to the approval of the Finance
       Sub-Committee.

16.    CITY COUNCIL'S CATERING ACTIVITIES
                   The Chief Executive submitted a report (a) concerning
       the investigation recently undertaken by the Food Consultancy into
       the City Council's catering operations and (b) enclosing as appendices
       to the report (i) a summary of the recommendations contained in
       the report of the Consultants, (ii) a number of reports outlining
       and giving the results of the detailed work carried out on the
        Consultants' recommendations by Council officers and in particular
       a joint working group of officers and trade union representatives
       and (iii) a detailed brief of further consultancy work required
       to be carried out in respect of the Council's catering activities.
       RESOLVED: That, in the light of the information contained in the
       documents now submitted:-
        (A) the Food Consultancy be commissioned to undertake further
             work in connection with the City Council's catering activities
             and in accordance with the brief set out in Appendix 3 to
             the report now submitted;
       (B) one Direct Service Organisation be established for all catering
             activities carried out by the Council under a Director of
             Catering Services, subject to further consideration being
             given to the reporting arrangements of the Director by the
             Chief Executive and the appropriate Committees;
       (C) authority be given for the establishment of a post of Director
             of Catering Services at a salary in accordance with JNC
              Grade 3 plus 15% performance related pay and that arrangements
             be made to advertise this post in advance of confirmation
             of this decision by the Council;
       (D) an additional sum of £50,000 be identified in the current
             financial year to cover the extra resources required to enable
             a team of employees to be released from their existing duties
             to carry out work on specifications, strategies and service
             planning in connection with enforced competition, under the
             appropriate direction of the Management Team Sub-Group on
             Enforced Tendering; and
       (E) the City Treasurer, in consultation with the Chair of the
             Finance Sub-Committee, be requested to determine how the additional
             financial resources required as a result of recommendations
             (C) and (D) above should be provided.
Policy Committee   26.9.89                              Page 4


17.     LANDFILL GAS - THE IMPLICATIONS FOR SHEFFIELD
                   The Director of Health and Consumer Services and the
        Director of Recreation and Amenities submitted a joint report
        outlining the background to and the implications for the City Council
        of Waste Management Paper 27 on "The Coi\trol of Landfill Gas" which
        had been produced by H. M. Inspectorate of Pollution in response
        to a number of incidents where landfill gas had led to explosions,
        fires, odour nuisance, vegetation dieback and dangerous gas
        concentrations in and around houses and which attempted to provide
        advice and guidance to waste disposal authorities and site operatives
        on how the gas could be safely controlled and on .the steps they
        should be taking. The joint report also set out a policy- for a
        corporate response to the implications of the Waste Management
        Paper, assessed the resource implications of the policy, made
       recommendations for future action and referred to the problems
        currently being experienced in respect of landfill gas from the
        Greaves Lane site at High Green.
       RESOLVED: That (a) the policy on the control of landfill gas as
        detailed in Section 7 of the joint report now submitted be adopted
        as Council policy;
                   (b) with particular reference to the Greaves Lane site
       at High Green -
              (i) the Director of Health and Consumer Services be authorised
       to arrange, through the Director of Cleansing Services, for the
        immediate installation of gas management measures at the site,
       as the agent of the Director of Recreation and Amenities;
             (ii) the City Treasurer be given delegated authority to approve
       the Project Report Form CP3 to be prepared by the Director of
       Recreation and Amenities in respect of the capital financing of
       such installation works;
             (iii) the Director of Health and Consumer Services (A) be
       requested as a matter of urgency, in conjunction with the other
       Chief Officers concerned, to consider the most appropriate means
       of providing advice, information and assistance to the residents
       of the affected area in order to allay any unnecessary fears, such
       consideration to take into account the suggestions made at this
       meeting including the possible siting of a mobile advice unit and
       the holding of a public meeting in the area and (B) be authorised,-
       in consultation with the Chair of this Committee, to make the
       necessary arrangements for the provision of the assistance;
             (iv) the Directors of Cleansing Services and Health and Consumer
       Services be requested to investigate and report back on any potential
       income generation from the landfill gas produced from the site; .
                   (c) the potential additional resources required to fund
       the carrying out of gas management at any further sites with a
       landfill gas production problem be noted and further reports be
       •brought to the Finance Sub-Committee when any further sites with
       a gas problem in the Council's ownership are identified for inclusion
       in the Capital Programme;
                   (d) approval be given to the action proposed to be taken
       by the Health and Consumer Services Department in connection with
       the landfill gas problem as detailed in the report and involving
       the surveying and monitoring of sites atnd the carrying cut of any
       necessary emergency/remedial works and that the Chair of the Finance
       Sub-Committee and the City Treasurer be requested to give consideration
       to the means of funding the proposed action; and
Policy Committee   26.9.89                               Page 5


                 (e)           the Chief Officers concerned :be requested to investigate
       the possibility of obtaining resources from the Department of the
       Environment's reserve allocation in respect of landfill gas.
       (NOTE: A copy of the joint report will be circulated to members
               of the City Council with the prirrfced minutes.)


18.    COMMITTEE STRUCTURE - CONTRACTS AND DIRECT SERVICE
       ORGANISATIONS
                 The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
       submitted a report (a) referring to the decision of the City Council
       at its annual meeting on 17th May, 1989 to give to the Municipal
       Enterprise and General Se rvices Programme Committee the responsibility
       for supervising and controlling the contractor-side functions of
       all existing and proposed Direct Service Organisations with the
       sole exception at that stage of the Works Department; and (b)
       containing proposals as to how that Committee should now deal with
       those new responsibilities in addition to its existing responsibilities
       for the five municipal trading enterprises.
       RESOLVED: That (i) with immediate effect the contractor-side
       responsibilities for all existing and proposed Direct Service
       Organisations (with the exception of the Works Department) be
       transferred to the Municipal Enterprise and General Services Programme
       Committee and be exercised through a Direct Services Organisation
       Panel of that Committee;
                 (ii) in the event of any dispute arising between a client
       committee and a contractor committee which is not capable of being
       resolved by the Council's normal administrative procedures, the
       matter be referred to the Contracts Panel of this Committee which
       will act under delegated authority; and
                 (iii) the membership of the Direct Services Organisation
       Panel be determined by the City Council at its meeting on 4th
       October, 1989.

19.    HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - OVERVIEW AND PROPOSALS FOR FUTURE
                 The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
       submitted a report (a) providing a summary of action taken by the
       City Council since and in the light of the tragedy at Hillsborough
       Football Ground on 15th April, 1989, (b) addressing the general
       recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor regarding the issuing of
       safety certificates by the City Council as the enforcing authority
       and (c) arising therefrom identifying a number of matters now
       requiring consideration including (i) the staffing requirements
       necessary to the effective and efficient running of the licensing
       service, (ii) the level of fees which should be charged for the
       issuing of certificates and the length of such certificates and
       (iii) the future administrative arrangements and decision-making
       procedures required to operate the service. Copies of the following
       associated .documents were enclosed as appendices to the report:-
       1.   A report of the Director of Social Services to the Family
            and Community Services Programme Committee on 10th May, 1989
            on the involvement of staff of his Department in the aftermath^,
            of the Hillsborough disaster and proposing the setting up
            of a task team to continue the ongoing work with people .
            emotionally affected by the disaster.
Policy Committee   26.9.89                                Page 6


        2.   A report of the Director of Libraries and Information Services
             to this Committee on 23rd May, 1989 on the arrangements made
             by that Department for the operation of a 'Hillsborough Helpline'
             service.

        3.   A report of the Director of Health and Consumer Services to
              the Health and Consumer Services Programme Committee on 20th
              June, 1989 on the action which was taken by the Bereavement
              and Support Services and Public Health Divisions of that
              Department"Th response— bo-the disaster.

       4.    Reports of the Acting Head of Administration and Legal
              Department to the General Purposes Panel and the Municipal
              Enterprise and General Services Programme Committee at their
              meetings on 17th August and 18th September, 1989, respectively,
              advising members of action taken and recommendations for future
              action in connection with the Safety of Sports Grounds Act
              1975.               _

       5.    A copy of the Prohibition Notice, served on Owlerton Sports
              Stadium.

       6.   Copies of letters from the South Yorkshire Metropolitan
             Ambulance Service, the Building Surveyor, Department of Land
             and Planning, the Director of Health and Consumer Services
             and the South Yorkshire County Fire Service on the review
            •of the administration and inspection service.
       RESOLVED: That (A) the proposals now reported of the Municipal
       Enterprise and General Services Programme Committee for the creation
       of two additional posts of Chief Licensing Officer on Grade POld
       and Licensing Officer on Scale 4/5 to deal with safety of sports
       grounds and other issues, subject to discussions with the appropriate
       trade unions' under the Council's Responding to Change agreement,
       be approved so far as this Committee is concerned and that consideration
       be given to the means of funding the posts;
                  (B) approval be given to the principle of charging fees
       in respect of applications for. the issue or amendment of safety
       certificates and that the Acting Head of Administration and Legal
       Department be requested to report back with a suggested scale of
       fees;
                  (C) with reference to paragraphs 16 and 17 of the interim
       recommendations of the Taylor Report relating to the future
       administrative arrangements for the issuing etc. of safety certificates
       and the setting up of effective Advisory Groups, authority be given
       for (i) the continuation in operation in its existing form of the
       Advisory Group which comprises appropriate professional officers
       and is chaired by a senior officer in the Administration and Legal
       Department and.which advises the City Council in the exercise
       of its functions under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 and
       (ii) the establishment of a separate group on the lines now indicated
       and including representatives of the stadia and recognised supporters'
       clubs,to be chaired by an elected member of the City Council whose
       function would be to make representations to the Advisory Group
       and through it to the Council on matters of particular concern
       to the group; and
Policy Committee   26.9.89                               Page 7

                  (D)            further to the decision of the City Council at its ann
       meeting on 17th May, 1989 to refer to the Health and Consumer Services
       Programme Committee, as from a date to be determined by this Committee,
       the powers and duties'exercised by the Municipal Enterprise and General
       Services Programme Committee in relation to licensing matters, approval
       be given for the powers and duties of the Council under the Safety of
       Sports- Grounds Act 1975 to be similarly transferred to. the Health and
       Consumer- Services Programme Committee on the understanding that such
       transfer is orv the basis' that all. existing delegations of powers to
       officers shall remain unaltered and that, until such time as the Health
       and Consumer Services Programme Committee has determined ana has in
       operation an appropriate Sub^Committee/Panel structure to deal with
       these additional responsibilities and to exercise the same~~delegated
       powers as the General Purposes Panel of the Municipal Enterprise and
       General Services Programme Committee, the Council's powers and duties
       under the said Act shall continue to be delegated to the General
       Purposes Panel.-                             . r_

20.    LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND HOUSING BILL -
        MISCELLANEOUS CHARGING PROVISIONS
                  The Committee received and noted a report of the Acting
        Head of Administration and Legal Department giving details of the
        provisions of Clauses 138 - 141 and 150 in Part IX of the Local
        Government and Housing Bill relating to the proposed powers of
        local authorities to make charges for the provision 6f local authority
        services.

21.    APPROPRIATION OP LAND
                  The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
        submitted a report on the question of the appropriation to the
        general estate of the City Council of land which was currently held
        for housing and education purposes and which was not considered to
        be necessary for the specific statutory purposes of either the
        new Housing Revenue Account envisaged by the Local Government and
        Housing Bill or the Education Reform Act 1988, respectively.
        RESOLVED: That (a) the information contained in the report now
        submitted be noted and the Acting Head of Administration and Legal
        Department, in consultation with the appropriate Officers, be requested
        to report back with details in respect of lands proposed to be
        appropriated to the general estate of the Council; and
                   (b) in the event of the City Treasurer and the Acting
        Head of Administration and Legal Department being of the opinion that
        urgent action is required in this connection in order to safeguard
        the-Council's interests, the Emergency Sub-Committee of this Committee
        be given delegated powers to deal with the matter on the understanding
        that on any occasions when proposals relating to education land or
        premises are to be eonsidered the Chair of the Education Programme
        Committee shall be co-opted on to that Sub-Committee.

22.    AMA COMMUNITY POLICY GROUP
       RESOLVED: That (a) approval be given to the action taken by the
       Chair of this Committee in authorising arrangements to be made,
       in conjunction with the Federation of Community Work Training Groups,
       for the Community Policy Group of the Association of Metropolitan
       Authorities to hold a meeting in the Town Hall, Sheffield, on 13th
       September, 1989; and
Policy Committee    26.9.89                                 Page 8


                   (b)           attendance at that meeting by members of the City
         Council be recognised as an approved duty for the purposes of the
         payment of allowances under Section 177(2)(b) of the Local Government
         Act 1972*

23   .   CONFERENCES/SEMINARS
         RESOLVED: That (a) delegates be appointed to attend conferences
         etc. as follows:-

         Conference Etc.                Date and Venue      Delegates

         Quarterly meeting of the       29th September,     The Chair of the
         Association of Direct Labour   1989 - Glasgow      Contracts Panel and
         Organisations                                      the Principal Solicitor,
                                                            Contract Advisory Unit

         Centre for Local Economic      lOth/llth           The Chair and any
         Strategies:-                   November, 1989      interested members of
         - Annual Conference on         - Sheffield         this Committee.
          "Reclaiming the Public
          Interest - An Economic
          Agenda for the 1990's"

         - Four one day policy          18th October        The Chair of this
          seminars on "The Future of    and 1st, 15th and   Committee (or his
          the Public Sector"            19th November,      nominee)
                                        1989 - London

                  • (b) the invitations now submitted for the City Council
         to be represented at an Information Technology for Local Government
         study day on "IT Awareness for Councillors", to be held in London
         on 9th November, 1989 and a weekend study course for Senior Councillors
         and Officers on "Rethinking Member/Officer Relationships" arranged
         by the School for Advanced Urban Studies, Bristol, from 2nd to
         4th February, 1989 be declined; and
                    (c) arising from the ITLG study day mentioned in paragraph
         (b) above, arrangements be made for the holding of two Information
         Technology Awareness Seminars for members of the City Council on
         the 10th and 24th November, 1989 and that attenance at the Seminars „
         be recognised as an approved duty for the purpose of the payment
         of allowances under Section 177(2)(b) of the Local Government Act
         1972.

24.      RETIRMENT OF MR. IAN P0DM0RE, CHIEF EXECUTIVE
                    The Committee were reminded that Mr. I. L. Podmore, Chief
          Executive, would retire on 30th September, 1989 and it was
          RESOLVED UNANIMOUSLY: That this Council -
                    (a) place on record their high appreciation of the valuable
          and efficient service rendered to them and to the City by Mr. I.
          L. Podmore in the post of Chief Executive to which he was appointed
          in 1973 and in the post of Deputy Town Clerk with the former Sheffield
          City Council during the period 1970 - 1974;
                    (b) express to him their gratitude for the devoted and
         .able manner in which he has undertaken his duties and for the advice
          which he has given to the Council and its Committees;
Policy Committee    26.9.89                              Page 9


                 (c) congratulate him upon the excellence of his work
       and the eminence he has attained in his profession; and
                 (d) extend their best wishes to Mr. Podmore and his wife
       for their future welfare and for a long and happy retirement and
       direct that a copy of this resolution under the Common Seal be
       presented to him.

25.     EXCLUSION OF THE PUBLIC AND PRESS
        RESOLVED: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting
        during the consideration of the remaining items of business, on
        the grounds that in view of the nature of the business to be transacted,
        there would be a disclosure to them of exempt information described
        in Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act 1972* as amended by
        the Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985 under the
        following paragraphs:-

        Item       Paragraph          Reason

       26(a),          7              Information relating to the financial
       (d) and                        or business affairs of any particular
       (e)                            person (other than the authority).

       26(b)           7              Information relating to the financial
       and (c)                        or business affairs of any particular
                                      person (other than the authority).

                       9              Relating to any terms proposed or
                                      to be proposed by or to the authority
                                      in the course of negotiations for
                                      a contract for the acquisition or
                                      disposal of property or the supply
                                      of goods or services.

        27             9              Relating to any terms proposed or
                                      to be proposed by or to the authority
                                      in the course of negotiations for
                                      a contract for the acquisition or
                                      disposal of property or the supply
                                      of goods or services.

26.    WORLD STUDENT GAMES
       (a) Provision of Sporting and Recreational Facilities - Review
       of the Financial, Legal and Organisational Structures
                 The City Treasurer, the Acting Head of Administration
       and Legal Department and the Director of Design and Building Services
       submitted a joint report bringing members up to date on the final
       funding arrangements for the provision of the Ponds Forge International
       Sports Centre, the Don Valley Athletics Stadium and the Hillsborough
       Leisure Centre and enclosing as appendices to the report details
       of (a) the agreed organisational structure and the structure of
       the funding package for the three facilities being provided for
       and operated by Sheffield for Health Ltd., (b) the total amount
       of the financing package negotiated for the facilities at £100.425
       million and (c) the revenue consequences for the City Council in
       1992/93 of the capital financing costs for all the World Student
       Games facilities.
Policy Committee   26.9.89                               Page 10


       RESOLVED: That (i) the contents of the joint report now submitted
       be noted and approval be given to the action taken by the City
       Treasurer and the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
       in finalising the funding arrangements for the provision of the
       Ponds Forge International Sports Centre, the Don Valley Athletics
       Stadium and the Hillsborough Leisure Centre as detailed in the
       report;
                 (ii) approval be given to the appointment of Tax Consultants
       in connection with the funding arrangements as referred to in
       paragraph 9 of the report; and
                 (iii) it be noted that separate reports are being prepared
       on the financial, legal and organisational arrangements in respect
       of the provision of the Arena/Velodrome, the Lyceum Theatre redevelopment'
       and the proposed tennis complex at Hillsborough Park.

       (b) Provision of Sporting and Recreational Facilities - Report
       on Progress and Capital Expenditure
                 The Committee considered a joint report of the Director
       of Design and Building Services, the City Treasurer and the Director
       of Recreation and Amenities (a) informing members of the progress
       being made on the various sporting and recreational facilities
       being provided in connection with the World Student Games and
       (b) identifying the current estimated capital expenditure in respect
       of each scheme compared with the position reported to the City
       Council in January 1989 and the principal reasons for the differences
       in costs.
       RESOLVED: That (i) the position with regard to the current forecast
       capital expenditure of £141,683,000 and progress on each of the schemes
       being provided for the World Student Games as detailed in the joint
       report now submitted be noted;
                 (ii) the officers concerned be requested to report back
       on the options which are available for reducing capital expenditure
       on such schemes;
                 (iii) the arrangements for the oversight and direction
       of the consultants and the management contractors be reviewed by
       the Chief Executive on behalf of Sheffield for Health Ltd., the
       Lyceum Theatre Trust and the City Council; and
                 (iv) the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
       and the Director of Design and Building Services be requested to
       examine the possibility for the fee payments to consultants being
       limited to a level of fee which would have been payable had the
       capital costs not increased and to examine whether the consultants
       have carried out their commissions in accordance with their appointments.

        (c) Provision of Sporting and Recreational Facilities -
        Revenue Proviion
                  The Committee received and noted a joint report of the
        Director of Recreation and Amenities and the City Treasurer on
        the latest position with regard to the revenue estimates in respect
        of the sporting-and recreational facilities being provided for
        the World Student Games.

        (d) The Lyceum Theatre Redevelopment
                  The Director of Arts submitted a report on the latest
        position in respect of the scheme for the restoration and refurbishment
        of the Lyceum Theatre and giving details of (a) the approvals given
        by the City Council to the various phases of the redevelopment
Policy Committee   26.9.89                              Page 11


        (b) the currently proposed structure for the financing arrangements
        for the scheme and the proposed constitutional arrangement whereby
        a joint co-ordinating committee drawn from the Lyceum and Crucible
        Trusts will be responsible for the management of both Theatres
        and their related trading activities, (c) the latest estimated
      . capital out-turn cost for the project, (d) the operational budgets
        for the Lyceum Theatre for 1990/91 and 1991/92 and (e) other related
        issues including EEC funding for the scheme.
        RESOLVED: That.the— eofttents-- of the report now submitted be noted
        and the City Council's revenue commitment to the Lyceum Theatre
        of £210,000 in 1990/91 and £250,000 in 1991/92 be confirmed.

       (e) Main Events Arena
                  The City Treasurer, the Director of Design and Building
       Services, the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
       and the Director of Recreation and Amenities submitted a joint
       report informing members of the latest position in connection with
       the arrangements for the construction, financing and operation
       of the Main Events Arena required for the World Student Games and
       outlining the basic elements of the legal agreement, the latest
       estimated capital costs, the legal and administrative arrangements
       and their effects on the City Council. The report (a) indicated that
       a more comprehensive report was currently being prepared which
       would take into account the conclusion of the negotiations with
       ISM and SMGI as developer and manager of the scheme, respectively, and
       (b) also sought approval for further interim capital expenditure
       prior to the firialisation of the legal documentation in order to
       meet the construction timetable.
       RESOLVED: That (a) the contents of the joint report now submitted
       and the progress of the negotiations with ISM/SMGI and the Department
       of the Environment be noted and a more comprehensive report be
       submitted on finalisation of the negotiations; and
                  (b)           the Project Report Form CP3 now submitted in respect
       of interim funding totalling £15.1 million (£421,000 in 1988/89,
       £8,669,000 in 1989/90 and £6,010,000 in 1990/91) for professional
       fees, design work and construction work on the Main Events Arena
       for the World Student Games in order to achieve the construction
       timetable be approved on the understanding that the expenditure
       will b^. reimbursed to the City Council when the financing package
       is finalised.

27.    DEPARTMENT OF DESIGN AND BUILDING SERVICES -
       OFFICE ACCOMMODATION
               The Director of Land and Planning submitted a
       report (a) indicating that on the authority of the Finance Sub­
       committee at its meeting on 19th September, 1989 notice had been
       given to the landlords of the City Plaza Building of the City Council's
       intention to terminate its lease of the accommodation occupied by the
       Department of Design and Building Services in that building, (b)
       on the negotiations concluded with the owners of Carbrook Hall
       Business Park with a view to the Council's renting or purchasing
       premises at the Business Park for use by that Department and (c)
       giving details of the two bases on which the owners were prepared
       to make the accommodation available to the Council.
Policy Committee   26.9.89                               Page 12


        RESOLVED: That approval be given for the transfer of the Department
        of Design and Building Services into premises at the Carbrook Hall
        Business Park, subject to the City Treasurer reporting back on
        the financial implications of the terms now negotiated and detailed
        in the report now submitted for either leasing or purchasing such
        premises.
