          FAMILY AND COMMUNITY SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                                  1037

(2) HILLSBORO UGH STADIUM INQUESTS
   The Director of Social Services submitted a report containing proposals for the establishment
of two temporary posts within his Department to provide support to witnesses and other persons
attending the inquests into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster. The report stated that the
inquests had been re-opened on 11th November, 1990 and were expected to last for up to 12
weeks.
   Resolved: That, subject to the necessary finance being made available, approval be given to
staffing arrangements in connection with the provision of support to persons attending the
Hillsborough Stadium Inquests as detailed in the report of the Director of Social Services nqw
submitted.
(3) NORFOLK PA RK PRIN CIPAL SOCIAL W ORKER
  The Director of Social Services submitted a report on the outcome of a review of the Hyde
Park Mental Health Project which had been established as a joint funded community orientated
project working under a local management committee on Hyde Park. The report explained that,
following the vacation of the Hyde Park flats, the project was moved to the Norfolk Park Estate
and the supervision of the staff involved transferred to the Principal Social Worker for Norfolk
Park.
  Resolved: That, subject to a review of the arrangements by 31st March, 1991, approval be
given to the payment with effect from 1st February, 1989 of an additional increment to the
Principal Social Worker for Norfolk Park in recognition of additional duties undertaken in
connection with the supervision of the Hyde Park Mental Health Project, such payment to be
funded from within the projects budget.
(4) SLEEPING-IN D U TIE S— RESIDENTIAL ADULT HOMES
  The Sub-Committee considered reports of the Director of Social Services on proposals to
phase out sleeping-in arrangements in respect of staff in residential adult homes. The report
indicated that a responding to change proposal had previously been submitted to the trade unions
reviewing the sleeping-in arrangements but that, following a decision of the Yorkshire and
Humberside Provincial Council concerning payments for holidays and sickness, it was now felt
that this proposal was inappropriate.
   Resolved: That (a) approval be given to the phasing out of sleeping-in payments in respect of
staff of residential adult homes;
  (b) the responding to change proposal reviewing the current sleeping-in arrangements be
withdrawn; and
   (c) the Director of Social Services be authorised to (i) submit a responding to change proposal
to the appropriate trade unions to have waking peripatetic senior staff covering the whole City
and (ii) enter into negotiations with recognised trade unions and at a minimum cost to the
Department on the inclusion of sleeping-in payments in the calculation of holiday and sick-leave
pay and to determine the implementation date of such payments.
(5) HEPA TITIS “B ” VACCINATION PROGRAM M E
  Resolved: That, in the light of information contained in the report of the Director of Social
Services now submitted, (a) approval be given to the carrying out of a programme of Hepatitis
“B” Vaccinations for those members of staff designated as being in “high risk groups” as
determined by the Department of Health’s Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation;
and
  (b) the Director of Social Services be requested to investigate alternative funding arrangements
for the carrying out of this programme.


 Meeting of the Staffing Sub-Committee held 10th January, 1991. Present— Councillors
Burrows (Chair), Darke, Mrs. Davey, Mrs. Fleming, Hattersley and Heath.
(1 )   EXCLUSION O F T H E PUBLIC A N D PRESS
  Resolved: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before discussion takes
place on the undermentioned items of business on the grounds that, in view of the nature of the
business to be transacted, if the public and press were present, there would be a disclosure to
1038       FAMILY AND COMMUNITY SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

  them of exempt information as described in paragraph 1 of Schedule 12A to the Local
  Government Act, 1972, as amended by the Local Government (Access to Information) Act,
  1985, relating to a particular employee of the Authority.
  (2) STAFF ESTABLISHM ENT
    The Director of Social Services submitted a report containing proposals for the creation of
  additional posts in the Service Development Section to undertake the work connected with
  increased requirements in legislation for strategic and operational planning activities as well as to
  assist operational managers develop and achieve delivery of appropriate services. The report
  indicated that the additional posts could be financed by the deletion of other posts in the
  Department.
    Resolved: That, subject to consultation with the relevant trade unions under the Responding to
  Change Agreement, approval be given to proposals for (a) the creation of two posts of Principal
  Planning and Development Officer on Grade POld/e and one half-time post of Clerk on Scale
  1/2/3; and
     (b) the deletion of the post of Development Officer (Supported Accommodation), the post of
   Co-ordinator (Grenoside Hospital) and the half-time post of Clerk (Grenoside Development
   Team).
   ( n o t e : One post of Principal Planning and Development Officer and the half-time post of Clerk
   will be on a temporary contract to be reviewed in March 1993.)
   (3) STAFF— HO N O RA RIU M
     Resolved: That, in accordance with the details contained in the report now submitted by the
   Director of Social Services, authority be given for the payment of a honorarium to the officer now
   mentioned in respect of additional duties and responsibilities for the period from 1st December,
   1990 to 31st March, 1991 and for the position to be then reviewed.

4 Registered Homes Act Panel
r e s o l v e d : That, except so far as they relate to matters delegated to the Registered Homes Act
Panel, the following minutes be approved—
     Meeting of the Registered Homes Act Panel held 10th December, 1990. Present— Councillors
   Steinke (Chair), Butler and Mrs. Leach.
   ( 1 ) EXCLUSION O F T H E PUBLIC AND PRESS
     Resolved: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before discussion takes
  place on the following items of business on the grounds that, in view of the nature of the business
  to be transacted, if the public and press were present, there would be a disclosure to them of
  exempt information described in paragraph 7 of Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act,
  1972 as amended by the Local Government (Access to Information) Act, 1985, relating to the
  financial or business affairs of other persons.
★ (2) REGISTRATION OF MANAGER AT SHIRECLIFFE LAWNS. 24 SHIRECLIFFE LANE
    The Director of Social Services submitted a report on an application for the registration of a
  manager at Shirecliffe Lawns, 24 Shirecliffe Lane. The applicant appeared before the Panel in
  support of the application.
     Resolved: That, in the light of the information contained in the report now submitted and
  following an interview, the applicant now mentioned be registered as the Manager at Shirecliffe
  Lawns, 24 Shirecliffe Lane, under the provisions of the Registered Homes Act, 1984.
★ (3) REGISTRATION OF EXTRA BEDS AT ACORN LODGE, 175 SHIRECLIFFE ROAD
    Following a visit of inspection, the Panel considered a report of the Director of Social Services
  on an application for the registration of six extra beds at Acorn Lodge, 175 Shirecliffe Road.
    Resolved: That, in the light of the information contained in the report now submitted and
  subject to the installation of a vertical shaft lift, approval be given for the owner of Acorn Lodge,
  175 Shirecliffe Road to register in her name, the six extra beds at the Home thus increasing the
  number of beds from 16 to 22, under the provisions of the Registered Homes Act, 1984.
