508     MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

    (11) LEG AL PROCEEDINGS
      The Panel noted a verbal report of the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department
    that, in proceedings held at Sheffield Magistrates’ Court on 13th/14th July, 1989, the Council’s
    prosecution of the operators of a shop at 68 Division Street on the grounds that the premises were
    being operated as an unlicensed sex shop had failed.


      Meeting of the General Purposes Panel held 17th August, 1989. Present— Councillors Butler
    (Chair), Hussain, Lamb, Moscrop, Mrs. Mulheam, Mrs. Nelson, Mrs. E. Smith, Mrs. Walton
    and White.
★     SAFETY O F SPORTS GROUNDS
      The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on the issue and
    amendment of General Safety Certificates under the provisions of the Safety of Sports Grounds
    Act, 1975.
      Chief Inspector Beal of the South Yorkshire Police attended the meeting to give the Police
    observations on the proposals contained in the report and Mr. K. T. Addy, a Director of the
    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and Dr. Eastwood, Consultant Engineer, attended the
    meeting to give the observations of the Football Club.
       The Chair asked for a letter dated 16th August, 1989, from the Sheffield Wednesday Football
    Club requesting a written ruling prior to the coming Saturday’s match on the question of access to
    and capacity in the North Stand at the Hillsborough Football Ground, which letter had not been
    circulated to members of the Panel before the day of the meeting, to be considered as an urgent
    item.
      Resolved: That (a) in accordance with the provisions of Section 100B(4)(b) of the Local
    Government Act, 1972, as amended by the Local Government (Access to Information) Act,
    1985, the request in the letter now submitted from Sheffield Wednesday Football Club be
    considered as a matter of urgency in view of the impending commencement of the Football
    Season;
      (b) confirmation be given to the action taken by the Chief Executive in (i) issuing to the
    Sheffield United Football Club an interim Safety Certificate under the provisions of the Safety of
    Sports Grounds Act, 1975 and (ii) amending the current Safety Certificate issued to the Sheffield
    Wednesday Football Club, all in accordance with the details contained in the report and copy
    documents now submitted;
      (c) the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department be authorised to issue a further
    Notice of Amendment in respect of the Certificate issued to the Sheffield Wednesday Football
    Club (as amended) as follows—
          (i) Schedule 3 of the amended Certificate shall be further amended to state that (A) the
          maximum capacity for the upper area of the North West Terrace at the Hillsborough
          Football Ground shall be 2,300 and (B) the maximum total capacity permitted in the North
          Stand shall be reduced to 9,700 and the maximum total capacity permitted in the
          Hillsborough Football Ground shall be 43,542; and
          (ii) for the sake of clarity, additional Condition 10 of the amended Certificate shall be
          amended to reflect the fact that only the upper part of the terracing of the North West
          Terrace shall be used;
      (d) approval be given to the proposed arrangements now reported for the upper part of the
    North West Terrace at the Hillsborough Football Ground to be used on a contingency basis as
    and when requested by the Police.
       (e) having heard the representations of Chief Inspector Beal on behalf of South Yorkshire
    Police and the representations of Mr. Addy and Dr. Eastwood on behalf of the Sheffield
    Wednesday Football Club concerning the use of the North Stand (i) in view of the need for
    segregation of football supporters and taking account of the operational plans of the Police, the
    North stand shall be filled only through turnstiles located in Penistone Road; and (ii) taking
    account of the undertaking by the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to provide two additional
    turnstiles (currently serving the Spion Kop Terrace) to serve the North Stand, the capacity for the
    North Terrace shall be reduced to 9,700;
            MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                              509

          (f) the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department and representatives of the South
        Yorkshire Police and the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club be requested to monitor the
        operation of the Hillsborough Football Ground particularly with regard to the functioning of the
        North Terrace until the end of September, 1989, and report back to this Panel on the outcome of
        such monitoring; and
          (g) the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department be requested to make
        arrangements for this Panel to visit and inspect the Hillsborough and Bramall Lane Football
        Grounds and the Owlerton Sports Stadium in the near future.


         Meeting of the General Purposes Panel held 4th September, 1989. P resen t- Councillors
        Butler (Chair), Ms. Fiore, Lamb, Mrs. Mulheam, Mrs. Nelson, Mrs. E. Smith and Mrs. Walton.
★        ( 1 ) CINEMA EXHIBITIONS
        Confirmation o f Action
          Resolved: That confirmation be given to the action taken by the Acting Head of
        Administration and Legal Department in consultation with the Chair of this Panel in authorising
        the issue of a “Local 12” certificate in respect of the “Batman” film.
        New Category “12”
          The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department reported verbally on a proposed
        change in the Council’s cinema licence conditions to incorporate the recent introduction by the
        British Board of Film Classification of a film category “12” and the Panel received a copy of a
        press release from the British Board of Film Classification announcing the introduction of the
        new category.
           Resolved: That the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department be authorised to
        take any necessary steps to alter the Standard Cinema Licence Conditions to incorporate the new
        film category “12” , outlined by the British Board of Film Classification, into the Council’s cinema
        licence conditions.
        Film Classification
          The Panel received reports of the Senior Film Officer requesting the reclassification of a
        number of films for local exhibition.
          Resolved: That the requests now submitted by the Senior Film Officer for permission to exhibit
        the following films under local certificates as indicated be granted—
                                                Previous         Proposed
        Title                                   Category         Local Category
        Yield to the Night                      “X”              “15”
        Are We All Murderers?                   “X”              “15”
         Gorillas in the Mist                   “15”             “12”
        The Elephant Man                        “PG”             “12”
         Nine films by George Kuchar            Unclassified     “18”
         A Song of Love                         Unclassified      “18”
         The Hands of Orlac                     “A ”              “12”
           (Mad Love)
         Kiss Me Deadly                         “A ”              “12”
         Miss Julie                             “A ”              “12”
         Rome, Open City                        “A ”              “12”
    ★      (2) SAFETY O F SPORTS GROUNDS
         Bramall Lane Sports Ground
            The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a copy of a consent
         issued in consultation with the Chairs of the Panel and the Municipal Enterprise and General
         Services Programme Committee in respect of the removal of three radial fences from the Spion
    510     MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

      Kop and Bramall Lane terraces at the Bramall Lane Sports Ground, together with consequent
      ancillary work proposed to be completed in time for the football match on Saturday, 9th
      September, 1989 and reported that the Club had now indicated that it was doubtful whether the
      ancillary work could be completed by that date. A representative of the Building Surveyor
      reported on the structural aspects of the work.
       Resolved: That (a) confirmation be given to the action taken to issue the consent on 25th
      August, 1989, as now reported; and
         (b) a time limit of 15th September, 1989, be imposed for compliance with Condition 5 which
      requires (i) the testing of the lengths of barrier which have been altered or were unable to be
      tested previously because of the proximity of the radial fences, and (ii) the submission to the
      Council of reports thereon.
      (n o t e :   A copy of the Council’s letter to the Club will be sent to each member of the Panel.)
      Hillsborough Sports Ground
         The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on proposals of
      the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to carry out alterations to the Hillsborough Sports
      Ground to provide (a) office accommodation for the Young Owls Club and (b) a hospitality suite
      in the North Stand. Plans of the proposals were exhibited at the meeting and the Panel received
      copies of letters from the Club’s consulting engineers and the South Yorkshire County Fire
      Service and a memorandum from the Council’s Building Surveyor regarding the proposals.
       Resolved: That, subject to compliance by the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club with the
     comments of the South Yorkshire County Fire Service, the Building Surveyor and the Director of
     Health and Consumer Services now reported, on condition that the Club inform the Council
     when the works are completed, approval be given in accordance with Section 8 of the Safety of
     Sports Grounds Act, 1975, to the carry out of the alterations at the Hillsborough Sports Ground
     referred to in the report now submitted and the plans now exhibited.
     Urgent Item
       The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department reported on correspondence which
     he had held with the proprietors of three local sports grounds regarding action to be taken to
     comply with the recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor’s Interim Report on the Hillsborough
     Disaster and stated that certain of the recommendations still had not been put into effect at the
     grounds.
       Resolved: That the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department be requested to
     write to the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, the Sheffield United Football Club and
     Owlerton Sports Stadium Limited enumerating the outstanding items now reported and asking
     for an immediate reply.
     ( n o t e : (a) In accordance with the provisions of Section 100B(4)(b) of the Local Government
     Act, 1972, as amended by the Local Government (Access to Information) Act, 1985, the Chair of
     the Panel (Councillor Butler), decided that this item should be considered as a matter of urgency
     in view of the need to ensure the safety of the public; and
       (b) copies of the letters to the proprietors of the sports grounds will be sent to each member of
     the Panel.)
★     (3) STREET COLLECTION
       Resolved: That the following application for a street collection permit be granted—
     Applicant                     Organisation                        Location            Date
     G. A. Christie                Sheffield Area                      Fargate             4.10.89
                                      Chinese Solidarity
     (4) SHEFFIELD COMMUNITY HEA LTH COUNCIL
       Resolved: That Mrs. Ann Hewitt of 3 Drummond Crescent, Sheffield, be appointed to serve as
     a nominee of the City Council on the Sheffield Community Health Council, to fill a vacancy.
     (5) LEG AL PROCEEDINGS
        The Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department referred to his report to the Panel
     at its meeting held on 7th August, 1989 that, in proceedings held at Sheffield Magistrates’ Court
