      ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                                       235

  Resolved: That the public and press, the officer from the South Yorkshire Police, the
applicants and officers of the City Council involved in the application relating to the Arches,
Walker Street, be excluded from the meeting before further discussion takes place on the
grounds that, in view of the nature of the business to be transacted, if the public and press were
present there would be a disclosure to them of exempt information described in paragraphs 12
and 13 of the Local Government Act 1972, as amended by the Local Government (Access to
Information) Act 1985 relating to (a) legal matters and advice and (b) proposed actions under any
enactment by the Authority.
  The City Solicitor and Head of Administration reported orally giving legal advice on various
aspects of the application relating to the Arches, Walker Street.
  A t this point in the proceedings the meeting was re-opened to the public and press.
   Resolved: That consideration of the application now submitted for a public entertainments
licence in respect of the Arches, Walker Street be deferred to a future meeting of this
Sub-Committee to allow the refurbishment works now reported to be completed so that a further
inspection of the premises can be undertaken by the relevant authorities.
Nimmo’s, Sidney Street
  With reference to his report of 21st April, 1994 which was noted by this Sub-Committee, the
City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a further report on an application for a
public entertainments licence in respect of Nimmo’s, Sidney Street.
   The applicant attended the meeting and stated that he had no intention of applying for a liquor
licence in respect of the premises. He also stated that the hours on his application should be
revised to 11.00 p.m. until 2.00 a.m. on Sunday to Thursday and 11.00 p.m. until 6.00 a.m. on
Friday and Saturday.
  A n officer from the South Yorkshire Police Authority stated that since there was a demand
from the public for venues such as that proposed by the applicant, it was important that they be
regulated and licensed and he did not foresee any difficulties in policing the premises during the
revised hours which had been proposed.
  A n officer from the Directorate of Environmental Services and Standards stated that the
premises had been inspected on the 17th May, 1994 when three areas of work, relating to access
to the toilet area, the electrical inspection certificate and a final exit door were still outstanding
but which should be completed within the next few days.
  Resolved: That the public and press, the officer from the South Yorkshire Police Authority,
the applicant and officers of the City Council involved in the application relating to Nimmo’s,
Sidney Street be excluded from the meeting before further discussion takes place on the grounds
that, in view of the nature of the business to be transacted, if the public and press were present
there would be a disclosure to them of exempt information described in paragraphs 12 and 13 of
the Local Government Act 1972, as amended by the Local Government (Access to Information)
Act 1985 relating to (a) legal matters and advice and (b) proposed actions under any enactment
by the Authority.
  The City Solicitor and Head of Administration reported orally giving legal advice on various
aspects of the application relating to Nimmo’s, Sidney Street.
  A t this point in the proceedings the meeting was re-opened to the pubic and press.
   Resolved: That, subject to (i) the outstanding works now reported being completed to the
satisfaction of the Director of Environmental Services and Standards, (ii) no liquor being
consumed on the premises, (iii) the age limit of entry to the premises being restricted to 18 years
and above and (iv) the City Solicitor and Head of Administration being satisfied as to the
ownership and control of the premises, authority be given to the City Solicitor and Head of
Administration to grant a public entertainments licence in respect of Nimmo’s, Sidney Street for
a period of four months.
The Leadmill, Leadmill Road
  The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report for the renewal of public
entertainments and theatre licences in respect of The Leadmill, Leadmill Road.
236      ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

    Resolved: That the application now submitted for the renewal of public entertainments and
  theatre licences in respect of The Leadmill, Leadmill Road be granted for a period of 12 months.
  Crucible Theatre, Norfolk Street
    Resolved: That, in the circumstances outlined in the report now submitted by the City Solicitor
  and Head of Administration, approval be given for the renewal of public entertainments and
  theatre licences in respect of the Crucible Theatre, Norfolk Street for a period of 12 months.
  The Embassy, Mansfield Road
     Resolved: That, in the circumstances outlined in the report now submitted by the City Solicitor
  and Head of Administration, approval be given for the renewal of a public entertainments licence
  in respect of the Embassy, Mansfield Road for a period of 12 months.
★ (2) HYPNOTISM ACT 1951
    The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on an application to hold a
  public performance of hypnotism on 1st June, 1994 at the White Rails, Upperthorpe. The
  hypnotist, Mr. Nigel Shillitoe, addressed the Sub-Committee on various aspects relating to his
  act.
     Resolved: That the public and press, the applicant and officers of the City Council involved in
  the application relating to public performances of hypnosis be excluded from the meeting before
  further discussion takes place on the grounds that, in view of the nature of the business to be
  transacted, if the public and press were present there would be a disclosure to them of exempt
  information described in paragraphs 12 and 13 of the Local Government Act 1972, as amended
  by the Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985 relating to (a) legal matters and
  advice and (b) proposed actions under any enactment by the Authority.
    The City Solicitor and Head of Administration reported orally giving legal advice on various
  aspects of the application relating to public performances of hypnosis.
      A t this point in the proceedings the meeting was re-opened to the public and press.
     Resolved: That, subject to the observance of the standard conditions now reported in respect
  of public performances of hypnosis, the application now submitted for a performance of hypnosis
  to be held at the White Rails, Upperthorpe on 1st June, 1994, by Nigel Shillitoe be granted.
★ (3)   SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS—SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB
  North-West Stand Facilities for the Disabled
    The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action he had taken, in
  consultation with the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group, in approving a proposal
  submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to
  modify part of the enclosure located within the North Stand of the Hillsborough Stadium for
  persons confined to wheelchairs in order to improve sight lines for those spectators.
    Resolved: That confirmation be given to the action of the City Solicitor and Head of
  Administration in approving the proposals now reported to modify part of the enclosure for
  persons confined to wheelchairs located within the North Stand of the Hillsborough Stadium.
  New Souvenir Shop
    The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action he had taken, in
  consultation with the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group, in approving in principle a
  proposal submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday
  Football Club for a new souvenir shop at the Hillsborough Sports Stadium.
     Resolved: That confirmation be given to the action of the City Solicitor and Head of
  Administration in approving in principle the proposal now reported to provide a new souvenir
  shop at the Hillsborough Sports Stadium, subject to the comments now reported of the Sports
  Grounds Advisory Group that (a) details of the interior of the development and of the revised
  siting of ambulances and other emergency vehicles which are required as a result of the proposal,
  should be forwarded to the Chief Licensing Officer and (b) Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
  should be notified that there will need to be an alteration to the stewarding of the Stndium.
★ (4) SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS-DON VALLEY STADIUM
    The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action he had taken, in
  consultation with the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group, in approving a proposal
  submitted by the Director of Design and Building Services to Sheffield for Health Limited to
