            HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                                        1041

      (b) the South Yorkshire Police be requested to m onitor the situation regarding public
    behaviour and traffic flow in the vicinity of the consent site.

    ( n o t e : The public and press were excluded from the meeting while the Panel were making
    decisions on the above application.)

★   (5) NURSES AGENCIES
       Resolved: That approval be given to the application now submitted for the renewal of the
    licence issued in respect of the use of premises at 209 Twentywell Lane as a Nurses Agency, in
    accordance with the details now reported verbally by the City Solicitor and Head o f
    Administration.

★   ( 6 ) CINEMA AND PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT LICENSING
       The City Solicitor and Head of Administration reported verbally on the current situation
    regarding an application for the issue of a cinema licence and a number of applications for the
    issue or renewal of public entertainment licences.

       Resolved: That (a) consideration of the application now submitted for the issue of a cinema
    licence including the “Restricted 18” category in respect of premises at Crystal Suite, 144
    Neepsend Lane be deferred to enable the applicant to attend before the Panel;
      (b) the application now submitted for the renewal of a public entertainment licence in respect
    of Isabella’s Nightclub, Eyre Street, be granted for a period of six months;
      (c) on the applications now submitted, the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be
    authorised, on his being satisfied that all outstanding requirements have been met, to issue public
    entertainm ent licences for a period of 12 months in respect of the following premises—
    Canton Restaurant, Malin Bridge,
    Midhope Centre, Midhopestones,
    Cairo Jax, Bank Street;
       (d) the City Solicitor and Head of A dministration be authorised, in consultation with the Chair
    of this Panel, to grant an application for the issue of a public entertainment licence and a theatre
    licence in respect of the Lyceum Theatre, Tudor Square, subject to the agreement of suitably
    modified conditions to be attached to the licence; and
       (e) pending the receipt of further information, consideration of the applications now submitted
    in respect of the following premises be deferred—
    Stubbin Community Meeting Rooms, Fairthom ,
    Sheffield U nited Executive Suite, Bramall Lane,
    Colley Sports Centre, Remington Road,
    Earl Marshal Sports Centre, Earl Marshal Road,
    W oodthorpe Baths, Chadwick Road,
    Sheffield Polytechnic (various sites),
    Mappin A rt Gallery, Weston Park,
    Fat Freddy’s, Charles Street,
    Crucible Theatre, Norfolk Street,
    Hillsborough Leisure Centre,
    Ponds Forge International Sports Centre.
    ( n o t e : An application for the issue of a public entertainment licence in respect of Assisi Hall,
    Sandygate Road, was withdrawn from consideration by the Panel.)
★   (7) SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
       The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on the proposed provision of
    a track betting facility at Bramall Lane Sports Ground (Sheffield United).
      Resolved: That (a) confirmation be given to the action taken by the City Solicitor and Head of
    Administration in approving the proposals submitted by Ladbrokes Racing Limited on behalf of
    the Sheffield U nited Football Club for the alteration of a small store room on the South Stand
    Concourse at Bramall Lane Stadium to form a track betting facility; and
1042        HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

      (b) the South Yorkshire Police be requested to monitor the operation of the track betting
    facility at the Bramall Lane Sports Ground and to report back to this Panel after six matches have
    elapsed from the date of the initial consent having particular regard to any congestion in the
    vicinity of the track betting facility both before and immediately after matches.


      Meeting of the Licensing Panel held 11th December, 1990. Present— Councillors Butler
    (Chair), Mrs. Askham, Damms, Mrs. Midgley and Mrs. P. M. Smith. Also in attendance—
    Councillors George and Whitfield.
    ( 1 ) SAFETY O F SPORTS GROUNDS
    Home Office Circular 75/1990
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on Home Office Circular
    75/1990 and attachments relating to the longer-term recommendations of the Hillsborough
    Inquiry.
      Resolved: That the contents of the report now submitted and of Home Office Circular 75/1990
    and attachments be noted.
    Home Office Circular 9511990
      The City Solicitor and Head of A dministration submitted a report on Home Office Circular
    95/1990 which was issued with a revised edition of the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds.

      Resolved: That the contents of the report now submitted and of Home Office Circular 95/1990
    be noted.
★    (2) DON VALLEY STADIUM
    Provision o f Temporary Facilities
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on the possibility of the
    proprietors of the Don Valley Stadium wishing to provide tem porary facilities for large sporting
    events.
     Resolved: That the proprietors of the Don Valley Stadium be requested to submit to the City
    Council by 31st January, 1991, plans indicating the arrangement of any tem porary facilities which
    may be provided in the Stadium for large sporting events.
    Public Address System
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on problems which had
    arisen in the operation of the public address system installed at the Don Valley Stadium.
      Resolved: That the proprietors of the Don Valley Stadium be required to review the public
    address system in the Stadium with particular regard to the points raised in the report now
    submitted and to submit appropriate proposals to the City Council by 31st January, 1991.

    Emergency Landline Telephone System
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on the recommendations of
    Lord Justice Taylor’s Final Report on the Hillsborough Disaster and of the New Edition of the
    Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds regarding the provision of emergency landline telephone
    systems in sports grounds.

       Resolved: That the proprietors of the Don Valley Stadium be required to submit to the City
    Council by 28th February, 1991, proposals for the installation of an emergency landline
    telephone system at the Stadium.

    First A id Facility
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on the provision at the Don
    Valley Stadium of an adequate first aid facility.

      Resolved: That the proprietors of the D on Valley Stadium be required to complete, to the
    satisfaction of the City Council and its advisers by 31st January, 1991, the first aid facility already
    provided at the Stadium including the installation of a telephone and aerial as detailed in the
    report and to fully stock the facility in accordance with the guidance note previously forwarded to
    the Stadium Management.
