     The Authority expressed concern that Police Authorities had not been
     involved in the follow-up to the Home Office Circular and that the Circular
     did not address the problem of the additional resources needed for
     strengthening crime prevention activities.
     RESOLVED -
     1    That the contents of the report be noted.
     2     That the AMA stance that local authorities should take the lead in the
          inter-agency approach to crime prevention be endorsed and the AMA be
          informed of the Authority's concern that the question of additional
          resources for strengthening crime prevention activities must be
          addressed.
     3     That the Authority comment in detail on Home Office Circular 44/1990
          after the AMA report has been received.
     4     That the Clerk and Financial Officer inform the Home Office of the
          Authority's concern at the failure to involve Police Authorities in the
          follow-up to the circular and the failure to inform Police Authorities
          properly about the setting up of local Working Groups to monitor the
          progress made in the development of local multi-agency crime prevention
          wo r k .
54   NATIONAL CRIME PREVENTION WEEK
     The Clerk and Financial Officer submitted a report giving preliminary
     details of national Crime Prevention Week to take place in 1991. The aim
     was to draw attention to the achievements of local crime prevention activity
     and to encourage others to take part.
     RESOLVED - That the report be noted and further reports be submitted when
     more information becomes available.
55   EFFICIENCY SCRUTINY - FORCE DRIVING SCHOOL
     In accordance with minuted 37 of 3 August 1990, the Chief Constable
     submitted a report on the deployment of the manpower savings effected as a
     consequence of the implementation of the Driving School Efficiency Scrutiny
     recommendations.
     RESOLVED - That the contents of the report be noted.
56   APPEALS PANEL - TERMS OF REFERENCE
     The Clerk and Financial Officer submitted a report on the need to enlarge
     the terms of reference of the Appeals Panel to include applications for
     regrading from hourly paid employees. The membership of the Appeals Panel
     was also considered.
-   4-

         RESOLVED -                                                 '
         1     That the terms of reference of the Authority's Appeals Panel be:
               "To hear appeals by all civilian employees under the Authority's
               Appeals and Disciplinary and Grievance procedures of the local
               conditions of service".
         2     That membership of the Appeals Panel comprise one Police Authority
               member from each of the District Councils plus a Magistrate member.
57       FINAL ACCOUNTS 1989/90 SUMMARY AND CAPITAL RECEIPTS
         The Clerk and Financial Officer submitted reports on (a) the annual accounts
         for the year ended 31 March 1990 including a comparison of actual
         expenditure against that projected at the revised.estimate stage and an
         explanation of the main variations, and (b) the level of usable capital
         receipts at 31 March 1990 to be set aside as provision for credit '
         liabilities.
         RESOLVED -
         1     That the reports be referred to the Finance and General Purposes
               Connnittee for further consideration and monitoring of the current
               year's expenditure and a summary of the 1989/90 accounts be included in
               the Annual Report.
         2     That the Authority determines not to set aside any of the usable
               capital receipts as at 31 March 1990.
58       HILLSBOROUGH ENQUIRY - DECISION BY THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
         REGARDING CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS
         The Chief Constable submitted a report on the decision of the Director of
         Public Prosecutions that there was no evidence to justify any criminal
         proceedings being instituted against South Yorkshire Police, Sheffield
         Wednesday Football Club, Messrs Eastwood and Partners, or Sheffield City
         Council in connection with the disaster at Hillsborough on 15 April 1989.
         The Director had also concluded that there was insufficient evidence to
         justify proceedings against any officer of the South Yorkshire Police or any
         other person for any offence.
         RESOLVED - That the decision of the Director of Public Prosecutions be
         noted.
59       CIRCULARS. ETC
         The Clerk and Financial Officer submitted, for the information of the
         Authority, the following:-
         (a)   Home Office Circular No 69/1990 relating to football exclusion orders
               and attendance centre orders.
-   5-

         (b)   Home Office Circular letter of 23 August 1990 relating to staff
               appraisal and career development for police officers in England and
               Wales.
         RESOLVED * That the documents be noted and the Chief Constable be requested
         to submit to a future meeting of the Authority the response to the
         questionnaire contained in the Home Office letter of 23 August 1990.
60       LIST OF OUTSTANDING AND/OR REQUESTED REPORTS
         In accordance with Finance and General Purposes Committee Minute 1.2 of
         9 June 1989, a joint report of the Clerk and Financial Officer and the Chief
         Constable was submitted on outstanding and/or requested reports.
         RESOLVED - That the contents of the report be noted.
61       ITEMS TO BE CONSIDERED IN THE ABSENCE OF THE PUBLIC
         RESOLVED - That, under Section 100(A)(4) of the Local Government Act 1972,
         the public be excluded from the meeting for the following items of business
         on the grounds that they involve the likely disclosure of exempt information
         as defined in paragraphs 1 and 7 Part 1 of Schedule 12A of the Act.
62       APPLICATION FOR PAYMENT OF TRANSFER VALUE
         The Chief Constable and the Clerk and Financial Officer submitted a joint
         report on an application for the Authority to accept a repayment of a refund
         of pension contributions and approve a subsequent payment of a pension
         transfer to enable a former City of Sheffield Police Officer to be credited,
         in his current employment, with pensionable service, and on the discretion
         afforded to the Police Authority to deal with such applications by virtue of
         Regulation 4 of the Police Pension (Supplementary Provisions) Regulations
         1987.
         RESOLVED - That the Authority approve of a repayment of the refund of
         pension contributions by the former City of Sheffield Police Officer now
         named, and to the offering to the Post Office Pension Scheme of the transfer
         value now indicated, subject to that Scheme finding the interest which has
         accrued in the interim period due to the fact that they did not properly
         advise the former Police Office of the rules of transfer at the appropriate
         time.
63       CHARGES FOR POLICING FOOTBALL MATCHES AND OTHER SPECIAL EVENTS
         Further to minute 44 of 3 August 1990 and minute 17 of the Finance and
         General Purposes Committee of 24 August 1990, the Clerk and Financial
         Officer and the Chief Constable submitted a joint report on the Authority's
         policy on charging for the policing of special events, with specific
         reference to the policing of football matches.
         Whilst the scale of charges to be applied was a matter for the Authority,
         the operational policing of such events was a matter for the Chief Constable
         who proposed to move to a new basis of match categorisation having taken
         account of the recommendations of the Taylor Report and the local conditions
         at and around each ground.
     The costs for the proposed categories were easy to calculate but the
     Authority had to consider how far to move towards recovering the total costs
     of policing inside football grounds having regard to the advice of the
     District Auditor, the AMA (including a draft Home Office Circular) and the
     Association of Chief Police Officers. Also detailed were the options open
     to the Authority, as well as the proportion of charges for police services
     which Football Clubs could reclaim from the Football Trust.
     RESOLVED -
     1     That the introduction of new deployment patterns based on the
           categorisation of matches be noted.
     2     That the charges for the forthcoming season be set so that the total
            amount recovered represents an increase of 50% over last season.
     3     That the future charging policy be based in principle on a move over a
           five year period to the full recovery of the costs of all officers
            chargeable in accordance with Section 15 of the Police Act 1964.
     4     That the Authority records its view that in view of the financial
            situation of some clubs the achievement of the above objective requires
            significant changes and the following recommendations have this in
            view.
     5     That the Chief Constable and the Authority discuss with each Club the
           deployment of police under the new categorisation arrangements, it
            being recognised that the numbers deployed at each match are an
           operational decision of the Chief Constable.
     6     That the Chief Constable discuss with the football clubs and report to
           the Authority on the feasibility of training and increasing the number
           of ground stewards.
     7     That the Local Authority Associations be urged to discuss with ACPO and
            the FA the arrangements nationally for providing police services within
           football grounds and for charging for these services.
64   THE POLICE (DISCIPLINEUSENIOR OFFICERS) REGULATIONS 1985
     The Clerk and Financial Officer reported on the current situation of the
     complain against an Assistant Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire,Police.
     RESOLVED - That the Clerk and Financial Officer consult with the Police
     Complaints Authority and that further consideration of this matter be
     deferred to the next or a special meeting of the Authority.
65   COMPLAINTS AGAINST THE POLICE
     The Force Complaints Book was available for Members' inspection.

CHAIRMAN


WP004468/AH
