h ILLS 6Vlo   oiS   TtK   c(£
vJL ^                                                                        W*V
                                                 ^V^rvrct




      O r i=^              - r * ^                     ~ _ 2   ^   L     =


t o     ~   ~   w   ^   ,     - «      «    f
                                     » ^ v -4r




                            » \JW^   '**-
        o t W * ,   w>s’
                                                                   ■or
                            j WJu<4.




                    Y U i ~C*"*^'.




                                                   J-tfK
Acting Head of Department
                                              Solicitor, Licensing

31 July 1989                                  David Bownes
AH/GW                                         Chief Licensing Assistant
4018 - Mr Webster




ret HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY - REPORT TO POLICY

I attach, for your information and attention, copies of recent copy
correspondence passed to me by the Chief Executive concerning this issue
and would be grateful if you would let me know, pursuant to our recent
discussions, when the first draft of the report will be available.




cc      Mrs E Bashforth
        Principal Solicitor, Common Law
City of Sheffield
           Metropolitan District




                                   C h ie f E xecu tive
                                   Ian L. Podmore
     ACTING HEAD OF ADMIN
                                   Town Hall,
     AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT          Sheffield S1 2HH
                                   Telephone 7 3 4 0 0 0

     C.EX/RF-27/7/89


                                   w ith com plim ents
     R3719                                                                    Sch 9 1 6 0
                           C IT Y OF S H E FFIE LD — M E M O R A N D U M
 t
From    CHIEF EXECVUTIVE                           To        CITY TREASURER


Date 2 7 th July, 1989
Ref- C.EX/RF
Tel. Ext.4 0 0 0                                   Ref.      THE/ES.10(2)




        HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY




        Thank you for ycur memorandum of the 26th July with the
        interim report on the financial costs to the Council of the
        Hillsborough tragedy.    I will come back to you on how that
        might be included within the comprehensive report when I
        have a clearer idea as to how that report will look.

        In the meantime would you have a further look at paragraph 4
        of your report and consider whether it is appropriate for
        that sort of inf ormation -to be made available in a report,
        which I imagine will become public, when negotiations are
        still continuing between the Police Authority and the Home
        Office.     I have been hearing verbal reports from
        ________ and others at South Yorkshire Joint Consultative
        Committee meetings and clearly effort are still being made
        to try to avoid any of the Inquiry costs falling on South
        Yorkshire.   I have heard other figures than £5M used as the
        estimated cost and it may be inappropriate to refer to the
        "West Midlands Police Inquiry" as the South Yorkshire line
        is that the Home Secretary decided that the West Midlands
        Police should make their report to the Taylor Inquiry.     I
        think this paragraph should be cleared with
From >      City Treasurer                        To     Chief Executive



Date        26th July 1989
                                                         Enc.
Ref.        THE/ES.10(2)       •
Tel. Ext.   4416 - T. Evans                       Ref.




                                   HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY

            As requested by the Policy Committee of the 23rd May, I have prepared
            an interim report on the financial costs to the City Council of the
            Hillsborough Tragedy, which I have attached.

            Could you let me knov if you wish to include this within the comprehensive
            report you were asked to arrange or if you feel my report should .go to
            Committee separately.




            City Treasurer

                                                                           2 7 JULI98? 1


            v,r




                                   >
    J                              *•                                 '        2 > R . R F T
        %                                                    "
f
                               POLICt COMMITTEE - "         1989

        THE FINANCIAL COST TO THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY
        - INTERIM REPORT OF THE CITY TREASURER____________________________ ■


        1.   This report deals with the costs incurred by Council Departments as a
             result of the Hillsborough Tragedy.

        2.   The attached statement attributes the cost to three main aspects - The
             operational costs of the disaster itself; the conduct of the inquiry and,
             thirdlyr ongoing costs.

        3.   It will be-seen that most of the expenditure has already been incurred on
             the first two items and latest estimated total costs for the Inquiry,
             which the Home Office will reimburse, is £125,950 whilst for the disaster
             the figure is £58,710. At this stage we can be less certain on the level
             of ongoing costs arising from the Coroner's Inquests and the special
             social work task tesa but the best estimate “is around £250,000.  In view
             of the nature of soae of the ongoing costs, It may be possible toobtain
             a contribution from the Hillsborough Trust towards some of these and

    •        members are asked to indicate if they would like this course of action to
             be pursued.

        4.   A further area of costs that will have the greatest impact, although not
             directly chargeable, is the West Midlands Police Inquiry.  It is
             understood that this cost, at present estimated at around £5m., will be
             recharged to the Sooth Yorkshire Police Authority and will not be
             reckonable for the normal Home Office Grant.  In lieu of this, a
             government contribution of just under £lm. has been offered, leaving the
             balance to be met by the precept on the South Yorkshire District
             Councils. Discussions are continuing with the Home Office seeking a more
             generous contribution but, even given this, a substantial part of this
             expenditure will be precepted oa Sheffield.

        5.   A further report will be submitted to Committee when more information is
             available on the ongoing costs and the West Midlands Police charges.




                                          <f. NEWMAN
                                         City Treasurer




        BKSAAH
                                              •     SUMMARY OF COSTS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY
                                                                                                   •
                                  CONDUCTING THE INQUIRY                   OPERATIONAL COSTS OF THE DISASTER                   ONGOING COSTS

     DEPARTMENT                 Costs to Date                                Costs to Date                             Costs to Date
                                                             Estimated                                  Estimated                           Estimated
                           Direct         Indirect          Total Costs    Direct          Indirect    Total Costs    Direct    Indirect   Total Costs
          (1)                (2)             (3)                (A)          (5)              (6)          (7)          (8)        (9)        (10)

                            "    I            £         '        £           '   I    ■“                    £   '        I          £              £

Dept, of Land & planning    21,229                894          25,000        10,114            -          11,000         -          -              -
(including Works)

Chief Personnel Officer         2,500         -                 2,500            -             -            -            -          -              -

Admin. & Legal Dept.        31,765           5,025             45,700         6,510            -           7,000         -          -              2,000

Health & Consumer               3,410         -                 3,500        34,325            -          40,500         -          -          118,600
Services

Family & Community               -            -                  -               *             *            *          8,000        -          110,500
Services

Libraries & Information              50            75                200         -             -            -          1,325        -              1,500
Services

Publicity Department            2,999         -                 3,800            -             -            -         12,866        -           17,500

Cleansing Department        40,000                259          45,000

Other Departments                -                206                250             210       -                210      -          -               -



TOTALS                     101,953           6,459            125,950        51,159            -          58,710      22,191        -          250,100
                                                                                                                                           .....        .....



* Still being calculated
                                                                                      Sch 9 162
    R3719



From      MR* P* O'NEILL,
                               C IT Y OF S HEFFIELD — M E M O R A N D U M

                                                     To   MR. M. WEBSTER,
                                                                                   PX
                                                                                   r
          ASSISTANT CHIEF PERSONNEL OFFICER               ACTING HEAD OF ADMINISTRATION
                                                          AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT
Date      31st July, 1989                                 cc Chief Executive
R ef.     P/PO’N/JAH
Tel. Ext. 4 1 3 2                                     Ref. AH/GW



          HTT.T-^BOROUGH DISASTER INQUEST

          Thank you for your memorandum relating to the above, dated the 28th July,
          1989. If you consider that I could be of some assistance in the light of
          the experience gained in co-ordinating the recent Inquiry, please do not
          hesitate to contact me.




            P. ( T N e ill
Acting Head of Department                   Mrs
                                            Solicitor
                                            Legal Services
28 Jaly 1989
AH/GW
4018 - Mr Webster




r«M SAFETT OP SPORTS GROUHDS

With reference to your communication of 20 Julyr I apologise for the
delay in responding to you, although we have had brief discussions on
a number of issues and I know that since that time I have signed out
several letters to both the Police, Fire and Ambulance Services and other
parties regarding certain of the matters that now need to be chased up.

Basically, I agree that there is a need for a full report to be drawn
up for Members at the earliest opportunity and that this document should,
amongst other things, deal with the question of safety procedures and
resource matters.

With regard to the other issues raised in your communication, I will
asic |    to arrange a meeting saoe time during Thursday or Friday of
next week in order that we can decide on the best way forward.
Sheffield Wednesday
                  hootballClubpic
                                                                                                   TO:                 L tfrP H -   fc«£PT.
Our Ref:              GHM/JB/D34/3630                                          fax no:    ~=?? > 5 0 o 2 S ______ PAGE.J              OF: 3.
                                                                               ATTENTION OF: ryn|g- UO£.g>Srr£^____________
2 8 th     July 1989
                                                                               FROM:              rv\ACjt-AFU.     DATE:     ~
                                                                               COMPANY: £==■                 F C _____ FAX NO: _________
Mr. M. Webster,                                                                P o s t - n 'N otes fro m 3 M                       fi«t no : 7668
Acting Head of Department,
City of Sheffield,
Administration and Legal Department,
Town Hall,
Sheffield,
Si 2HH


Dear Mr. Webster,

Re:        Safety of Sports Grounds - Hillsborough

I am in receipt of your letter dated 26th July 1989.

In respect of points you have raised, many have been covered by my letter dated
14th J u ly 1989 and meeting of the Officer Working Party held here at
Hillsborough earlier today.

West Stand and Terrace
It has been agreed that the West stand only will be used for the first matches
with Norwich and Everton. Turnstile arrangements and other associated matters
were agreed at today's meeting.

Stewarding and Crowd Control

This has been the subject of a meeting and correspondence between the Club and
the Police. Final points will be clarified at a further meeting to be held
early next week.

Management Responsibilities

These are noted and confirmed. I believe that you are in possession of all the
necessary information and the relevant officers have inspected the ground.

Football Association's interim Recommendations

I am of the opinion that recommendation (ii) pre-empts possible areas of comment
that may be made with the publishing of Lord Justice 'Baylor*s Report. Ihis
matter should be looked at once the findings of the interim report have became
know n.


Hillsborough. Sheffield             S6 1S W .    Telephone: (0742) 34312          ?ontinued . . .
Telegram s: W ednesday Sheffield 6. Telex N o ,5 4 7 7 0 9 W E D N 6 S
Fax      N o. 0 7 4 2 3 3 7 1 4 5    R e g is te re d in E n g lan d N o. 6 2 4 7 6

Chairman H E McGos. Secretary- G.H MackrwH, P 0 C-A Martager. R. AtKin&on
Offectors: M. Sheppard.     J.P.. F.C.A.    {Vicc'Chrorm.in}. f>.t. Speight. O.B.E.,
C Woodward. K.T Addy E. Barren. (J K Hulley
Further Action
X believe that the Club and its advisors have addressed all s h o r t - t e r m measures
in conjunction with the Police and St. Johns Ambulance Brigade. *                *
meeting with S.Y.M.A.S. next Tuesday and will keep you advised.
interim report has been published we will obviously have to discuss how its
findings should be implemented. I will, of course, be pleased to clarify any
specific points you wish to raise.

Dr. Eastwood

I note your intentions.
An area of concern to me in the short-term is the police intention to access
supporters to the North Stand via the Penistone Road turnstiles only. We have
several objections to these proposals, ranging fran the inconvenience caused to
our paying customers, through to the criticism made at the inqu ry
similar policy which was adopted on 15th April.
it was agreed to leave the matter in abeyance until the publication of the
interim report next week. If agreement cannot be reached then the Local
Authority will be called upon to make a written ruling on the matter. M .
Bownes of your Department can report further to you on this subject.

 It is obvious, to all parties that the existing Safety certificate is patently
 flawed and therefore once Lord Justice Taylor has published his report I believe
 the preparation of a new and effective safety certificate should be a matter of
 some priority, in order to give the subject matter as much tune as possible for
 consideration I would welcome a sight the draft Safety certificate which has
 been circulated as soon as possible.

 Yours sincerely,




             ell




>8-07—1989   16J00                  0 7 4 2 73714=
Acting Stead of Dapartaants                 Chiof Sxacutlvo
Administration and Loyal                    Dirootor of Boalth and
                                            Conauaar inrlooi
28 July 1989                                oo   Councillor CJC Botta
AH/OW                                            Councillor J ttoro
4018 - Mr wobator                                Mr 9 O’Kaill




U X J U R M M M U OZnSBBt ZBQBB8V

laviag got tba first part of tha Taylor Inquiry out of tho way (with
tho roport duo to bo publiahod# I undaratand* toward* tho lattor part
of noxt vMk) Z an now bolng proaaod by Dr Voppar regarding tho paroolvod
nood for additional acoc— odatlon for tbo Inquaat.

Aa you know, oa tho currant atato of tbo law* ho la required*
notwlthatandlng tho Inquiry, to u k o hia own anqulriea into        tha
elreuaetanoea concerning tho doath of oaoh doeoaaod poraon. Accordingly
tho praaont Court faellltloa aro obrlooaly lnadoquato for thla also
of aatter at which thoro will nood to bo accomodation for at loaat
aa nany Barriatara and thalr aupporting ataff aa thoro were at tha
Inquiry* together with aocowa nation for tho Jury and a retiring roeai
for than and alao roeai for tho relativea who will wlah to attend. Zn
addition* thoro will alao bo a nood for offlco acconaodation.

Zn torma of duration* it la likely that tha laquaat could woll tako
half aa long again aa tho Inquiry took* ao tho accoaaodatlon would bo
roquirod for b o m thing botwoon ft and 12 wooka.

I hava Indleatod to Dr Voppar that it la unllkaly that tho accoaosodation
aado available for tho Inquiry could bo aade available for hla Inquoat
which ha undoratanda and aooopta but raltarataa tha above nooda and
requireaenta and alao tho faot that aa tha ooata aro likoly to bo M t
bjr thla Authority ho la looking to ua to put in hand tho arrangeaenta
to find aueh acoe— odatlon aa a aattar of s o m urgancy.

I would welaoaa tha opportunity of dlaouaalng tha aattar with you aa
Z undartook to go back to Dr Popper with aoae preliminary obaervationa
by tha and of noxt week.
                  Ct
                                                                         ' IB'


                             S H E F F IE L D M A G I S T R A T E S ' C O U R T
                 JO HN RICHMAN, B.A.                                                                                                                                              CASTLE STREET
                             SOLICITOR
                    CLERK TO THE JUSTICES
                                                                                                                                                                                  SHEFFIELD S3 8LU
                                                                                                                                                                                  TELEPHO NE No. (07421 7 68535
                       F. S- T. DEALY,
                             BARRISTER
                                                                                                                                                                                 fa:::{37-f:??::i27
              DEPUTY CLERK TO THE JUSTICES



              Our Ref..                        '11396                                           Your Ref.           AH/DG                                                              26th July, 1989

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                R3869



                             Dear Mr. Podmore,

                                                                                            Safety of Sports Grounds

                                    Thank you for your letter dated 17th July, 1989 which
                             clarifies the position of the City Council in respect of notifying
                             the court of changes in the sports grounds safety certificates.

                                    I look forward to hearing from you if and when the conditions
                             attached to the certificates are amended.


                                                                                                       Yours sincerely,




                                                                                     CONV




                              I. L. Podmore, Esq. ,
                              Chief Executive,
                              Town Hall,                                                                                                             A r-                    •     •                              i

                              Sheffield.                                                                                                                    L    L r ’i .   c.
                              SI 2HH                                                                                                                        H u Al ) C r          j    A So.oU ,.T               '\
                                                                                                                                                A             DE PT               |       head                   ']

                                                                                                                                                B            0       1.      A J5        89              jp^ j

                                                                                                                                                 I     U S M .         |         LIE     j CC .
                                                                                                                                                GS                                                       „   *    ;




                                                                                                                                      Mr.                                                                             269
FOR TELEPHONE ENQUIRIES ON THIS MATTER PLEASE ASK FOR........................................................................................                                              EXT. No...........................
         cc    U jz-   .'I   u %                                           G   ; M   ,    executive ---- T *
                                                                                             / g H IE F
              'tsawvd ^        I*                                              M q j! s w W f-L 0   G.P.O.1
        City of SheffieldMetropolitan District
                                                                       ...          3 f JU L 1989
                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                ...                      P i'B
                                                 0 I AUG
                                                                       _                 1                    P ic u |

        copies to: Mr. P. O'Neill, Personnel Dept.
                   Mrs.|          Publicity Dept.
                   Mr. Tony Flanagan, Operations Manager,
                     Cleansing Dept.
                                                                                                          /
                   Mr. I. L. Podmore, Chief Executive
                   Councillor C. J. C. Betts
                   Mr. M. Trunkfield, Catering Manager


                                                           Town Hall,
                                           28.7.89         Sheffield SI 2HH
R6974                                                      Telephone 734025
INQUIRY IN TO THE HILLSBOROUGH                        The Rt Hon Lordjustice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                                      SO Q u een Anne’s Gate
                                                      London SW1II9AT
                                                      01-273 2 5 7 7 /3 6 0 2 /2 3 7 0




Councill or Anthony Danuns
The Lord Ma y o r of Sheffield
T own Hall
SHEFFIELD
                                                      Date
                                                                   25 July 1989




HILL SB O R O U G H DISA S T E R PUBLIC INQUIRY


As you know, the Inquiry        has now completed its oral hearings in
Sheffield.   I am writing       on Lord Justice Taylor's behalf to
express his appreciation        to you and your colleagues for so kindly
pl acing the Town Hall at       his disposal for the oral hearings.

The excellent arrangements made to accommodate the Inquiry team
and the w h olehe arted commitment and support of Town Hall staff
o ver recent^weeks, who responded to the demands imposed on them
wit h u nfailing patience, versatility and humour, have been of
immense assistance.     As you know, Lord Justice T aylo r and his
Assessors personally thanked m a n y of the staff concerne d at a
short gathering in the Mandela Room towards the end of the
hearings.    Lord Justice Taylor has asked that M r O'Neill, in
particular, be thanked for his invaluable help and practical
assistance.

I should be grateful if you would pass on Lord Justice Taylor's
thanks to all concerned.


                                                                             _L




                                                  R M W H A L L E Y ->/
         RECEIVES                            Secretary to the Inquiry


          28JUL1989
            GP/262/DMB


            25th July, 1989




The Chief Constable,
South Yorkshire Police,
Police Headquarters,
Snig Hill,
SHEFFIELD,
S3 8LY.

For the attention of Superintendent Marsh - Headquarters Operations

Dear Sir,

Review of the Administrative/Inspection System in relation to
Safety of Sports Grounds__________________________________

As a result of the Hillsborough Inquiry I am currently reviewing in detail
the operation of the above systems. I intend as part of this review to take
full account of any views which you wish to express in relation to the
systems. In conducting the review I feel I should emphasise that the
reasonable safety of spectators is the fundamental object of these two
systems and any comments made should be formulated with this ultimate
objective in mind. I therefore wish to invite you to make comments
preferably by reference to the following points so that a compilation of
comments will prove to be relatively simple. I propose that any comments
made will be passed onto all other members of the Advisory Group for
information.

Communications

It is clear frcm the evidence produced to the Inquiry that there is a need
for inproved cormiunications between all persons involved in Safety of Sports
Grounds. This obviously includes communications between the Council and the
Clubs. Comments are welcomed on how communications may be inproved. There
is also clearly a need for public relations to be inproved in relation to
Safety of Sports Grounds. I anticipate that Council Members may wish to
have a more prominent role in relation to the system. Again your views are
welcomed on these points.

The role of each member of the Advisory Group

It again has become clear through evidence to the Inquiry that the roles of
Advisory Group members require clarification. WOuld you please let me have
your views on what you perceive your role to be.


                                                734005 - Mr. Bownes
Review of the Council's approach to the Clubs

I think that the Council's approach in the past has perhaps not been quite
positive enough and this needs correcting. It is likely therefore that the
Council will in future adopt a much more positive approach and will use its
various powers to (for example) require works to be done within a set time
at Sports Grounds. This sort of approach will require clear and considered
decision making in a relatively short time and appropriate administrative
procedures will need to be provided to ensure that this can be done. Your
comments on this slightly different approach will be welcomed.

Relationships with the Clubs and their Advisors

Once again in view of the evidence presented to the Inquiry it is vitally
important that the question of who the Council as Certificating Authority
deals with in relation to Safety of Sports Grounds matters is made clear. I
believe that the Council should deal in most situations directly with the
Club who may then, of course, obtain detailed advice from other sources
should they wish to do so.

Inspections and Enforcement of Certificate Conditions

I think it is clear that there is a need for inproved systems in relation to
inspections. Should there for instance be a rolling programme of
inspections the object of which would be to compare the state of the ground
with the Green Guide? Should there be inspections on match days as well as
those which take place annually? Perhaps you would consider these and any
other points which you feel to be relevant in relation to inspections.

As far as enforcement is concerned the extent of it should be determined and
the responsibility for bringing matters to the attention of the Council
should be made clear.

Role of the Advisory Group and its Administration

These areas require review. What exactly is the role of the Advisory Group?
Are the notes of meetings adequate? Do other matters need to be noted?
Would the use of forms be of benefit?

Safety Certificate Condition

As far as the Safety Certificate Conditions are concerned a revised draft
taking into account the comments which you have recently made is attached
for your attention. If you have any further comments to make please do not
hesitate to let me know as soon as possible.

Please bear in mind that the list of points I have mentioned is not by any
means exhaustive and if you feel you wish to make comments on other matters
please do not hesitate to do so. If you feel it is necessary to talk to
other members of the Advisory Group please also feel free to do so. I look
forward to receiving your comments as soon as possible.

Yours faithfully,




Acting Head of Department.

MS2AAL/MA
                            CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM

Frcm:   The Acting Head of Administration    To:    The Director of Health and
        and Legal Department                        Consumer Services
Date:   25th July, 1989
Ref:    GP/262/DMB
Tel Ext 4005 - Mr. Bownes                    Ref;




        Review of the Administrative/Inspection System in relation to
        Safety of Sports Grounds__________________________________

        As a result of the Hillsborough Inquiry I am currently reviewing in detail
        the operation of the above systems. I intend as part of this review to take
        full account of any views which you wish to express in relation to the
        systems. In conducting the review I feel I should emphasise that the
        reasonable safety of spectators is the fundamental object of these two
        systems and any comments made should be formulated with this ultimate
        objective in mind. I therefore wish to invite you to make ccmments
        preferably by reference to the following points so that a compilation of
        ccmments will prove to be relatively simple. I propose that any ccmments
        made will be passed onto all other members of the Advisory Group for
        information.

        Ccmmunications

        It is clear frcm the evidence produced to the Inquiry that there is a need
        for improved ccmmunications between all persons involved in Safety of Sports
        Grounds. This obviously includes ccmmunications between the Council and the
        Clubs. Comments are welcomed on how ccmmunications may be improved. There
        is also clearly a need for public relations to be improved in relation to
        Safety of Sports Grounds. I anticipate that Council Members may wish to
        have a more prominent role in relation to the system. Again your views are
        welcomed on these points.

        The role of each member of the Advisory Group

        It again has become clear through evidence to the Inquiry that the roles of
        Advisory Group members require clarification. Would you please let me have
        your views on what you perceive your role to be.

        Review of the Council's approach to the Clubs

        I think that the Council's approach in the past has perhaps not been quite
        positive enough and this needs correcting. It is likely therefore that the
        Council will in future adopt a much more positive approach and will use its
        various powers to (for example) require works to be done within a set time
        at Sports Grounds. This sort of approach will require clear and considered
        decision making in a relatively short time and appropriate administrative
        procedures will need to be provided to ensure that this can be done. Your
        ccmments on this slightly different approach will be welcomed.

        Relationships with the Clubs and their Advisors

        Once again in view of the evidence presented to the Inquiry it is vitally
        important that the question of who the Council as Certificating Authority
        deals with in relation to Safety of Sports Grounds matters is made clear. I
        believe that the Council should deal in most situations directly with the
        Club who may then, of course, obtain detailed advice from other sources
        should they wish to do so.
Inspections and Enforcgnent of Certificate Conditions

I think it is clear that there is a need for improved systems in relation to
inspections. Should there for instance be a rolling programme of
inspections the object of which would be to compare the state of the ground
with the Green Guide? Should there be inspections on match days as well as
those which take place annually? Perhaps you would consider these and any
other points which you feel to be relevant in relation to inspections.

As far as enforcement is concerned the extent of it should be determined and
the responsibility for bringing matters to the attention of the Council
should be made clear.

Role of the Advisory Group and its Administration

These areas require review. What exactly is the role of the Advisory Group?
Are the notes of meetings adequate? Do other matters need to be noted?
Would the use of forms be of benefit?

Safety Certificate Condition

As far as the Safety Certificate Conditions are concerned a revised draft
taking into account the ccmments which you have recently made is attached
for your attention. If you have any further ccmments to make please do not
hesitate to let me know as soon as possible.

Please bear in mind that the list of points I have mentioned is not by any
means exhaustive and if you feel you wish to make ccmments on other matters
please do not hesitate to do so. If you feel it is necessary to talk to
other members of the Advisory Group please also feel free to do so. I look
forward to receiving your ccmments as soon as possible.



MS2AAP/MA
                             CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM          >

Frcm;   The Acting Head of Administration    To:     The Director of Land and Planning
        and Legal Department

Date:    25th July, 1989
Ref:     GP/262/DMB
Tel Ext: 4005 - Mr. Bownes                    Ref:




        Review of the Administrative/Inspection System in relation to
        Safety of Sports Grounds____________ __ ___________________

        As a result of the Hillsborough Inquiry I am currently reviewing in detail
        the operation of the above systsns. I intend as part of this review to take
        full account of any views which you wish to express in relation to the
        systsns. In conducting the review I feel I should emphasise that the
        reasonable safety of spectators is the fundamental object of these two
        systems and any comments made should be formulated with this ultimate
        objective in mind. I therefore wish to invite you to make ccmments
        preferably by reference to the following points so that a compilation of
        ccmments will prove to be relatively simple. I propose that any ccmments
        made will be passed onto all other members of the Advisory Group for
        information.

         Communications

        It is clear frcm the evidence produced to the Inquiry that there is a need
        for improved ccmmunications between all persons involved in Safety of Sports
        Grounds. This obviously includes ccmnunications between the Council and the
        Clubs. Ccmments are welcomed on how communications may be improved. There
        is also clearly a need for public relations to be improved in relation to
        Safety of Sports Grounds. I anticipate that Council Members may wish to
        have a more prominent role in relation to the system. Again your views are
        welcomed on these points.

         The role of each member of the Advisory Group

        It again has become clear through evidence to the Inquiry that the roles of
        Advisory Group members require clarification. Would you please let me have
        your views on what you perceive your role to be.

         Review of the Council's approach to the Clubs

         I think that the Council's approach in the past has perhaps not been quite
         positive enough and this needs correcting. It is likely therefore that the
         Council will in future adopt a much more positive approach and will use its
         various powers to (for example) require works to be done within a set time
         at Sports Grounds. This sort of approach will require clear and considered
         decision making in a relatively short time and appropriate administrative
         procedures will need to be provided to ensure that this can be done. Your
         ccmments on this slightly different approach will be welcomed.

         Relationships with the Clubs and their Advisors

         Once again in view of the evidence presented to the Inquiry it is vitally
         important that the question of who the Council as Certificating Authority
         deals with in relation to Safety of Sports Grounds matters is made clear. I
         believe that the Council should deal in most situations directly with the
         Club who may then, of course, obtain detailed advice frcm other sources
         should they wish to do so.
Inspections and Enforcement of Certificate Conditions

I think it is clear that there is a need for improved systems in relation to
inspections. Should there for instance be a rolling programme of
inspections the object of which would be to compare the state of the ground
with the Green Guide? Should there be inspections on natch days as well as
those which take place annually? Perhaps you would consider these and any
other points which you feel to be relevant in relation to inspections.

As far as enforcement is concerned the extent of it should be determined and
the responsibility for bringing matters to the attention of the Council
should be made clear.

Role of the Advisory Group and its Administration

These areas require review. What exactly is the role of the Advisory Group?
Are the notes of meetings adequate? Do other matters need to be noted?
Would the use of forms be of benefit?

Safety Certificate Condition

As far as the Safety Certificate Conditions are concerned a revised draft
taking into account the ccmments which you have recently made is attached
for your attention. If you have any further comments to make please do not
hesitate to let me know as soon as possible.

Please bear in mind that the list of points I have mentioned is not by any
means exhaustive and if you feel you wish to make carments on other matters
please do not hesitate to do so. If you feel it is necessary to talk to
other members of the Advisory Group please also feel free to do so. I look
forward to receiving your ccmments as soon as possible.



MS2AA0/MA
    R 371 9                                                                                        Sch 9160
                            C IT Y OF SHEFFIELD — M E M O R A N D U M

From                                              To             :Mark Webster, Acting Head
              Police Liaison Officer                              of Admin. & Legal D e p t . ,
                                                          \p /   C.C. |                            |
Date          24th July,   1989                                  Admin    SLegal,
Ref.                                                                                              SI
Tel. Ext.                                         Ref.    ^      Admin.   & Legal



              I have recently been in discussions with the Archdeacon for Sheffield,
              Stephen Lowe, w ho as you may know was very involved in the
              Hillsborough disaster and in co -ordinating the churches support in the
              follow-up to it.     He asked whether the City Council had plans to do
              any kind of review of the emergency disaster operations, and if so,
              whether it w o ul d be possible to draw in some of the views from o u t ­
              side organisations such as the church who, he believes, have a great
              deal to offer in terms of practical s o l u t i o n s .and ways forward. The
              same I am sure is true for many of the voluntary organisa ti ons also
              involved.

              I said I w ou ld pass on to you this request and ask you to consider
              how the views of outside bodies might be fed into any City Council
              processes.


                                  K




              HJB
                                                                       ADMINISTRATION & LEGAL
                                                                           DEPT. SHEFFIELD
                                                                       * “ HEAD O f 1 ASSISTANT
                                                                            OEPT    |   HEAD    1LS

                                                                              2 4. JUL 89              PAA

                                                                          Q S M ..   1   UB   1        CL
                                                                       3 1 _________________           ____
                                 CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM
 i

' Fran:       Mrs.                                To:    Mr. M. Webster,
 ’   ,        Solicitor                                  Acting Head of Administration
              Legal Services                             and Legal Department
     Date:    20th July, 1989
     Ref:     LSi
     Tel Ext: 4004                                Ref:




             Re Safety of Sports Grounds

             As you are aware, work is now being undertaken with a view to
             establishing whether or not a revision of administrative procedures is
             required and to assess the way forward following the inquiry into the
             recent disaster.

             I attach a note which was made following a discussion with David Bownes
             and myself which flagged up a number of issues. No doubt you will let
             me know if you have any comment to make upon any of the issues which
             were discussed or if you feel that we emitted anything from our
             deliberations.

             One of the steps which must be taken, I think, in the not too distant
             future is to report matters to Members. I think you already have a
             draft outline of the proposed preliminary report for consideration.

             One of the key issues is whether or not the Licensing Section continue
             to deal with the administrative system. It would seem appropriate for
             this to be the case for the immediate future in view of David Bownes
             expertise in this area but obviously consideration will have to be given
             to the matter in a more general context.

             A number of steps have already been taken. David Bownes and I attended
             a meeting with the Police at Hairmerton Road. I attach a minute of that
             meeting for your information. A meeting has also been arranged with the
             Ambulance Service and consideration is being given to whether or not
             they should be invited to be part of the Advisory Group. It is planned
             that a meeting of the Advisory Group take place in the early part of
             next week, probably on the 25th July, 1989.

             As you are aware, work is in progress following the annual inspections
             of Hillsborough, Bramall Lane and Owlerton Stadium.

             Perhaps the best way forwarded is for the three of us to meet together
             in the not too distant future to discuss the various issues raised. I
             will keep you advised of progress and dates of meetings with outside
             bodies should you wish to attend.




             MS2AAN/MA




             MS2AAN
                                                                                 rT


 Acting Head of Department


 13th July, 1989.
 L/RJL----
 4004-




Safety of Sports Grounds - Questions arising

I  had a meeting with David Bowns to discuss the list of questions he had
prepared in his memorandum dated the 5th July, 1989. We met on 7th July 1989.

1.   Ensuring Safety of Sports Grounds
                 i
     The main question arising from this topic was whether or not it was
     appropriate for the Licensing section to continue to deal with the
     administrative system.We reached the conclusion that there was a need    to
     discuss this with Mark Webster.   There will also need to be a report to
     Council of a general nature concerning the Hillsborough enquiry and this
     matter could be referred to members at that stage.

     a)   Safety of Sports Grounds is at present achieved by a method of
          inspections, meetings and reports of the various advisory groups.  We
          reached the conclusion that this was a valid starting point but that
          the system should be amended to use the green guide as a starting
          point.  A comparison should be made with the state of the ground and
          any exceptions from the green guide justified.

     b)   The second way that safety in sports grounds is achieved is by
          imposing certificate conditions.  Their compliance is checked upon
          inspection.  Should checks be made on match days?  Should conditions
          be amended so that there is more enforcement by the Council?   Cost?

     c)   Should we consider issuing annual certificates?

     d)   Should the Council go back to basics?  David was satisfied that the
          basic exercise was substantially completed in 1987.  It is considered
          that the way forward may well be to carry out "phased inspections" by
          reference to the green guide with deviations noted and justified.

     e)   Should we talk to other authorities? We do not consider there is any
          benefit in talking to other authorities at this stage.  It may be
          useful eventually to complete the details (e.g. re exit with, steward
          numbers etc).

     f)   How urgent is it?  It is considered that the matter is very urgent,
          but first of all we need a policy decision from the Council.

     g)   Legal advice? We need to consult with Keeble Hawsons upon the
          question of liability and how any changes to the system may affect
          t h is .

2.   The Administrative System

     It is essential to have good communication and relevant communication,

     a)   Responsibilities -   It is difficult to define the roles of the various
     advising bodies.  It does not seem likely that we can amend the basic
     framework vis-a-vis responsibilities of various bodies.  As a basis
     for the administrative system it was concluded that it would be
     appropriate to undertake an analysis of the green guide and the
     certificate conditions to establish a framework of responsibilities
     for the advising bodies.  There would have to be a "catch all" for
     peripheral matters.

b)   Inspection and Performance Visits - These are a good way of enforcing
     matters.  These clearly need "boosting up".  Another way of monitoring
     is via applications by the club to amend facilities.

     i)    Annual Inspection

           This has been the subject of criticism during the enquiry.  David
           does not see that there is any advantage in making a note at the
           time of inspection in the form of minutes.  He feels that brief
           notes are of more use than lenghty minutes.  The advisory group
           is not a decision making body, the Council is.  Brief minutes o f ^
           the meeting of the advisory group should be taken and subject to®
           alteration after circulation.  Furthermore, if somebody wishes to
           express a view, a facility should be available so that the
           advisory group can consider the matter.

     ii)   During Performance Inspections

           This should be encouraged.

     iii) Applications from the Club

           These are circulated at the moment with a covering note from
           Licensing.  It is felt that this system is adequate.  We need to
           make it clear to all the advisory bodies that they have control,
           for example, all can call a meeting of the advisory group at any
           time, additionally, we must ensure that they do not have the
           power to require the Council to act.

     iv)   It is felt that we could gain from learning about approaches of
           other local authorities.  Perhaps the AMA could assist in this
           respect.

     v)    Forms

           These are felt to be useful as a checklist, certainly if we are
           going to go back to basics.  This would be easy to achieve for
           the purpose of alterations to the Club.  David does not however
           feel it would be as easy in some areas.  Forms could also be of
           use for comments upon the annual inspection.

Communications

These need improving.   A revised administrative system would assist, as
will explanation of the function of the working group.

Communications with Police and Fire Service

As above.  It is clear as a result of the enquiry that the Police advised
the Club to take certain action without going through the advisory group.
We need to establish how the Police perceive their role.  Matters must be
                        referred to the advisory group, not simply acted upon.   We need to talk to
                        the
                        Police quickly and also discuss matters with the Fire Service as soon as
                        possible.

                   5.   Communication between Council and Licensees

                        The difficulty arising from the enquiry vis-a-vis the Club's relationship
                        with Eastwoods.  They clearly had different perceptions of each others
                        role.  In future, all correspondence should go to the Club and to
                        Eastwoods.  If Eastwoods are instructed in a particular matter, we need to
                        get the Club's written confirmation that they are. The Club needs
                        reminding that the Council are only too willing to talk about any safety
                        issue at any time.

                        We discussed whether or not an even handed or a positive approach was
                        best. We f*elt on balance, that it would be better to be more definite.
                        The Club must be penalised if they do not comply with the Council's
                        requirements.  We should be more definite in our requirements.

                        We also discussed officers roles in this. Matters should always come
                        through the proper channels.  We should avoid discussions between the Club
                        and individual officers.

                   6.   Public Relations

                        This is clearly a matter for members.

                   7.   Litigation

                        We need to send a draft of the Committee Report to Keeble Hawson for
                        comment.

                   8.   Other Licensing Systems

                        These clearly need reviewing as soon as possible.




M S 5 A B K /J L
 In iormal meeting with Superintendents Sleath, Marshall
 Inspector Sewell and Sergeant Buxton? and Mrs.            hnd Mr. Bowire;


 Saiety of Sports Grounds - Sheffield VJprfrv^day

 B k !meeting commenced at approximately 3.30 p.m. and there then followed a
 long discussion lasting until approximately 5.00 p.m. about the Police role
 in respect of Sheffield Wednesday and various miscellaneous natters in
 raation to safety of sports grounds. The meeting itself progressed at quite
 a iace and without a formal agenda as such therefore the following notes
 coner the various areas discussed but not necessarily in the order in which
 thesdiscussion took place.

 General Circumstances of the Ifeet-inq

It seemed reasonably clear fran the discussions that took place that the
Po] ice were looking towards planning the first few ganes of the football
sec son and that they were looking in the light of the Hillsborough Inquiry
foi seme guidance frcxn the Council as Certificating Authority on various
iss ues which are dealt with in more detail belcw. The discussion was rather
difficult in that it seemed the Police vrere unsure as to their role in
relation to Sheffield Wednesday. It transpired that there did not seem to
have been any directions fran Headquarters in relation to Sheffield
Wecnesday and that there was therefore seme confusion at divisional level.
It was suggested to the Police that they may like to raise various natters
with Headquarters in order to obtain a direction fran them.

Allocation of Turnstiles

Inspector Sewell talked for seme minutes about the allocation of turnstiles
           5ames 3-t Sheffield Wednesday. He vrondered about whether or not
the'West Stand would be used and if so how many turnstiles should be used to
     it. There was also a discussion about the number of turnstiles to be
used to fill the North Stand. It was mentioned to the Police that Mr.
Collins in his closing submission to the Inquiry had made reference to the
adequacy of turnstiles in relation to the numbers of people which they could
cope with in a set time and that in relation to football matches care should
be taken to ensure that the anticipated number of spectators can gain access
to the areas controlled by the turnstiles within a reasonable period.

Segregation of Spectators at Leppinqs lane

It was mentioned that in order to gain access to the North Stand sate hare
supporters would normally use gates at the Leppings Lane end and that there
would therefore be possibly same mixing of heme and away supporters at that
        H!0 groui?d ‘ The turnstiles used for filling part of the North Stand
f e a t the lappings Lane end alongside turnstiles used to fill the West
Stand and terraces for away supporters. It was mentioned by the Police that
this potential mixing of spectators was possibly a flashpoint but it was
also mentioned that no difficulties had arisen in the past in this area. It
was pointed out to the Police that even though no difficulties had arisen
sup^rters^        ^ appropriate time 1:0 ensure complete segregation^ of

Stewarding and Capacity

The Police expressed concern about the number and positioning of stewards
especially in view of the Inquiry and felt that the Club ought to supply
more stewards and look again at their positioning, remuneration, etc. The
point was also made that the Police would not engage in stewarding duties it
was'emphasised to the Police that this was a matter for discussion with the
Club and it was really for them to make their position absolutely clear so
as to prevent confusion.

During the course of the discussion the Kdp was mentioned and it was
explained to the Police that the Club vrould have to satisfy the Council as
to its methods for ensuring an even spread of spectators on the Kop. The
Police agreed that this was a matter for stewarding after sane discussion.

Use of the West Terrace

According to the Police the Club are intending to use Pens 1 and 2 which are
just about under the Police Control Box on the West Terrace for the
accomodation of spectators. The view was put to the Police that this
matter should really be discussed by the Advisory Group as the use of any
part of the terrace had implications for means of escape, etc. There was a
particular question about the widths of pitch perimeter fence gates. The
point was made that perhaps it would be better if the whole of the West
Terrace was closed as far as spectators were concerned until suitable
arrangements could be made for it to be re-assessed. It was also mentioned
that the Council may go as far as issuing a Prohibition Notice in respect of
the whole West Terrace if it appeared that the Club intended to use/(for~~ li"
spectators. This issue would obviously have to be carefully considered at
the appropriate time and with the benefit of the advice frcm the Advisory
Group.

Use of the West Stand

The Police wanted to knew if it was possible for the West Stand to be used
it was said to them that it might be possible for it to be used. It was
emphasised that these matters were subject to discussion with the Advisory
Group.

The North Stand

The question of filling the North Stand with Heme Supporters was discussed.
Apparently there are same 10(?) turnstiles on Penistone Road which are used
to fill the North Stand and 9 on Leppings Lane which are also normally used
for that purpose. If the 9 at Leppings Lane end were not used then there
would be a question about the suitability of the turnstiles (in terms of
numbers) for use in filling the North Stand. It vrould seem that there ray
not be sufficient to enable the North Stand to be filled to capacity w::riin
say 1 hour. This question would need to be looked at by reference to the
mention of turnstile capacities by Mr. Collins either in his written
submission or in his verbal ccnments to the Inquiry. If it did turn out to
be right that there were "insufficient" turnstiles then the capacity on the
North Stand might have to be adjusted.

Inspection on the Stadium

 It was noted that the annual inspection had taken place in May but that
 neither the West Terrace nor the West Stand had been available for the
.purposes of that inspection. It was agreed that it would be necessary for
 an inspection of the West Stand and Terraces to take place before
 the;Standi was used for the accommodation of spectators.
Notices outside the Ground at Leppinqs lane

Superintendent Marshall mentioned the Notices at the Leppings Lane end and
indicated that they were unsatisfactory. This point was lost during the
course of the discussion tut obviously it will need to be looked at.

General points raised at the Meeting

It was mentioned that the Ambulance Service had been talking to the Police
that morning and that HMD's letter to them had been passed on to the
Ambulance Services Lawyers. It was finally suggested that it would be
appropriate for HALD to speak to the Ambulance Service in order to obtain
their views perhaps prior to a letter caning back from them. The Ambulance
Service apparently said to the Police that they would provide anything the
Police required tut there was a question of paying for it. It was explained
to the Police that perhaps they may like to say that provision of first aid
facilities was .not within their remit and they may like to pass on such
Inquiries to the Council.

This point brought up the general question of who does what and it was
recanmended to the Police that they should take a firm line with the Club as
to what they were not prepared to do. It was also emphasised to the Police
that in the light of the Inquiry it was essential that they talk to the
Council about matters which might effect safety rather than simply going
direct to the Club and asking them to do various works. This point was
noted by the Police.

The proposed next steps were detailed to the Police which included
discussing matters with the Police at Headquarters level and the Fire
Service in a similar fashion and of course the other two Advisory Group
Members. Hopefully then an Advisory Group meeting would be called to
discuss matters generally. It was also emphasised to the Police that if
they felt they wished to raise anything they could do so in writing or by
calling an Advisory Group Meeting and that they must feel free to use these
opportunities at any time.




HBDAAF/MA
       4


                                                          T U    ft   c   r


                        ' I N Q U I R Y      I N T O       T H E          H I L L S B O R O U G H

                                          S T A D I U M          D I S A S T E R




                    B
                                                          Before

                                                 LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR




                                                 MR. B. JOHNSON
                                   (Chief Constable, Lancashire Constabulary)

                                                            and

                    D                             PROF. L MAUNDER.

                                                        (ASSESSORS)




                                                                At

                                                       The Town Hall,

                                                         Sheffield,

                                                                on

                                              Friday, 14th July, 1939.




                                              TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
                                                   (Morning Session)



                                      Frou the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
                                           Official Shorthand Writers,
                                      55, Queen Street, Sheffield. Si 2DM.
                    H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
is-.


                                                                                           39


                                                   The feelinqs that have been aroused in consequence of
                           those S e n t S oigh? not to detract from the careful analysis



                           Hr. Glasgow has said, these issues may be
                           to the particular context at another time and another pla ,
                           but sir we will sit down having thanked the Inquiry for 1
                      B    k   i   nand co-operation and if sir we have been impertinen.
                                       d   n   e   s   s


                           o  oCjlltSnable Se apologise, but sir we do insist that the
                               r


                           simplistic view should be avoided.
                                                   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:               Thank you, Mr. Woodward.

                                                   MR. TOULSON:                Sir, may I give you the page reference?

                                                       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:            Yes.     Thank you very much.


                               that                tS-cSSSi £ £ ^ r? n s .^ “.tns,sif»:nca
                                                                                                     s r « sir F
                      D        onwards" the *sane                                      163,1
                               the ooint also with the final paragraph in ou. sKeleton
                               submissions which deals with the question.

                                                       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:            Yes, thank you..........
                                           pntiTFS* Sir, like those who have gone before, I
                               don't propose to repeat what is already sat out i" s i t i n g in
                                   r   * ,      ^ y_j nnr "Pinal observations on Denali      unc
                       E       wllat we nave called QUj.                    urtin£ni \c t rnmi0ntod
                               ^Tribunal" but I think it would perhaps be helpful n 1 conia-i
                                o n one or two matters that perhaps I have not covered and which
                                have been dealt with by others.
                                          qir  before I do that may I put    on a whitesheet and
                                   re=er to a couple of errors in the observations.    There are
                                   of ^course some obvious typing errors but there are .wo w.uc.
                                   I think I ought to draw specific attention to.
                                          The first occurs on page 15 in the p a r a g r a p h _numbered 2
                                   on that page, the third line from the bottom. As ^ ^ a d s
                                   it- is "But we do not think we can be criticised . That S-A
                                   be "he        be criticised"
                                                           c   S  It may be a fairly obvious erro-
                                                                   u   l   d           .


                                   but it obviously is an important difference in -he mean g.

                                            Sir the other factual error which has been drawn to
                                   mv attention occurs on page 34 at
                                       +-HP+- naae where the first sentence reads:  nucn 1 1 1 j.e~i-uj
                                   was generated by the allegation made that afternoon tna. ^ans
                                   had taken down a fence". I honestly                 -°v/ ^ g a i n
                                   there. That should of course read forced a gate . A g a i n
                                   I* think it is a fairly obvious error but one .or whicn _
                                   apologise.
                       H

       J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                              40



                          At the risk of being told that I am being simplistic, it
                    would appear from the evidence we have heard that the
                    cause of this disaster was the opening of Gate C at 3.52 wij-hou
                    the taking of adequate steps, or indeed any steps, to prevent
                    those coming in through that gate from going into the pens.

                          The pens were already if not at capacity, certainly very
                    near capacity, and the additional numbers coming in quite
               B    Stelrly! we iiuld suggest, on the evidence that we have heard,
                    caused the injuries and the deaths.
                          Now to say that that is and was the immediate cause is
                    of course by no means the whole answer to the Probiems that
                    face you sir in deciding on the events of the 15.h o. April
                    o* this year, because there were of course, or the.e are m e
                    questions to be asked as to what necessitated the opening ol
                    the gates, what caused the pens to be in a situation
                    they were already at capacity and yet nothing haa been done to
                    ensure, quite apart from any question     opening oi the 9a ^s,
                    that further fans should not be able to go into
                    of course the issues as   to the speed oi reactionof the
                    to the events that were   going on in the pens.
                           All those matters   have been fully dealt with in the sub­
               D     missions that we have made and indeed that others have made
                     and as I say I do not go into them in detail again.      . .

                           May I just though mention one matter and it arises out
                     o^ the observations made by Mr. Woodward a few moments ago in
                     relation to the time at which the barrier collapsed in Pen 3.

                       /    Now there can of course be no doubt but that the collapse
                    /o f that barrier did cause injuries and deaths. One only has
                      to look at the horrifying video that we saw o^ the pile o
                      bodies in the vicinity of the gate to Pen 3 which would have
                      been virtually in front of that barrier which collapsed, buu
                      if that happened as Mr. Woodward would have the Inquiry^accept
                      at 2.47 as oDposed to somewhat later than that, again iu is
                      not possible"to be precise and there is conflicting eviaence
                      about it, but certainly on the preponderance of the evidence it
                      would appear to have occurred certainly .after the '
                                                                         teams came
                      out on to the pitch and probably after kick-o^f at 3 o cloc*.
                      but beyond that it is not possible, safely to go.

                            As I say, if it happened at 2.47, that means that there
                      was not only considerable overcrowding in Pen 3 but evidence
                      which should have been apparent to any Police Oificer on the
                      perimeter that something had gone very badly wrong in tnat
                      pen at 2.47.
                            Now if that be right then the delay in doing anything
                      about it is a delay of at least ten minutes on the evidence
                      that we have had. I don't think anyone has suggested in toe
                      course of this Inquiry that the Police delayed that long, bu
                     -i* Mr. woodward is correct in his submissions, it may be that
                H     he has not thought through the consequences ror his clients



J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                     41


                    and. in particular for those who should have been
                    what was happening in those pens u , as I say, that collapse
                    really aid occur at 2.47.
                          The truth is, as I have said, that in our submission it
                    is almost inevitable to find that it happened later and tnat
                    there is therefore a connection and a real connection between
               B    the opening of that gate and the coming of the fans into the
                    pens, the overcrowding and the disaster.
                          Now we have said in our submissions that the^ disaster
                    was wholly avoidable, echoing without knowing it the language
                    of Mr. Jackson in the forefront of his submissions.

                          We have said that it arose, and we repeat that it arose
                    not through callousness, not through any deliberate action on
                    the part of the Police or indeed anyone else because it is not
                    only the Police.
                          We suggest that it arose because of ignorance, because
                    of complacency and because of lack of foresight by those
                    responsible for the safety of the spectators in that ground.

               D          Now there was undoubtedly a badly behaved minority o*.
                    fans who must bear some responsibility for the continuation
                    at least of the crush outside the. Leppings. Lane turnstiles^-..
                    although we would suggest the evidence-establishes-^the^did'
                    not cause the crush originally, but as I say we think that there
                    is evidence, it is evidence from a large number of Police
                    Oficers with a different degree of emphasis, that certainly
                    they contributed to the continuation of that crushing.
                E
                    X         Having said that there can be no doubt that they bear
                        no responsibility for the dangerous overcrowding in the pens
                        or for the deaths and injuries that resulted from that dangerous
                        overcrowding and indeed that is a matter which was explicit y
                        put by Mr. Hytner to Chief Superintendent Duckenfield when
                        he elicited from Chief Superintendent Duckenfield the apology
                        for the inference that had been drawn as a result of
                        Mr. Duckenfield's observations that the fans were in any way
                        responsible for the deaths and injuries in the pens.

                              I have said "complacency, ignorance and lack of foresight."
                        Complacency, we say that was effectively the belief by the Police
                        and to a degree by the Club that there were no problems. I
                        have isolated the Police and the Club, that may not be fair to
                        either of them because it was the Working Party as well, every­
                        one concerned with the safety of that ground.
                              Previous semi-finals had apparently gone well. The Police
                        plan had seemed to work; no problems were therefore foreseen.

                              In truth we know that those turnstiles at Leppings Lane,
                        having regard to the bottle-neck and having regard to the
                        numbers with which they had to cope were insufficient.
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                     42


                          we know that there was no proper system for mon^ ° r^
                    the pens and that such system or non-system as there
                    clearly dangerous.
                          ianorance, lack,of appreciation that there always had
                    been overcrowding in these pens and :
                                                        ^ w ^ a      tJr?lSeS3
                    when too many people were gathered together on a terr
               B          The photographs which were produced as part of the
                    vire Brigade's evidence were you may thin* sir most instr
                    Tn this reaard and I suspect that many people may have been
                    surprised at the gaps there were when the pens were filled to
                    a volume of 54 people per 10 square metres.
                                             It is not a picture of the sort of dense packing that one



                    i f t Ioe i teof densitv^’hich i ^ U f l ^ v f
                    S 1 u St°Sp S i t f S n f p e o p l e observing who are in a p or t i on to
                    rn_rt^ .•»> cafetv and who are concerned with safety are equai y
                    S S S S o l M look at, and that we ^ 1               has been one o the
                    problems and one of the manor problems in this instance.
               D            It is quite plain that education is needed and needed
                     m i ~klv so that all- those- concerned, Stewards, Police apd in                  v
                     o       "Jtn^w
                        lers iuiuw
                         t   h   e  whit   sort
                                    wii&L. _
                                     r   s      of packing
                                              - — l- --    or- whaf       sort
                                                             , ri=f o r r a n p . of numbers ratne-,.
                                  . _ ..
                         5.4 look   like when packed on a terrace.
                           q-c course I add to the ignorance ignorance of the ract
                     that people were in distress and perhaps a failure lO Iook
                     A   fnr {-hnt sufficiently because of a conditioning to tne
                     v   ithat fans must not cone out of the pens because to do so
                             e   w



                     is a pitch invasion.
                               Third, lack of foresight. The Police did not appreciate
                         the possibility, so it would seem, of late arrivals or o_
                         troublesome arrivals all at once and so no proper prepara_io
                         were made for it.
                               We suggest that greater thought should have been S-^en
                         to what I have described as "long distance policing by v/hicn
                         T mean policing of people arriving away :rom .he immediaue
                         vicinity of the turnstiles and the ground, something wnich as
                         I said in opening was raised not 1 think in 1926, another
                         mistake in the submissions, but in 1924 following the first
                         Cup Final at Wembley in 1923.
                               There was a failure to foresee the consequences of
                         opening the gS?e and there was a failure to foresee that there
                         was a lack of proper arrangements to monitor and control t.
                         filling of the pens.
                                   Sir that is a summary and a short summary of the wa\
                             in whici ie put this, as I say I am not going to go into
                H            further detail because it is all contained in our written



J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                      43


                    submissions which should be read, of course, with what I have
                    said to you here and now.
                            There is a matter with which I ought tojleal and one or

                    r tt    ™   a   S
                                    t havfbeenlaLed                               today.

               B    „a                                     v   s   ts
                    exceedingly quickly.
                             it is of course very much in the public interest that you

                             If       £^Sd,TtSrJSt“o                      f       apSne^,


                    that should be done.



                    S f S ^ - S ° S S 3 C S IS r S         S t i c - e f i r ^ r r t h a t
                    is made.
               D           We have, and I am speaking here for                 Jndf^°r
                     those instructing, me and I think, I don t thin-         _ ' . .
                    -the investigatorsv the West Midlands Police,.
                           We havp at all times been conscious of the need to balance
                     thoroughness "and speed and more particularly of the need not
                     to sacrifice accuracy to speed.
                            We believe that we have struck the right balance and^that
                     no witness has been omitted who could have shea a differenu
                     light on any part of the story of the events of the 15uh o.
                     April.
                            There have of course, as I said at the outset this
                     morning, been additional statements and additional witnesses
                     have come to light, but we suggest that those are glosses o
                     the evidence already given and do not si5niri^ ^ t^ ^ " e d
                           „__4-ari4- acnpct o^ that evidence and we are comj.ori.ea
                                “     lefst oll of nine of, the parties appearing before
                     fa n sir seen to have no complaint 'on this particular score.
                     There is one exception, the Police.
                               I think I must say frankly that we are surprised and
                         disappointed by the attitude shown in those final submissions
                         tileh do reflect to an extent their conduct of the case
                         at this Inquiry.
                               It must have been abundantly clear to everyone in this
                         room and to anyone who had sat through the evidence in t..is
                         Tnauirv that mistakes had been made by the Police, yet only
                     -   two i think have effectively been admitted. One very grudgingly
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
by .Chief Superintendent Duckenfield that he had not taken steps
to. cater for the opening of Gate C and the oth    V


and SYMAS had not been incorporated in the Operational
of 1989.
      Despite the evidence from all the senior Officers that
it was recognised and accepted that no Sheffield Wednesday
P i.hall club Stewards would be in or monitoring numbers in
 t  terrace and in the pens and that therefore the Police would
     h   e


be doing this, again and again witnesses were cross
on the basis that the Green Guide says:   Stewards
responsible and the Police are not.
       in paranthesis we cannot see how the evidence that has
 been adduced this morning before the Inquiry f       other
 Forces do in other football grounds, can conceivably assist
 you in your fact finding task as to what happened at this
 ground on the 15th April 1939 because it is that, of course,
 with which you are concerned.
        N0 responsibility for any part of the factors “ ^ributing
  to the disaster, that is to say the crush at the turnsti            ,
  the overfilling of the pens, the slowness to reac., has-been
- accepted by -the -Police and since mistakes .ai®. n.ot a c c ^ p^ d   _
' I think-‘people- as Mr.--Hytner said, vould_be-forgiven
  believing that it is thought that no lessons are needeu
  be learnt.
         ,
        we now find in the final submissions as I understood
-hr.  Woodward’s oral submissions, he does not resile f.om this
^ that the suggestion that the whole Tribunal process is
  "inherently u n s a t i s f actory^and incapable of enabling reliable
  conclusions to be reached."
            He said that he did not impune the endeavour but that
     is not to remove the criticism that the results would no, be
     achievable.
                When I started - it sounds a bad way, doesn’t it - wnen
         I  started in the law I was told that if you nad a bad case
         attack your opponent. This sir takes things perhaps a stage
         curther, attack the Tribunal as an alternative approach and
          then perhaps it will be thought that any adverse bindings can
         be brushed aside.
               Complaint has been made of the lack of rules of evidence.
         This is, as you sir have pointed out a moment ago, an Inqu y.
         ^  Is nit a fawsuit between parties.  It is designed to get at
         the truth and the absence of the rules of evidence does not
         make that impossible or more difficult. Indeed quite uhe
         contrary we would suggest.
               Mav I take an unusual course and remind you, sir, and
         my learned friend of what an eminent Judge, Lord Justice Dioloc
                                                    45



                      as he then was, said in respect of inquiries and inquisitorial
                      approaches. For the reference this is from a case called
                      R. -v- Deputy Industrial Injuries Commissioner ex parte Moore
                      which I have in 1965 1 AER page 81 at page 94.

                            What the learned   Lord Justice said was pointing outthat
                      findings must be based   on evidence following a fair    hearingwas
                      this. He said:
               B
                            "Evidence is not restricted to evidence which would
                            be admissible in a Court of Law.

                             For historical reasons based perhaps on the fear that
                             juries who might be illiterate we re incapable o~
                             differentiating between the probitive values of
                             different methods of proof, the practice of the^
                             Common Law Courts has been to admit only what the
                             Judges then regarded as the best evidence of any
                             disputed fact and thereby to exclude much material
                             which as a matter of commonsense would assist a fact
                             finding Tribunal to reach a correct conclusion."

                       And he goes on to say that the decision reached must be based:
                D            "On material which tends logically to show the
                             existence or non-existence of facts relevant to the
                      -.     issue to be determined."                       -    •*-

                       We would respectfully suggest to you, sir, that you are not to
                       be equated to an illiterate juryman and that the evidence that
                       we have heard in this Inquiry and the way that that evidence
                        his been elicited is adequate and proper and sufficient to enable
                      /'you not only to make findings but to make findings which are
                        accurate and reliable findings and to suggest to the contrary
                        is quite wrong.
                             Indeed so far as the procedure is concerned by which this
                       Inquiry approached its task it was one which was specifically
                       put to and agreed by all Counsel appearing for all parties as
                       being fair in all the circumstances, and that being so, sir,
                       it is in our submission quite wrong that the suggested criticisms
                       of the reliability of any findings that you may make are thought
                       to have any validity whatever.     f

                             Now it is clear, and it must have been clear beyond a
                       peradventure and particularly having regard to the submissions
                       made by all parties other than the Police, that criticisms
                       would be made of the Police operation on the 15th of April,
                       not individual Officers, certainly other than those responsible
                       at the top, most of whom acted with presence of mind and in
                       some cases with great heroism and devotion beyond the call of
                       duty.
                             It is all the more unfortunate, we would suggest, that
                       those criticisms have not been accepted and that attempts have
                J-J    been made to shift the blame



J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                   46


       I say this because there is inevitably and properly v y
real- sympathy for the Police and the difficult task that they
have to^perform and the role they have to play in controlling
and policing crowds at football matches.
      That sympathy is in danger of being dissipated by the
manner in which they have presented their case to this Inquiry.

      It is   a sad indictment of football and its fans that
segregation   is necessary and that a Police presence of some
800 o? more   Officers is thought to be needed. W h i l e the majority
of the fans   are well behaved, a minority ana a minority which
is sizeable   in terms of pure numbers is not.
      Their conduct was deplorable. There is a common theme
in the Police evidence, I say "common theme" there are exceptions
because the Police evidence ranged from those who were very
critical of the fans to those who were not really so critical
and said it was not a very great deal different from what one
would expect of fans at any particular match, but there is
theme which suggests that the behaviour was worse than anything
which had been experienced by South Yorkshire Police before.

        So be it. That sort of behaviour, we would suggest, is
 not peculiar to Liverpool Football Club and is known at sad y
 many Football Clubs and their supporters throughout the land,
 but- to have1*800 or^nrore Police. on duty, to deal w i t h i n uicipated
  trouble from -fans'-and-to control" the crowds and-then t.o .say that,,
  activities such as have been described namely taking o. dnnx,
  irresponsibility, attempts to enter without tickets ana s o o n          -
  are not foreseeable, is frankly, we would suggest, nonsensical.
    /
 /      I have dealt with the question of the barrier. I shall
' not go over that again.
       Let me now come to one or two specific comments in relation
 to submissions made by others.
       The City Council. Can I ask you sir to look tojpage 6 of
 their submissions. They say there at the end of the first
 paragraph on that page:
         "The Certificating Authority regarded the Club as
         likely to be in a position to prevent more than      ^
         7,200 spectators being admitted to the West Terrace.

 Sir,    I simply append to that the question how on earth
 they    regard the Club as likely to be in that position and it
 does    not appear that they made sufficient enquiry to ensure tnat
 that    was the position.
          On the next page just before iii the last sentence.      They
  say:
          "The fact that no appeal was ever made or indeed ever
          threatened is some indication that these Authorities
                                          47


                did not find fault with the terms of the Safety
        •       Certificate. This^is in relation to the Police and
                Fire Services
MOW if that is intended to be a comment in relation to
Yorkshire County Council then fair*enough. If it is l n.enaec
to delate to the City Council then with respect it perhaps is
S t SO    id because of course all the interested P i t r e s
believed that there was an active reappraisal of the ^-eri
thell?ety Certificate going on over the three years or so
since 1986.
      Sir on page 10, towards the bottom, there is a suggestion
     after a criticism of the flexibility approach. Sir,
would adopt that as being, I would suggest, a sensible suggestion
It is at the bottom of the page.
      Sir on page 19 there is reference to ambiguities in tne
Green Guide in relation to what is meant by "separate sections
of the ground."
       The comment I would make on that is that with
commonsense would surely dictate that where .here are ae ^ | to
seareaated areas or areas self-contained in effect, thentne
nrinciDle would apply, but one does accept the Green Guice
not perhaps as clear as it might be in that context and having
s   at h a t th e r e fo r e
        i   d                -other respects in which..yau may ^ U ^ s i r ,   .cr
that S e L            been brought to light some ^                » «*•.
Green Guide, the most obvious one Annex C, but clearly

                 LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Testing the barrier?
    /
-'/      MR      COLLINS: That is the barrier, the manner of testing
 the b a r r i e r ? but clearly consideration will have to be given
 and no doubt this is a matter which can be pursued a, S^age
    r e s p e c S   in which the Green Guide can be made clearer or
 firmed up where necessary.
           Sir, we would respectfully suggest that the underlying
    theme of the submissions made on behalf of the City Council
    reflects the error of complacency to which I have referrea **
    oni ^ f t h e three matters in the earlier part of these remarks.

          Sir. so far as the Fire Service are concerned there is
    no criticism that I have sought to level against them in tne
    course of my final submissions. They were concerned ’
    adequacy of the means of egress from the pens and not with
    layout as such and the effect upon capacity as such.

          The only issue perhaps there is whether it really was
    so clear that the Police would man those gates at the back,
    by which I mean the Police would have an O f f i c e r there a,
    all times, or whether the Police understanding of manning,
    namely that if the gates were shut and needed to be openea
    there would be an Officer there, was not more what was          ^
    expected, but that is a matter which has been gone througn ut
    considerable length in the course Oi the Inquiry.
                                                                                           f
                                                                          V     -         - ■
1 $        -                                                              .'Ji'.' .--
                                                                                    ■..■* ■-
                                                                           - -- 'c -v -r    ■




                                                             48


                                Sir, so far as SYMAS is concerned you may think sir that
                          the•interim suggestions that are set out in their report are
                          all helpful and valid save perhaps for the last one on page 11
                          where they refer to a "possible amendment of the 1975 Act.

                                That there should be some tightening up is no doubt correct
                          but whether they have got it right by suggesting that"if an
                          application is not dealt with within six months there shall hav-
                      B   been deemed to have been a refusal" is another matter because
                          that on the face of it might seem to be possibly unfair to uhe
                          Club which was of course not responsible for the dilatoriness
                          of the Licensing Authority.
                                LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Certainly I would have thought it
                          would not be a matter for an interim recommendation, in any event.

                                 MR. COLLINS: Certainly not for an interim recommendation
                           in any event, I accept that.
                                   Sir, I don't want to go into the details of the reasoning
                           of Mr. Kallipetis, the close reasoning in relation to what was
                           overheard and led to the request or the question about ambulances.
                           You will obviously form your own conclusion. The only observation
                           I make is that Mr. Kallipetis in his argument relies very
                      D    strongly upon the accuracy of one part of Mr. Waugh s evidence
                           and Mr. Waugh's evidence you may feel was not entirely satis
                           fa c tory- in crela t ioft-to what- at-the end,-pf rthe d^y was.-, fte ,*t
                           was saying about■the circumstances,•or what-he heerd and the
                           circumstances in which he made the request.

                                   Sir the Club at page 5 make a point, an important point
                            arid one which you will clearly have to consider. It is at the
                           ✓end of the first paragraph on that page where they say tnat ^
                          ' they do not believe they are alone in expressing the view thau
                            it would be regrettable if this tragedy led to the abolition
                            of the terrace as a viewing area.

                                 LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Again that is a matter of long-term
                           consideration.
                                 MR. COLLINS: Of course that is a matter zor long term
                           but if we are right in our submission that the key to safety
                           is control of numbers, then although again we accept that perhaps
                           there can never be any such thing as an absolutely guaranteec
                           safe terrace, because however much you keep to capacity uhere
                           is always the danger of swaying and that sort of thing which
                           can cause trouble and of course people bunching up together
                           if they are in one particular part, but having said that clear y
                           one must bear in mind that it would be a drastic step, and I
                           have no doubt sir you will bear in mind and certainly as you
                           say it is not a matter perhaps for an interim recommendation,
                           that it would be a drastic step to recommend the complete
                           abolition, in effect, of viewing from terraces.

                                  Sir the point is made at page 7 that this was a "first
                            class ground" and that the Club had adopted a thoroughly
                      H

      J. L. Harpham Ltd
responsible attitude towards their obligations and safety."

      Sir one accepts that, but it underlines you may think
the problem, because the evidence may satisfy you that^this
tragedy was inevitable at some time .given the layout O j. Leppings
Lane and given the system or lack of it in relation to uhe
monitoring of the numbers in the pens and pernaps that only
goes to show   how much needs to be learnt to avoid anything
such as this   ever happening again.
      Sir at the bottom of page 10 and on to page 11 it is
suggested that "even a perfect system would not have had any
material effect on the consequences of the additional rush
of some 2,000 fans."
      That on the face of it is a plausible point, but in our
submission what it ignores is this: had there been a Pr°P®r
system to monitor capacity in those pens to stop them ove^
filling, as a matter of fact it is plain that they had become
full before Gate C was opened and therefore there would ha e
been by then a system which would have meant that that tunne
wou?d have been blocked off and no one would have come through
Gate C down into the pens. Therefore we suggest there is in
that respect a direct connection or a contributory faCu°^ ^ ^
the lack of system of monitoring the pens and the tragedy thau
occurred.     .                               -
       Sir at paqe 12 there is reference to the cross-examination
 or examination by me of Mr. Mackrell in relation to the ticxets.

   /     Sir I accept that it may well be that an unfair^point
 m h a v e been put to Mr. Mackrell in relation to the B on
/the ticket because it was plain that in fact that 'B was on uhe
 s^ub which was retained by the turnstile operator and to the
 extent that I suggested the ticket in J h a t w a y encouragea people
 to go down the tunnel, I think it may be that thot went too .ar
 and I would like that to be made clear here and now.

       That does not mean that one accepts that the tickets were
 all they should be. Clearly ....
       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Well Mr. Mackrell very frankly
 conceded that.                       <
       MR. COLLINS:    As you say, sir, Mr. Mackrell quite clearly
 accepted that.
        Finally on the Club at page 16 there is a reference to
  the paragraph of the Safety Certificate and the construction
  I put upon it.
         I don't want to argue the point. Suffice it to say that
  it is my submission thcfc the construction there put by Mr. Glasgow
  is one with which I would quarrel and I would suggest that vnen
  +-he Certificate refers to the "appropriate and relevant standards
  in the Guide” it means what on the face of it says and any.aing
  less than that should not do.
      Of course if the Council is satisfied with something less
then the Club could not possibly be committing a criminal
offence in reaching those standards   What we say is the Club .
ouqht never-to be satisfied with anything less than uhat if
that is what the Safety Certificate says, but of course as I
repeat that would not mean that the Club was doing anything
wrong if the Council in fact was satisfied with     thing less.
It may be that that is a criticism more properly aimed au
Council than at the Club.
      Sir as far as Dr. Eastwood is concerned all I say,
because I*have dealt with the matters in my written submissions,
that I would accept that Mr. Toulson makes a fair point VJjen
he says that the Working Party included a Structural Engineer,
and that of course is something which you will no doubt take
into account.
      Sir, finally may I suggest a few of the more important
conclusions in a very shorthand form, not necessarily _n any
order of importance and not necessarily exhaustive.
      First of all it was overcrowding rather than the perimeter
fences that caused the danger.
        It is easy to understand why there has been a reaction
and why some of those fences have been removed by otner Clubs.
O n e only     to have seen t h o s e d r e a d f i U -photographs ln^th * —   -
Press of people pressed up against the perimeter rence uO~
realise why that reaction has occurred, but as I say fences
in themselves we suggest are not necessarily uhe ..rouble,
i£j overcrowding.
       Secondly the need for education in relation to the
 crowding.
       Thirdly strict controls on numbers and grounds will have
 to accept lower capacities if they cannot count mechanically
 the numbers in any particular part of the terraces.

       Of course there are means, I think there are manual
 clickers. I accept not entirely accurate but at least perhaps
 can give a guide if there is no other means of doing it, but
 as I say there must be lower capacities ir mecnamcal counts
 are not possible.
       There must be a clear understanding in writing preferably
 of the duties of the Stewards and the Police respectively at
 every match and every individual match as to crowd capacity
 on any terraces.
       Five, we suggest that the Police and indeed others,
 Stewards too if they are concerned, must be much more ready
 to recognise and trained to recognise the need of people uo
 escape from pens where they are_in distress and where tnere
 have been problems oi overcrowding.
                                                          51


                           Sixthly, we think greater consideration must be given
                     at all football grounds, but at Sheffield Wednesday in particular,
                     to what I have called earlier on "long-distance policing" and
                     I don't go into that again.
                           Seventhly there must be a consistent policy known to all
                     fans as to what is going to be done to ticketless fans if they
                     turn up at all ticket matches without tickets.
                B
                           This is a matter I think which has been dealt with
                     recently by the ACPO report but that and touting must clearly
                     be the subject of a consistent policy at all grounds and
                     adequate steps must be taken to prevent it and to discourage it.
                     When I say "it" I mean touting and people turning up without
                     tickets as much as possible.
                           Eighthly, it is plain that Safety Certificates must be
                     reviewed at shorter intervals. As to what precisely «_he correct,
                     interval is will no doubt be a matter of argument, but that they
                     must be reviewed regularly must, I think, be clear to all.

                               Finally there must always be sufficient turnstiles so that
                       all who have to come through the relevant turnstiles can be
                       in within a specified period of time, by wnich I mean tha, there
                D      should never be less provision than say, and I am simply plucking
                       a figure out of the air and I don't suggest tnis is necessarily
                    ■kv.the. right-cf igurey- 750^ so tnat. all could-^be goin:Wi.thin „t-hfi.- ~'~.
                       hour. 'TThatever is the right figure again may -we 1-1- be a- question
                       for argument.
                             If insufficient turnstiles exist at a ground then the
                     ground must accept that their capacity will be reduced for that
                    .''match to such as" is able to be coped with by the turnstiles
                     that exist.
                            Sir, as I say those are hot meant to be exhaustive but
                      are points that occurred to me that may I hope assist you in
                      vour consideration of any interim recommendations.

                            May I finally ally myself with Mr. Glasgow in thanking
                      the City Council for the facilities which they have provided
                      to us and to the Inquiry Team in this building.  It has made
                      our task a very great deal easier than it might otherwise
                      have been.
                             Sir, that is all I wish to say.        Thank you.

                            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Yes, well I again would like to
                      thank the Authorities for letting us use this extremely
                      convenient commodious chamber which has made it all a great
                      deal less trying than it might otherwise have been. I shall
                      acknowledge that in the report.

                            Again, at the risk of repetition, I would like to thank
                      all Counsel for their contribution and for all behind their^
                      who put in so much hard work. I now must do some hard \>o -a.
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                    with my Assessors and I shall hope to produce an Interim Repo
                    very soon.
                          Thank you all very much indeed.


                                         (The Inquiry was closed)
                B




                D




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
<




                   AH/DG
                          11165

                   17 July 1989



    J Richman Esq BA
    Clerk to the Justice of Sheffield Magistrates Court
    Castle Street
    Sheffield S38 LU


^ ^ D ear Mr Richman,

    SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
    I thank you for your letter of 20 June on the above topic which I have now had the
    opportunity of discussing with the relevant members of the Council's staff dealing with
    this topic.
    As a result of such discussion I can now point out, that so far as the letter of the 5 June
    is concerned it was felt that any changes in the Council’s policies in relation to the
    safety of sports grounds would be notified to you directly either by the Council's staff
    or the Police.
     The reasoning behind such a reponse was that, as I am sure you will appreciate, much
     of the safety of sports grounds system is unlikely to affect the Magistrates Court relating
     as it does to the structure of buildings, spacing of crush barriers etc and that whilst
     responsible officers will endeavour to inform you of any matters which occur to them
     as affccting the Court’s role, it is anticipated that the Chief Constable (who has a very
 _ significant input through his officers to the safety of sports grounds) would be the person
^ ^ b e s t placed to advise you on any matters which may affect the Magistrates.

    Accordingly, therefore, it may be appropriate for you to apprise him directly of your
    interests in the topic.
    Quite clearly the City Council is interested in close liaison and cooperation on all matters
    of mutual interest and in this regard I would be grateful if you could let Mr Webster's
    Chief Licensing Officer, Mr Bownes, have your thoughts on what areas you feel concern
    the Magistrates in relation to the safety of sports grounds, such as for example, the
    removal of perimeter fences.

    I trust that I have answered the points you raise, but if you require any further
    information or clarification then may I suggest that either your Assistant, Mr        J
    rings Mr Bownes direct on Sheffield 734005, or alternatively that you ring Mark Webster
    cm the extension shown belovs.

    Yours sincerely,




    Chief Executive


                                                   4018
                                            ty[V/ '      'pl/rh'     toe

                                                          (P/ll /Yl&fiT
D R A F T •LETTER

               GP/262/DMB




               10th July 1989

                                                                       Q u. u/cf
Mr. J. Richman B.A,
Clerk to the Justices,
Sheffield Magistrates Court,
Castle Street,
SHEFFIELD.
S3 8LU


Dear Mr. Richman,

Safety of Sports Grpounds Act 1975

Thank you for your letter of 20th June, enclosing previous correspondence in



I think it would be appropriate to clarify    letter of 5th June, and to    j
indicate that I would expect any changes in the Council's policy in relation to
Safety of Sports Grounds to be notified to you through either the Council's?or
the Police.                                                  /

I am sure you will appreciate that much of the Safety of Sports Grounds system
is unlikely to affect the Magistrates Court as it relates to the structure of
buildings, spacing of crush barriers etc.  However, I do appreciate that some
matters may be relevant to the Court.

If it occurs to me that any matters will affect the Court I will of course
endeavour to let you know about it. I would however, expect the Chief Constable
(who has a very significant input in the Safety of Sports Grounds) to be the
person best placed to advise you on matters which may affect the Magistrates.
You might therefore care to acquaint him of your interest in the situation.

If you wish to do so, you could perhaps let me have your thoughts on what areas
may concern you in relation to Safety of Sports Grounds - for example the
removal of perimeter fences.

I trust that this letter clarifies the situation.

Yours sincerely,




Chief Executive




11/WJD107/MS
                   S H E F F IE L D M A G IS T R A T E S ' C O U R T
                                                                       ADMINISTRATION & LEGAL "
           JOHN RICHMAN, B.A.
                                                                   I      Dr?!.,                             CASTLE STREET
                   SOLICITOR
                                                                                                             SHEFFIELD S3 8LU
             CLERK TO THE JUSTICES
                                                                                                             TELEPHO NE No 107421 7 68 53 5
               F. S. T. DEALY,
                   BARRISTER
                                                                          27            1U03   !d
                                                                                                PAA.
                                                                                                             FAX: (0742) 720129

         DEPUTY CLERK TO THE JUSTICES
                                                                                         ELNC (PSO

         Our Ref..   DMW/ m 6 5                                           — nMH /yrcj          I cc    20th June, 1989

                                                                                                                                                      R3S69




           Dear Sir,

                                                 Safety of Sportsground Act 1975

                  I would refer you to the enclosed correspondence between the
           Chief Licensing Officer for the Council and myself in relation to
           the conditions attached to the safety certificates for the two
           football league grounds in Sheffield.

                  In my letter I asked for early notice of policy changes in
           the light of the 'Hillsborough disaster' so that the sentencing policy
           of the Sheffield Magistrates could be reviewed accordingly.     (Clearly
           a less secure ground could result in more hooliganism and offending,
           which is the responsibility of the Bench to deal with).    I had
           thought that a close liaison between our respective agencies in this
           matter would be the best way forward, and so I was rather taken aback
           by the reply from. Mr. Webster.    It is not clear whether Mr. Webster
           intends to inform me personally of any alterations to conditions or
           whether his words "you will become aware of them" imply that I will
           need to rely upon the local press or radio for the information.

                   As I say, I had hoped for co-operation and close liaison in
            this matter which is of the utmost importance to the Bench in Sheffield.

                         Perhaps you would be so kind as to clarify the situation.


                                                               Yours faithfully,                                                  i f    :        j                   i
                                                                                                             c                   -lr         no          SC.P.O.'
                                                                                                         '       *\ . 1 .    ‘
                                                                                                         f r r                   23JU N I9S9                  P !'P

                                                                                                                              I ft.E .U .|P x.C .U .IV f.‘            .
                                                             Clerk fto the Justices                      1        U.P.
                                                                                                                              ! .....I             1


            Chief Executive,
            Sheffield City Council,
            Town Hall,                                                                                                       T
            Sheffield.
            SI 2HH
                                                                                                                                             *




                                                                                   M r . , White                                        269
FOR TELEPHONE E NQ UIRIES ON THIS M A TTE R PLEASE ASK FOR                                                                  EXT. No.
                S H E F F IE L D M A G I S T R A T E S ' C O U R T
                                                                                 CASTLE STREET
      JOHN RICHMAN, B.A.
                SOLICITOR                                                        SHEFFIELD S3 8LU
         CLERK TO THE JUSTICES
                                                                                 TELEPHONE No. (0742) 768535
            F. S. T. DEALY,                                                      FAX: (0742) 72012?
                BARRISTER
    DEPUTY CLERK TO THE JUSTICES


                                                    Your Ref.                   16th May, 1989
    Our Ref..              DMW/10970

                                                                                                               R3869




                  Dear Mr. Bownes

                                            Safety o f Sportsground Act, 1975

                         I am aware that as a result o f the Hillsborough tragedy the
                  conditions attached to the Safety Certificates at the two football
                  grounds in Sheffield are to be reviewed.    The Courts Committees
                  in South Yorkshire have recently met to discuss the implications of
                  the Hillsborough events, and in particular, the possibility that the
                  removal o f fencing within grounds may lead to an increase in hooliganism
                  and offending inside football grounds.     Clearly an increase in
                  offending has implications as far as the court is concerned and
                  contingency plans with regard to sentencing policy and planning of
                   courts need to be put in h a n d .

                          In view of this I would be grateful if I could be given an
                   early indication o f any policy changes that you intend to introduce
                   in respect o f the Safety Certificates in question.


                                                    Yours sincerely




                                                   Clerk to the Justices




                   Mr. D. Bownes,
                   Chief Licensing Officer
                   Sheffield City Council,
                   Town Hall,
                   Sheffield.




                                                                Mr. White                                269
                                                                                         EXT.No__________
E L tP IIO fit EM C. HltS ON       A -.i ASK FOR
City of Sheffield                M etrop o litan District

Roger Peniram, m b i m . Solicitor                                                             Administration and Legal Department
Head of Department                                                                             _       ....
                                                                                                Town Hall,
                                                                                                Sheffield S1 2HH

Our reference        DMB/GW

Your reference       DMW/10970

Date                 5 June 1989


       Mr
       Sheffield Magistrates' Court
       Castle Street
       SHEFFIELD
       S3 8LU



       Dear Mr

       SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUND ACT 1975, AS AMENDED

       Thank you for your                   letter        dated       16 May         1989,       the     contents          of which
       are noted.

       You will, of course, appreciate that this whole area is under review
       through the Inquiry.   Should alterations take place at any ground
       which may affect the areas you mention, I am sure you will become
       aware of them.

       Yours sincerely




       fr I______ I
       Acting Head of Department




                                                                                            Mr Bownes -
                                                                                        734690
                           For telephono enquiries on this matter pleasa ring......................................... (STD Code 0742)
                                                          Telex 54243 (Administration & Legal)
           Hie Acting Head of the                              Mr D Bownes
           Administration and Legal
           Department                                          cc Mrs B BaMiforth
           17 July 1989
           AH/DG
           4018


    HILLSBOROUGH - ACTION TO BE TAKEN
    In llgtit of the receipt of two recent communications, one by letter, and one by fax,
    from Mr Mackrell and Mr Jones respectively, I think it is appropriate for us now to
    consider how we are intending to deal with this stadia in terms of the new season.
    In particular, I think it is necessary and appropriate for the meeting requested by Mr
    Mackrell to take place and I would welcome your comments and observations and in
    particular a draft reply to such letter in the near future.
     With regard to the letter from Mr Jones, I believe at the very least we should press
^ ^ for details of the problems apparently noted by the Health and Safety Executive as
4 r l believe it is unsatisfactory for someone to say that they have observed defective barriers
     without then offering to supply details of their observations.
    In summary, therefore, it seems to me that prior to that portion of the ground re-opening
    for public use and indeed the ground itself re-opening there is a great deal of work and
    effort to be put in and if this requires additional resources to be allocated then the
    sooner we discuss this the better.
                                                                                                i



                                                                                      WG 502
                                                                                       I2.B9I




STAPLE                                               West Midlands Police
ATTACHMENTS
HERE                                               FA X       M E S S A G E


FOR THE ATTENTION OF;       O ^ W r^ v rv                                         N

                             ‘S 'w -e ,^ ’ v^_V4     C O tx^ Co^x.rvcjvlV_.



                              Fax No:    0~1 L\- 7 . ~ '“ I            3,     ‘


FROM:                         West Midlands Police                   Date: \ O V
                              Department.
'0t^-&N‘&V‘OP~0C
                              Telephone No:                          Extension:
CWj£_V
                              Pax No:    0" ^ U      1 ..   "'Ttc>o\3


 Total number of pages Including this page
                                                     rx
                                                     CD-


 Rtmirhe/Actlon roquircdi




   Authorised by:
                    Sergeant/lnspecto.vHeed of Department
t        t /
                /
      cRVYN JONES MSc                                                                 FURNIVAL HOU8E
    ^'SISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                                         Furnlval Gate
    HILLSBOROUGH IN Q U IR Y T F A M                                                  Sheffield S I 4QN
                                                                                      Telephone: 0742 727599
WE8T MIDLANDS POLICE HO                                                              8M ITH D O W N LANE POLICE STATION
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                                                Liverpool L7 3PR
Colmore Circus Queensway                                                              Telephone: 051-709 7175
Birmingham 84 GNQ
Telephone: 021-236 5000, extn. 2025
                                                                                      Your Ref:
NECHELL8 GREEN POLICE 8 T A T I0 N
Fowler Street                                                                        Our Ref:       JMJ/DH
Birmingham B7 5DA
Telephone: 021*359 3332                                                               Date:
                                                                                                    10   July 1989




          A d m in istra tio n    and Legal D ep artm en t
          S h e f f ie ld C ity   C o un cil
          Council House
          S h effield




          Dear S ir

          1 e n c l o s e a c o p y o f a l e t t e r I h a v e t o d a y s e n t t o Mr G- M a c k r e l l , S e c r e t a r y ,
          S h e f f i e l d W e d n e s d a y F o o t b a l l C l u b . , w h i c h may b e o f i n t e r e s t t o y o u ,

          your'S faithfully




          J ^ Jones
          A s s is ta n t C h ief C o n stab le
          H illsb o ro u g h In q u iry




         ENC




    PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE A T ................. S h e f f i e l d ,


10-07-1989        16:27
                                                     0742720013
                                                                                                                                P. 0 2
              /iVVN JONES MSc                                                              FURNIVAL H O U S E
          J iS T A N T CHIEF CONSTABLE                                                     Furnival Gate
                                                                                           Sheffield S i 4QN
        HILLSBOROUGH IN Q U IK Y 1 EAM
                                                                                           Telephone: 0742 727599

      WE8T MIDLANDS POLICE HQ                                                              SMITMDOWN LANE POLICE STATION
      PO Box 6 2 . Lloyd House                                                             Liverpool L7 3PR
      Colm ore Circus Q ya en sw ay                                                        Telephone: 0 5 1 - 7 0 9 7 1 7 5
      Birmingham B 4 6N Q
      Telephone. 0 2 1 - 2 3 6 5 0 0 0 , ex tn . 2 0 2 5                                   Your Ref:

      N E C H E U S QREEN POLICE STATION
      Fowler Street
                                                                                           O ur Ref:          JMJ/DH
      Birmingham B7 5D A
      Telephone! 0 2 1 - 3 5 9 3 3 3 2                                                     D ate:             TO July 198y




      G Mackrell lisq
      Club Secretary
   S h e ffie ld Wednesday Football Club
   Hillsborough
   S h e ffie ld
Q ib 1SW


      Dear Mr M ackrell

      I wish to confirm th a t we have now completed the physical examination o f the
      Western areas o f your ground a t Hillsborough. There is now no need fo r any
      fu rth e r work to be c a rrie d out at the ground. I , th e refo re , wish to form ally
      return those areas which we had re ta in e d , and which had become known as the
      "exclusion zone", back in to your possession.

      In carrying out th e ir work a t the ground the Health and Safety Executive       >
      n o tic ed that there were other b a rrie rs outside the Leppings Lane terraces   I
      which'showecf severe corrosion. I t is our view, th e re fo re , th at before you
      return the ground to f u l l use th a t you have a thorough examination undertaken
      by an independent s tru c tu ra l engineer.

0^    In retu rn in g the ground Lord Justice T a y lo r's In q u iry , the Health and Safety
      Executive and West Midlands Police hold no re s p o n s ib ility fo r the s ta te o f the
      ground and would urge you to take appropriate steps to check the s a fe ty issues
      before the re-s ta g in g of public events. Because th is is o f relevance to the
      S h e ffie ld C ity Council, I have taken the lib e r ty of copying th is l e t t e r to
      them.

      In closing, can I , on behalf o f Lord Justice Taylor, the Health and Safety
      Executive and my own In v e s tig a tin g O ffic e rs , thank you fo r the co-operation,
      not only o f the Club, but p a r tic u la r ly yo u rself and your reg u lar s t a f f
      over these d i f f i c u l t weeks.

      Yours       a f n r . s p e J v __________________________________________________




        j m Jones
        Assistant Chief Constable
        Hillsborough Inquiry


           PLEAS6 REPLY TO THE OFFICE A T .................. S h e f f i e l d


 10-07-1939               IS :27
     1 0 - 0 7 - iq g q   16:26
                                                                  0742720013
                                                                  0742720013                                                  P. 03
     Sheffield Wednesday                                                                                         *-c          i>    o’^ *r^
                    Football Club pic                                                                                                ^    '


     Our Ref:            GHM/JB/D33

     14th July 1989
                                                                                              administration      & LEGAL
                                                                                                 DEPT.
                                                                                                 HEAD OF         (            L.S
     Mr. M. Webster,                                                                      A       OEPT      1    \ HEW-   /

     Acting Head of Department,
i   City of Sheffield,                                                                    B        1 7. JUL 89                PAA
i   Administration & Legal Department,
     Town H a l l,                                                                         C    qsm   :'|   ub     |
                                                                                                                              a
     Sheffield.               Si 2HH                                                      m

     Dear Mr. Webster,

     Re:       Safety o f Sports Grounds

     I am in receipt of your letter dated 6th JUly 1989, which I assume has crossed
     with my letter dated 4th JUly 1989.

     The alterations to which I think you refer were the fitting of Gate 7 to the
I   North West terrace and the increasing in size of thegate in thewall to the
i   rear of the West Stand in 1987. Both thesetasks wereundertaken following     a
     request from South Yorkshire Police and a member of the Official Working Party.

     I note the third paragraph of your letter but would wish to point out that the
     club acted in good faith in response to a request from a constituent member of
     the Working Party. I feel that at our next meeting correct lines of
^    communication for similar matters need to be clarified.

    With regard to your letter dated 22nd May 1989:-

    a) Enclosed are copies of the Inspection Certificates for 1986 and 1987.
    b) Records of the numbers of spectators admitted to the stadium are permanently
    retained.
    c) Stewards: Training evenings for stewards, gatemen etc. were held on 6th and
    13th August 1987 and 16th and 23rd August 1988. On each occasion they were
    addressed by representatives of the South Yorkshire Police, South Yorkshire F ire
    Brigade and St. Johns Ambulance Brigade. The 'on the job1 training to which I
    referred relates to briefing given on matchdays to stewards by senior staff and
    members of the South Yorkshire Police.
    d) Section 28(4) confirmed.
    e) Turnstiles are regularly maintained by members of my own staff and where
    necessary by Mayor Turnstiles. Staff from Mayor Turnstiles will commence this
    year's maintenance work within the next week.

    Hillsborough, Sheffield        S 6 1S W .     Telephone:      (0742) 3 4 3 1 2 2
    Telegram s: W ednesday Sheffield 6. Telex No. 5 4 7 7 0 9 W E D N E S
    Fax No. 0742 337145 Registered in England No. 62478                                 continued . . .
    Chairman: H.E. McGee. Secretary: G.H. Mackrell, F.C.C.A. Manager: R. Atkinson
    Directors: M. Sheppard.   J.P., F.C.A.   (Vice-Chairman).   S.L. Speight. O.B.E..
    C. Woodward. K.T. Addy. E. Barron. G.K. Hulley.
We do have c e rta in comments and suggestions w ith regard to a proposed new Safety
C e r tif ic a t e . These w i l l be formulated fo r discussion a t the meeting o f the
Working P a rty . I understand from the tra n s c rip t of the in quiry th a t a d r a f t
c e r t if ic a t e has already been c irc u la te d to c e rta in other members of the Working
Party fo r th e ir comment, I would welcome an e a rly s ig h t of th is .

I look forward to hearing from you regarding a meeting as soon as possible.

Yours s in c e re ly ,




      MacfcrelJ
Seorefeary---
                                                                  Copies to:
                                                                  Mr G Hetherington,
                                                                  Sheffield Eagles
                                                                  Acting Head of
                  SADO/EG/P497                                    Admin & Legal
                                                                  FAO Mr D Bownes




                  13 July 1989



  Mr J S Carter
  General Manager
  Sheffield Sports Stadium
  The Stadium
  Owlerton
^Sheffield
B 6 2DE


  Dear John

  Application for Sports Ground Licence

  I refer to our meeting on Thursday 6th July 1989 and I have clarified with
  David Bownes of the Administration and Legal Department that an application
  for a licence is imperative if you wish the ground capacity to be rasied
  above the 4,000 figure which was provisionally set a few years ago pending
  an application for a licence setting a higher figure.

  There seems to be some confusion as to whether the 4,000 figure includes
  those persons in the Panarama Room and bars.

  However, I am led to believe that the Recommended Items of Safety Work
  outlined in the 1987 report of Eastwood and Partners, and the Maintenance
  Work (copies of relevant pages attached) would be required to be carried
  out before a licence to increase ground capacity was considered.

  Despite the fact that stewarding and safety at matches and other events
  will be organised as appropriate, it is the condition of the fabric of the
  ground, access and spectator facilities which are the major criteria.

  The Administration and Legal Department would have to be satisfied that all
  works had been carried out and any others that might occur when the ground
  is fully inspected on receipt of the licence application. So I would urge
  an early application and the completion of the Recommended Items of Safety
  Work.

  I understand from Gary Hetherington that he could have a Yorkshire Cup
  match on 17th September and the first scheduled Owlerton home match is
  against Barrow on 24th September.

  Gary has very wisely, in order to create time to get work done and
  hopefully a licence to increase capacity, arranged the first scheduled home
  match on 3rd September against St Helens to be played at Hillsborough.




                                                                Cont/'d. ..


                                 Mr Bauer
It is hoped all parties will be able to meet the timescale, for it is not
possible to consider more use of the two football grounds to overcome the
crowd limitations as they are at the moment, and besides use of other
facilities other than Owlerton will significantly reduce the income to the
Stadium Company, in what will probably prove to be one of the best years in
recent times, for public attendance.

Yours sincerely




J C Bauer
Senior Assistant Director (Open Spaces and Amenities)


Enc
 City of Sheffield            M etropolitan District

 Roger Pensam, FCIS. MBIM, Solicitor                                                        Administration and Legal Department
 Head of Department
                                                                                            Town Hall,
                                                                                            Sheffield S I 2HH

 Our referenca    _   GP/DMB
         k    *
 Your referenca

 Date                 27th July, 1989




Mr. J.S. Carter,
Owlerton Sports Stadium Limited,
The Stadium,
Owlerton,
SHEFFIELD.
S6 2DE




Dear Sir,

Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (as amended) - Owlerton Sports Stadium

I have received a copy of a letter from the City Council's Director of
Recreation and Amenities to yourself dated 13th July.  Unfortunately this letter
contains a number of inaccuracies which need correcting.

In the first place it is, as you know, not necessary for you to apply for a
licence in order to raise the ground capacity which currently stands at A,000.
As Mr. Bownes has explained to you it is necessary for you (if you wish to have
the capacity figure increased) to make a submission to the Council to the effect
that the ground is now in a suitable condition to accommodate more than A,000
people.  This matter was discussed with you some time ago and no such submission
has yet been made.  1 anticipate that the consideration of any such submission
will take a considerable time and you are therefore recommended to proceed with
matters quickly if you so desire.

As far as 1 am concerned the 4,000 figure includes all persons admitted to the
Stadium.

As you know the Council on 11th May 1988 let you have a substantial list of
requirements in respect of the Stadium and these supersede any comments made                                                by
Eastwood and Partners in 1987. Works done should therefore be done in
accordance with the Council's list of requirements.

As you are also no doubt aware there are a considerable number of factors
contributing towards Safety at Sports Grounds and 1 think it is difficult to say
that any one factor takes precedence over others.




PE/ 53                                                                          734690 - Mr.          aownes

                        For telephone enquiries on this matter please ring.........................       (STD Code 0742)
                                                       Telex 54243 (Administration & Legal)
                                              .1 ^ cr                t>           » * J*
                                                          ? I -I'-,> mLi->..' vrfc;
                                                    •;**&'b                    i f* ;i*?
               £ 3>>                                t*»
 2.
               ’SSKES:


 I trust this letter clarifies the position but if you remain in any doubt please
 let me know.

^You^s faithfully,., _




 Acting Head of Department
       719                                                                                       Sch 9160
                                      C IT Y OF S H E F F IE L D -    MEMORANDUM

             The Acting Head of Administration                   jQ      The Director of Recreation and-
             and Legal Department                                        Amenities
                                                                         F.A.O. Mr. Bauer
             27th July, 1989
             GP/262/DMB
Tel. E xt    4 6 9 0 - M r . Bownes                              Ref.




             Safety of Sports Grounds Legislation - Owlerton Sports Stadium
                            7

             I refer to the copy of the letter of 13th July 1989 from yourself to the
             Owlerton Sports Stadium which I received on 25th July. Unfortunately your
             letter contains a number of inaccuracies which require immediate
             clarification.

             My Chief Licensing Officer, Mr. Bownes, recalls a recent telephone conversation
             with your Mr. Bauer when a general discussion about Owlerton Sports Stadium took
             place. Your letter could, in fact, be taken as a modification of the Council's
             stance in relation to Safety of Sports Grounds at Owlerton Stadium and it
             therefore requires to be corrected immediately.  I would also point out that you
             do not (as far as I am aware) have delegated authority to deal with Safety of
             Sports Grounds' matters.

             I list below the inaccuracies which require rectification:-
                                                             *


             (1)    The company does not have to apply for a licence to raise the ground
                    capacity above the 4,000 figure.  What it does need to do if it wishes
                    the limit to be raised is to make a submission to the Council to the
                    effect that the stadium is now in a suitable condition to hold more that
                    4,000 people. Mr. Carter of the Company is well aware of this and has
                    been invited to make such a submission as soon as possible. The original
                    discussions about the submission took place some time ago and nothing has
                    happened about them.

             (2)    As far as the 4,000 figure is concerned I believe it includes all persons
                    within the stadium at any time.

             (3)    It is incorrect to say that the 'recommended items of safety work'
                    referred to in the 1987 Eastwood Report are those required by the Council
                    in order to bring the stadium up to a reasonable standard. In fact the
                    Council on 11th May 1988 sent a long list of requirements to the Company
                    (a copy of which is attached to this memorandum). These requirements
                    superseded any comments that may have been made by Eastwood and Partners
                    and I believe that in places they conflict with Eastwood's comments.
                    Obviously where there is such conflict, the Council's requirements take
                    precedence.
                       a.
             In parag^ph 4 of your letter you imply that stewarding and safety matters are
             somewhat secondary issues to "... The condition of the ground, access and
             spectator facilities ... etc.".  This is incorrect.  I think it is fair to say
             that there are a number of structural works required at the stadium but the
             importance of stewarding, etc. cannot be underestimated.

             It is of course vitally important to ensure that the Council has a consistent
             approach as far as safety of sports grounds is concerned and it is important
             that the position in relation to Owlerton be clarified.  I have therefore
             written to Mr. Carter at Owlerton Sports Stadium setting out the accurate
             position and a copy of my letter is enclosed with this memorandum.
f:           -■TV-                                         jjc                  ^iTi‘2c-“ s-i*-
                                                                 'rrr^V-J'rcriv'; I       h.-': ‘   \
        2.



        If in future you require any information as to the situation in relation to
        safety at sports grounds at Owlerton please let me know exactly what you require
        and I will then endeavour to meet your requirements.
        K
     $***             _       „   -’                                     “I             ..
        Enc •             *




        PB/53/DB257
                                  CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM
    «
  From:       Director of Recreation and             To:    Acting Head of Administration and
          •     Amenities                                     Legal Department

  Date:    15 August 1989                                   For the attention of Mr Bownes
  Refs     SADO/CAS/P382/P797 (please quote)
  Tel Ext: 77-229      (in reply - Mr Bauer)         Ref:   GP262/DMB




              Safety of Sports Grounds Legislation - Owlerton Sports Stadium

              I refer to your memorandum of 7 August 1989 regarding works that are
              proposed at the Owlerton Stadium.

              The works in question have been discussed between Sheffield Eagles and
              the Leader of the Council and other senior members and have to be
              carried out before the first home game of Rugby League on either
              17 or 24 September. The improvements to the changing accommodation are
              a condition that Sheffield Eagles were accepted into the first division
              and as such the modifications to existing facilities have been proposed
              in such a way that they do not alter the physical structure of the
              ground and/or the passage of spectators.

              The attached plans show the internal modifications to the existing
              changing accommodation at the northern end of the main grandstand and
              the proposed alterations are entirely within the existing walls and
              structure of the changing accommodation. It is necessary to have both
              home and away changing accommodation at this end of the building in
              order to have a separate access for teams on to the pitch without
              needing contact with spectators. ' This access will also be assisted on
              the days of the match by a metal barrier system stewarded appropriately.

              The other proposed changing facility is on the site of an existing
              wooden building labelled A on the attached plan which, at the moment, is
              in a very poor condition. It is proposed to site a portable changing
              unit with showers capable of taking up to three match officials linked
              up to services which are nearby. As you will appreciate there is a need
              to fast track the provision of these facilities and I think you will
              agree that the proposals do not change the layout but possibly, in the
              case of the area to be taken up by the officials' changing, may provide
              a wider gap for spectator and emergency access purposes.

              As you appreciate, this work has to be commenced as soon as possible and
              I hope that this memorandum has clarified the position and that you do
              not see any difficulties with these alterations.

              Although I have not been able to reply to your earlier memorandum
              regarding all the other safety works and the certificating of the
              ground, and will do so in due course, I think that I have persuaded all
              parties that we should keep the attendance levels and utilisation of the
              facilities at Owlerton to a 4,000 figure.

              On behalf of Sheffield Eagles I   am co-ordinating the stewarding of the
              facilities at Owlerton on match   days and will be utilising experienced
              stewards from both the football   grounds as well as liaising with the
              South Yorkshire Police who have   been involved with ongoing discussions
              since Eagles were promoted.

              Based on all the above information I would like a reply as soon as
              possible.


JB2AAH          c Bauer^— Senior Assistant Director (Open Spaces and Amenities)
    /fyjge* ) J ir t f                                     after JcM-i , 'ylA»d Aol 'Aip&t
                          ,e ic     t fc ' i^ c ia d u < S j    ■fte c u rW y e iz c & Z b d 3 $ -,-k
                                                                           (/




                           iS      fe tt     !aajZ?jLu L>JsJK     O yQ utm *     /jO i'& c x r J        /a ]
                                                         O                      //                   O'
            Qo/si-      MiplatJ




                                     (£*d c&lUJcA                  I            &m ~ Oft (T~
                            0

                J l & t t U £ & & - !J
                   //




                   4turt ^ C>CX\/.                                Cted V&tUlfi Qju&* 'l/uCo
                  'f'ecUdt

            O il 'WA^Coiit M zioM ofcc'^                           Sy        0-7T                  iC
       7/                                             tueA,^            o   J jzU' l o ^    a£t.

        kjJ.                    T i ^ v tl


                                                                             ■/ // fL
(M l              a$&K jlm b L                  &tio                          )J! (i m         CUi


i&tHA        Ik    c ^ t d . .        $;     $ z    /tfpwy.


        , ( U
   QA&JO
                            lO&WLfi
                                             Association of                  3S<
                                                                             Westminster
                                             Metropolitan                    London SW1P3BJ
                                             Authorities                     Telephone
                                                                             01-2228100
                                             Secretary AlunGronow            Facsimile receiver only
                                             Deputy Joan Jones               01-2220678



                                             ournt     S/CB                  5 July 1989
Mr M Webster
Acting Head o f Department                   jourmf    HMW
Adm inistration and Legal Department
C ity o f S h e ffie ld
Town H a ll
S h e ffie ld
S1 2HH                                         ________ _

                                        r s ® —-r
                                              j | l ^jssist
                                                        Emji .
                                              headOf    I     head
                                               03PT

                                                0 7. JUL
                                                        UB
                                                                     CCNVl




Dear Mr Webster

DRAFT MEMORANDUM TO THE TAYLOR INQUIRY

Thank you very much fo r your le t t e r o f 28 June g ivin g comments on our
o rig in a l d r a ft. I enclose a copy o f what in the event has now gone in and
I think you w ill see th a t we have taken on board the h e lp fu l observations
th a t you have made.      I f I may, I would add one a d d itio n a l comment myself
regarding the fifte e n general points you have lis te d at the back o f your
le tte r .    I think some o f these ought to be picked up separately rath er
than through heavy statements to the In q u iry .     C erta in ly they are in many
cases things which the Association ought to be move forward and I intend
th erefo re to include them as items fo r consideration when I report the
evidence to the next meeting o f our Policy Committee la te r th is month.

Thank you again fo r your help in the s o rtin g out o f our evidence and
ra th e r b elated ly may I also re g is te r my g ra titu d e and pleasure a t the
a tte n tio n and h o s p ita lity you provided when I came up to S h e ffie ld la s t
week.       I t made fo r a most pleasant day as w ell as a valuable one.

Kind regards.

Yours s in cerely
MEMORANDUM TO THE TAYLOR INQUIRY



1.   The Association of Metropolitan Authorities represents the 36

Metropolitan District Councils, 31 London Boroughs, the City of London, the

Inner London Education Authority and the Joint Authorities responsible for

Police, the Fire Service and Public Transport in the Metropolitan Areas.

The Association's role is to promote and protect the interests of its

member authorities and the community they serve, to provide a forum for

member authorities to discuss and act collectively on matters of common

concern and to provide a service to member authorities, including the

dissemination of good practice.    The county of Merseyside includes the

districts of Knowsley, Liverpool, St Helens, Sefton and Wirral where the

majority of the dead, the injured, their families, friends and neighbours

lived.   The county of South Yorkshire includes the districts of Barnsley,

Doncaster, Rotherham and Sheffield.    The district councils appoint the

elected members to the Fire & Civil Defence Authorities and Police

Authorities.



2.   Since March 1983, the Association has maintained a Working Party on

Football, which is now called the Football Development Working Party.      In

1984, the Association published "Football Violence : The Metropolitan

Viewpoint" (copy appended) and the Association also gave evidence before Mr

Justice Popplewell in 1985.   The Association provides joint secretariat

services for Football's Family Forum which will subait evidence separately

to the inquiry.



3.   The Association recognises that it would be possible for the Inquiry

to interpret narrowly its second term of reference "to make recommendations
a b o u t t h e n e e d s o f crow d c o n t r o l and s a f e t y            a t s p o rts g ro u n d s".          The

A sso c ia tio n u rg es th e           In q u iry to      ad o p t th e b ro a d e s t app ro ach b ecau se




         (a)       " t h e n e e d s o f crow d c o n t r o l a n d (cro w d )            s a f e t y " go beyond

                   i s s u e s o f m o v e m e n t, d e n s i t y ,   p o lic in g and b u ild in g m a te r ia ls               in to

                   a re a s o f p u b lic      p o lic y   such a s r e s p o n s i b i l i t y     fo r o rg a n isa tio n a l

                   p ro ced u res,      c o -o rd in a tio n and l i a i s o n       in    th e a fte rm a th o f

                   d i s a s t e r a n d m e d iu m t o    l o n g - t e r m co m m itm e n ts t o v i c t i m s u p p o r t ;

                   and




           (b )    " a t s p o r t s g r o u n d s " i n t e r p r e t e d n a r r o w l y w o u ld p r e c l u d e t h e

                   I n q u i r y fro m m a k in g re c o m m e n d a tio n s on crow d c o n t r o l a n d s a f e t y

                   a t o th e r la r g e s c a l e e v e n ts su ch a s pop c o n c e r ts h e ld e ls e w h e re

                   th a n   in s p o rts g rounds.




4.     The A s s o c ia tio n r e c o g n i s e s t h e n e c e s s i t y       to b a la n c e th e m a in te n a n c e o f

p u b lic o rd e r a t la rg e          s c a le e v e n ts w ith p re s e rv in g th e p e rs o n a l s a f e ty                of

in d iv id u a l s p e c ta to rs .          It   re c o g n is e s th e d i f f i c u l t i e s    fa c e d by th e

p o lic e ,    but it       b e lie v e s th a t c o n s id e r a tio n s o f p u b lic o rd e r and c o n tr o l can

at   tim e s o v ershadow           th e iss u e o f s p e c ta to r s a f e ty .             M e a su re s t o p ro m o te

p u b lic o r d e r and p u b lic s a f e ty           a r e n o t a lw a y s i d e n t i c a l .




The A s s o c i a t i o n a l s o a c c e p t s t h a t th e o p e r a t i o n a l c o n s i d e r a t i o n s r e l a t i n g

to   any s p o r tin g e v e n t a re u n iq u e .            Each f o o t b a l l g ro u n d i s       d iffe re n t       in

t e r m s o f c o n s t r u c t i o n a n d e n v ir o n m e n t, w h i l e crow d s i z e a n d d e m e a n o u r a r e

a ffe c te d      b y m any d i f f e r e n t f a c t o r s s u c h a s t h e w e a t h e r ,       th e im p o rta n c e o f

t h e m a tc h an d t h e r e l a t i o n s h i p b e tw e e n th e c l u b s in v o l v e d .              In th e s e

c i r c u m s t a n c e s l o c a l k n o w le d g e i s   as c ru c ia l     a s any s e t o f c e n t r a l l y       ag reed
guidelines.      Nevertheless, principles relating to the growth of community
involvement in football set out in "Football Violence: The Metropolitan

Viewpoint" remain as valid today as they were in 1984 and the document was

publicly endorsed by the then Minister for Sport, Neil MacFarlane MP within

weeks of publication.      The Association would ask the Inquiry to give due

weight to these principles in any recommendations which it makes about the

general context of the Hillsborough tragedy.



Furthermore the Association has long held, and will continue to take, the

view that any member of the public should have the same expectation of

safety at a public event whether this be an enclosed premises (such as a

theatre) in the open air, (a pop concert for example) or a sporting stadium

(football, cricket or rugby eg).



5-   With specific regard to the circumstances at Hillsborough, the

Association's position is clear and was stated in a previous inquiry to Mr

Justice Popplewell.     At any football match, the playing surface can

constitute a major place of safety for spectators in the event of an

emergency.      Whilst recognising the need to maintain public order, the

Association said that:



      (a)    there should be a choice of alternative means of escape from

             a stand which would provide so far as is reasonably practicable,

             for spectators to turn their back on the source of the fire or

             other problem and travel to a place of safety.   Such means of

             escape would require effective policing/stewarding on the spot;
      (b)   each exit should wherever possible have direct access to open air
            and should be separated from other exits to avoid funnelling

            people into a congested area;



     (c)    many seated stands are constructed so that people have to move

            forwards and downwards in order to get out.     This means that

            they may have to go towards the source of danger before reaching

            safety.     This is contrary to the interests of public safety, and

            the guidance document, (Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds) should

            b,e updated to limit the forward travel distance where there is no

            alternative means of escape at the rear of the stand;



     (d)    the training and number of stewards at public events requires

            scrutiny.     Most are casually employed.   Measures are necessary

            to ensure that their knowlege of the ground, its safety systems

            and the correct procedures are of the highest order because of

            the public responsibility which they carry;



     (e)    specific measures which should be taken in respect of enclosure

            fences include:    the siting of emergency gates in fences, such

            gates to be secured by suitable quick release mechanisms; such

            gates to be manned by sufficient stewards; stewards to be trained

            (see above); stewards to have independent communication with a

            central control point, and to be trained in the system used.



These points, which arose from the Bradford fire disaster are equally

applicable to the Hillsborough tragedy.
6.   Since Hillsborough, the Association's secretariat has inspected the

anti-panic barrier now installed at the municipal stadium in Nimes, in

operation at a match.     Although the system has only recently been

introduced, it does appear to provide a means of maintaining public order

and safety at the same time.     The Association would hope that the system

could be given an early trial in England to see if it would be appropriate

here.



7.      At this stage in the acquisition and evolution of experience from the

recent spate of major disasters including Hillsborough, the Association

urges the Inquiry to build into its report and recommendations positive and

forward-looking views on a number of issues:



        (a) The powers, practices and systems of local authorities' planning

             for major disasters and responses to them.     These are addressed

             in detail in two documents accompanying the covering letter,

             "Local Authorities and Peacetime Emergency Planning: A Review of

             Current Arrangements and Proposals for Improvement" (November

             1988) and an amended version of the Association's final submission

             (June 1988) to the Home Office in an endeavour to influence

             the latter’s Review of Peacetime Disasters;



        (b) Counselling and support for victims and carers/rescuers:    the

             Association firmly believes governmental initiative and

             commitment are necessary in two major areas.   First, there is

             a need for guidance and training packages to be promulgated to

             local authorities and District Health Authorities (the

             Association is represented on the Department of Health/CRUSE
       Working P a rty ).             Secondly, long term v ic tim and rescu er/carer

       support is expensive.                     The Association understands Liverpool

       C ity C ouncil's a d d itio n a l commitment is around £2 m illio n ; and

       o th er Merseyside a u th o ritie s w ill also have heavy costs in th is

       area.         The Association th erefo re urges the In q u iry to recomnsend

       prompt and f u l l reimbursement by government to lo c a l a u th o ritie s

       faced with the consequence o f d isaster among th e ir people,

       fa m ilie s and communities.                       The Association is aware th a t the

       Local Government and Housing B i l l , clause 133 a t Report Stage,

       enables the M in is te r to codify the so c a lle d "B ellw in Rules" but

       is unconvinced th a t government has any commitment to meeting in

       f u l l the fin a n c ia l costs o f d isa s te r.



(c)    M a jo r d i s a s t e r s g e n e r a t e p u b li c a p p e a l s .       The l a w 's      c o m p le x itie s

       a n d i n e q u i t i e s a r e w e l l known fr o m t h e e x p e r i e n c e s o f r e c e n t

       d is a s te r fu n d s.        The A s s o c ia tio n       does n o t c o n s id e r i t        n ecessary

       f o r ev ery lo c a l a u th o r ity          to    have a D is a s te r A ppeal d is c r e tio n a r y

       t r u s t on t h e s h e l f ,     u p d a te d a s e x p e r i e n c e a n d c a s e law d e v e lo p .

       H o w ever, t h e d a n g e r o f b u y in g i n t h e s t a t e o f t h e a r t a f t e r t h e

       next d isa ste r is           th a t   i r r e v o c a b l e d e c i s i o n s c a n b e m ade e a r l y o n .

       The A s s o c i a t i o n a c c o r d i n g l y    b e lie v e s i t    w o u ld b e s e n s i b l e   and

       p r u d e n t f o r gov ern m en t t o        is s u e g u id e lin e s on th e e s ta b lis h m e n t,

       a d m in is tr a tio n and te r m in a tio n o f d i s a s t e r a p p e a ls .




(d )   The A s s o c ia tio n      i s aw are t h a t c u r r e n t l y        som e b u i l d i n g c o n t r o l

       d e p a rtm e n ts in lo c a l a u t h o r i t i e s       a r e m o v in g b y v i r t u e o f t h e i r

       re sp o n sib ilitie s        fo r s a f e s t r u c t u r e s and b u ild in g s         in to th e area

       o f t r a i n i n g ste w a rd s and a s s i s t i n g        t h e p o l i c e o n cro w d m ovem ent

       and d y n a m ic s.         B e c a u s e t h e s e d e p a r t m e n t s k n o w how c r o w d s b e h a v e




                                                          -6 -
in tight spaces, before during and after a major event (like a

semi-final or a Michael Jackson concert), the Association

considers this emerging trend should be encouraged by Government

and standards approaches promulgated.      Equally, on-site match

day "spot checks" by appropriate officials from building control

and fire prevention should also be encouraged.      A vital issue

is the need to drastically review the recommendations of the

method of calculating the safe ground capacities for terraced

areas and viewing slopes as outlined in the Home Office guide to

Safety of Sports Grounds.      The term "peak viewing" area should

be further defined and given a maximum size and arrangements made

for a maximum number of persons based on 54 per 10m2 to occupy

that part of the faciliites.    All other areas should be

classified as requiring a substantially lower density factor

(possibly 40 per 10m2 ) yet maintaining the need for 6kn/m tests

to be achieved on all crush barriers.      (This maximum calculation

should be reduced, as in the current guide, depending on the

state of the terrace or viewing slope).




The figure of 54 per 10m2 is used throughout the terrace and

therefore must be an average figure.      This average is exceeded

in peak viewing areas and therefore any safety factors are

reduced proportionately.




It is also important in the light of Hillsborough, not just to

calculate terrace capacities but also to ensure that there is on

the spot monitoring that the capacities are not exceeded or at

least to keep a close eye on the crowd to ensure that they are

not too tightly packed.
           In self-contained terraces it might be possible to monitor

           capacities by means of a turnstile.   Where the terrace is not

           self-contained and there is the possibility of movement by fans

           in and out of the terrace or to other parts of the terrace the

           only control possible would seem to be effective supervision by

           Police or stewards whose task is to ensure proper "packing" of

           terraces.




           Where the playing area is considered to be a safe place for

           evacuation from stands, and there is a standing paddock or

           terrace area between the stands and the playing area, the

           packing density for this terraced area should not exceed the lower

           figure of 26 persons per 10m2 to reduce the risk of crushing in

           the event of forward evacuation from the stands towards the

           playing area.




     (e)   The incoming calls at Casualty Bureaux and hospital switchboards

           frequently cause the system to collapse.    This is because the

           public telephone network does not have the capacity to absorb a

           huge and unanticipated increase in calls.   The Association

           recognises that the perfect answer is unobtainable but recommends

           the Inquiry to take evidence on forthcoming proposed improvements

           and assess their likely effectiveness.




8.   In conclusion, the Association believes that public safety and public

order can be exercised to a high degree of compatibility in football

stadiums provided that the principles set out above are applied to the

particular circumstances of each individual ground and each event.

Improved standards of construction and training should assist the control
stadiums provided that the principles set out above are applied to the

particular circumstances of each individual ground and each event.

Improved standards of construction and training should assist the control

of each match, but this will need funding.    The funding required could be

provided by using a small percentage of the duty currently collected by the

Treasury from football pools.   This is a small sum to pay for ensuring

public safety.




The Association will be pleased to present more detailed technical or other

arguments to the Inquiry as appropriate.




                                    -9 -
                                                                                                                         OvvS,


City of Sheffield                      Metropolitan District



Our reference       E.REGN/DB/SC                                                        Electoral Registration Officer
                                                                                        Ian L. Podmore

Your reference                                                                          Elections Office
                                                                                        Town Hall
                                                                                        Sheffield S1 2HY
Date                5 July 1989                                                         Telephone 7 3 4 0 9 3




IMITATION POLL CARDS


After  the recent parish by-elections     I received a number of complaints in
connection with alleged imitation poll cards and have carried out investigations
on the material    supplied.  Section 94 of the Representation of the People Act
1983, provides as follows:

"No person shall for the purpose of promoting or procuring the election of any
candidate at a Parliamentary or local government election to which this section
applies  issue  any poll card or document so closely resembling an official poll
card as to be calculated to deceive,...... "

In the material supplied there is some difference in detail and layout between
the offending card and the prescribed form of official poll card under Rule 22
of  the Local Elections Rules, 1986.   It is a debatable matter as to how closely
the offending material does have to resemble the official poll card prescribed
under Rule 22, and in what circumstances imitation poll cards or documents are
likely to be     'calculated to deceive’.      Discussions with the Home Office,
however,  reveal   that they are concerned about election material of this nature
and consider   that many election agents      are getting   increasingly close to
infringing Section 94 of the Representation of the People Act, 1983.

All candidates and agents are advised to exercise care in avoiding any potential
infringement of the above Act, and while I propose to take no further action in
respect of   the Stannington ward by-election held on 22 June, any contravention
of Section 94 would amount to an illegal practice and could be the subject of
an election petition or prosecution at future elections.




Returning Officer




                                                                             4091
For telephone enquiries on this matter please dial (0 7 4 2 ) 7 3 ...................
Sheffield Wednesday
               Football Club pic


Our Ref:           GHM/JB/D34
4th Ju ly 1989


Mr. M. Webster,
Acting Head o f Department,
C ity o f S h e ffie ld ,
A dm inistration and Legal Department,
Town H a ll,
S h e ffie ld .
SI 2HH


Dear Mr. Webster,
Now th a t the evidence has fin is h e d being heard a t Lord ju s tic e T a y lo r's In q u iry ,
A ssistant C hief Constable Jones o f West Midlands P olice has advised me th a t the
ground is li k e l y to be released back in to my custody w ith in the next few days.

I would, th e re fo re , welcome a meeting o f the working p a rty in order to discuss
how the ground should operate fo r the commencement o f the season, p rio r to the
in te rim rep o rt o f Lord ju s tic e Taylor being published.

I look forward to hearing from you as soon as convenient.

Yours sincerely,




G*#rT9ackrSli-
■Senrefcary




Hillsborough, Sheffield      S 6 1S W .    Telephone:      (0 742) 3 4 3 1 2 2
Telegram s: W ednesday Sheffield 6. Telex No. 5 4 7 7 0 9 W E D N E S
Fax   No. 0 7 42 3 3 7145      R e g is te re d in E n g la n d N o . 6 2 4 7 8

Chairman: H.E. McGee. Secretary: G.H. Mackrell, F.C.C.A. Manager: R. Atkinson
Directors: M. Sheppard, J.P., F.C.A.   (Vice-Chairman), S .L Speight, O.B.E.,
C. Woodward, K.T. Addy, E Barron, G.K. Hulley.
Acting Head of Departments                   Councillor CJC Betta
Administration and Legal                     Councillor J Flora

30 June 1989
AH/GW
4018 - Mr Webater




W T M M M f l H M f OOM T

As previously indicated, the firat part of the Inquiry will be adjourned
aa front Friday 30 June until 14 July.

This will enable roans previously occupied by it, including in particular
the Council Chamber, to be available from this Friday, the exceptions
being Committee Boon 1 where the Treasury Solicitors have got their
office aa they will be remaining in the building during the adjournment
and Coamittee Room 4, for similar reasons.

It ia not yet clear how long they will require accommodation on the
14th but it is hoped to be no more than a day or so but on that date
they will take over all of the accommodation with the probable exception
of the Reception Suite which they have previously uaed.



cc      Chief Executive
        Nr F O'Neill, Aaaiatant Chief Personnel Officer
        Mr           Estates
        Mr            Bastates
        Mr
Acting Head of Department!                    Chief Bxocutive
Administration and Legal

26 June 1989
AH/GW
4018 - Hr Webater




ret HILLSBOKJOGH RACED*

With reference to your meaorandua of 14 June and in particular the second
■entence theof, my initial view is that once 1 have pulled together
all the various reports, draft or otherwise, which have been prepared
for submission to Committee on this topic, I should be in a position
to draft a comprehensive         report and to takeaccount of, in such document,
any issues viz-*a**vis the Council’s Peacetime Emergency Plan*

So that you are awars of the process, I have asked             to pull
together copies of the documents referred to above and to add his own
comments to the first draft which I will then circulate to relevant
Officers to ask for any additional points which they wish to have made
before forwarding the draft for your consideration.
   R3719                                                                      Sch 91 62
                              C IT Y OF SHEFFIELD — M E M O R A N D U M

From        CHIEF EXECUTIVE                       \CU>ING HEAD OF ADMINISTRATION
                                                  \ND LEGAL DEPARTMENT

Date        14th June, 1989
Ref.        C.EX/RF
Tel. Ext.   4000




            HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY


            As you may have seen from the minutes of the Policy Comittee
            on the 23rd May I have been asked to prepare a comprehensive
            report arising from this disaster and you will have seen
            that the City Treasurer has started to collect financial
            information.       I know that you have been co-ordinating
            input from a number of directions and would like to have a
            view as to whether this provides a foundation for such a
            comprehensive   report,   particularly  of   the   Council's
            Peacetime Emergencies Plan, or whether you feel any further
            action will need to be taken to complete the picture.
  r-M*IV                                                                        Sch 9162
                           CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM

From The Actlng Head 0f Administration       To
    and Legal Department

°"!8 13th June, 1989

                                              Ref.



    Peacesme_Bnergency Planning - A.M.A Checklist

    I refer to my memorandum of 6th June, 1989, and now enclose for your
    Information a copy of a circular which has been received from the A.M.A.
    containing a checklist for Metropolitan Districts and London Boroughs in
    respect of peacetime emergency planning procedures. You may find the
    checklist of some use In considering the Issues arising from the Hillsborough
    Disaster with particular reference to the Council's Scheme for Major Peacetime
    Emergencies.


                                               ADM!^*3TR'->.T!0 N & LEGAL



     1MS/JS




                                                                            J
                       R H F F F I F I                    D M A G IS T R A T E S ' C O U R T
                                                                                   ADMINISTRATION & LEGAL
           J O H N R IC H M A N , B .A .
                                                                             i        DEPT.,                                CASTLE STREET
                                                                                  A j KcAU O f {/xS i-TvTA N f
                       SO LICITO R
                                                                                                                            SHEFFIELD S3 8LU
             CLERK TO THE JUSTICES

                F. S. T . D E A LY ,
                    BARRISTER
                                                                                 B |      2 7 i U H 1389          PAA       m m     w o r *
         DEPUTY CLERK T O THE JUSTICES
                                                                                 £ s s Q .S .M .|   US   } ELNS   PSO

         O u r Ref..                                                         d ^ N fJ        r,vm/nw              cc     20th June, 1989
                                '11165                                  Y(

                                                                                                                                                        R3869




           Dear Sir,

                                                    Safety of Sportsground Act 1975

                   I would refer you to the enclosed correspondence between the
            Chief Licensing Officer for the Council and myself in relation to
            the conditions attached to the safety certificates for the two
            football league grounds in Sheffield.

                   In my letter I asked for early notice of policy changes in
            the light of the 'Hillsborough disaster' so that the sentencing policy
            of the Sheffield Magistrates could be reviewed accordingly.     (Clearly
            a less secure ground could result in more hooliganism and offending,
            which is the responsibility of the Bench to deal with).    I had
            thought "that a close liaison between our respective agencies in this
            matter would be the best way forward, and so I was rather taken aback
            by the reply from,Mr. Webster.     It is not clear whether Mr. Webster
            intends to inform m e personally of any alterations to conditions or
            whether his words "you will become aware of them" imply that I will
            need to rely upon the local press or radio for the information.

                   As I say, I had hoped for co-operation and close liaison in
            this matter which is of the utmost importance to the Bench in Sheffield.

                              perhaps you would be so kind as to clarify the situation.


                                                                    Yours faithfully,                                       r p n      fcHISF EXECUTIVE
                                                                                                                                    .v.'-'i SHE'F$EU>      IC .P.O .
                                                                                                                             M.T.
                                                                                                                             r;-s       2 3 J U N 1989
                                                                                                                                                                PUB
                                                                                                                                        R.E.U. jpx.C .U .       #/     '


                                                                  Clerk / t o         the Justices                         | U.P.



             Chief Executive,




                                                                                                                                                  *
             Sheffield City Council,
             Town Hall,
             Sheffield.
             SI 2HH




                                                                                                         M r . , White                         269
                                                                                                                                    EXT. No.
FOR TELEPHO NE E N Q UIRIES O N TH IS M ATTE R PLEASE A SK FOR.
                    S H E F F IE L D M A G IS T R A T E S ' C O U R T
                                                                                    CASTLE STREET
          JOHN RICHMAN, B.A.
                  SOLICITOR                                                         SHEFFIELD S 3 8LU
            CLERK TO THE JUSTICES
                                                                                   TELEPHONE No. (07421768535
               F. S. T. DEALY,                                                      FAX: (0742) 720129
                  BARRISTER
         DEPUTY CLERK TO THE JUSTICES


                                 /10970                  Your Ref.                 16th May, 1989
        Our Ref..

                                                                                                                                R3869




                    Dear Mr. Bownes,

                                                Safety of Sportsground Act, 1975

                           I am aware that as a result of the Hillsborough tragedy the
                    conditions attached to the Safety Certificates at the two football
                    grounds in Sheffield are to be reviewed.   The Courts Committees
                    in South Yorkshire have recently met to discuss the implications of
                    the Hillsborough events, and in particular, the possibility that the
                    removal of fencing within grounds may lead to an increase in hooliganism
                    and offending inside football grounds.    Clearly an increase in
                    offending has implications as far as the court is concerned and
                    contingency plans with regard to sentencing policy and planning of
                    courts need to be p u t in hand.

                           In view of this I would be    grateful    if I could  be given an
                    early indication of any policy changes that you intend to introduce
                    in respect of the Safety Certificates in question.


                                                         Yours sincerely.




                                                        Clerk to the Justices




                    Mr. D. Bownes,
                    Chief Licensing Officer,
                    Sheffield City Council,
                    Town Ha ll ,
                    Sheffield.




                                                                     Mr. White                                     269
                                                                                          EXT. N o .-------------------------
FOa 'EttPMON* ENG'- HltS O'J            A'li ASK FOR.
City of Sheffield           M etro p o litan District

Roger Pensam, MBIM, Solicitor                                                  Adm inistration and Legal Department
Head of Department
                                                                               Town Hall,
                                                                               Sheffield S1 2HH

Our reference      DMB/GW
Your reference           10970
Date               5 June 1989


       Mr White
       Sheffield Magistrates' Court
       Castle Street
       SHEFFIELD
       S3 8LU


       Dear Mr

       SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUND ACT 1975, AS AMENDED

       Thank you for your letter dated 16 May 1989,                            the contents             of which
       are noted.

       You will, of course, appreciate that this whole area is under review
       through the Inquiry.   Should alterations take place at any ground
       which may affect the areas you mention, I am sure you will become
       aware of them.

       Yours sincerely




       Acting Head of Department




                                                                            Mr Bownes -
                                                                            734690
                       For telephone enquiries on this matter please ring          .................(STD Code 0742)
                                                 Telex 64243 (Administration & Legal)
Peacetime Emergency Procedures


A Checklist      £ q XL   Metropolitan Districts and London BQfPUghg              prepared
by the Association o f M etropolitan A u th o rities


1.00    Introduction
        Approach And Assumptions
1.01    The approach         adopted is that a Metropolitan District's               or
        London Borough's ability to respond to a major disaster                       is
        necessarily         built     on the co-ordination at the           centre    of

        well-established,            comprehensive       and   coherent      emergency

        arrangements         which        have been    developed     at   Departmental
        level.


1.02    The     document assumes that there is an officer employed                   by

        the      authority         with     responsibility     for    reviewing      the

        Council's         ability     to respond to a       major     disaster.      The
        officer       should have the time and experience to develop                  an

        overview of the Council's corporate response to emergencies

        of      all       kinds,     through    a     systematic     assessment       of

        Departmental emergency procedures.


        Aima

1.03    a) To establish or reinforce the framework and elements                      of

              an effective major disaster scheme for the Council,
        b) To this end:

                i) To        assess        existing      Departmental       emergency
                    procedures




                                      1
              ii)   To     examine the       likely     impact    of    competitive

                    tendering on these emergency procedures

             iii) To determine areas for improvement in                Departmental

                    emergency procedures,

              iv)   To    determine      areas    for   improvement in         liaison

                    arrangements      between Departments,       and between         the

                    Council   and     external    agencies*       in response         to




       Procedure aod Format

1.04   The     document contains a questionnaire to be circulated                     to

       all    Departments       of the Council involved with response                 to

       emergencies,         including a major disaster. The form               may   be

       filled       in   by the Department concerned or by             the     officer

       responsible for disaster planning and should be returned to

       the latter.

       The questionnaire is contained at Appendix 1.


1.05   Once     the      questionnaires are completed and         returned,          the

       officer        responsible for the review may then refer                to    the

       following two sections and:

                i) conduct     an     overall assessment of       the        Council's

                    corporate response to emergencies of all kinds

               ii) establish        or amend as     necessary    the    Council's

                    major disaster scheme.




                                     2
2.00   Overall       Assessment of the Council's corporate response                to

       all kinds q£ peacetime emergencies

2.01   Bring     together all the replies to questionnaires               received

       from Departments.

2.02   What    are    the types of day-to-day emergency to            which       the

       Council responds:
                           (a)   during office hours

                           (b)   out of hours?


2.03   Are there gaps or inconsistencies in the Council's                  ability

       to respond?        If so, are these supportable (for cost-benefit

       reasons) - or are improvements needed?


2.04   Are     Departmental       arrangements     for   emergency        response

       affected      by    competitive tendering?        If so,    have    service
       agreements       been struck with contractors to ensure             that     a

       response will be made, or are they proposed?


2.05   Are Departmental written procedures adequate?                If not, what

       improvements are necessary?

2.06   Are    liaison      arrangements between      Departments,     with        the
       emergency services, with neighbouring authorities and                  with
       outside     bodies      adequate?     Are   the   liaison     procedures
       understood         by   appropriate    officers    and      followed        in
       practice?




                                   3
2 .0 7   Are     procedures              for       informing    the      Council's         officer

         responsible             for emergency planning and for calling him                       or

         her    in     to        assist       with     co-ordination       when        necessary,

         understood              by     appropriate       officers       and        followed      in

         practice?


2.09     Are incident reports prepared and forwarded to the                                officer

         responsible for emergency planning?


2.10     Are    each       Department's stand-by                and     call-out      procedures

         adequate?           Are       they        reasonably    consistent         across       the

         Council?           (This may be a matter for                  Corporate      Management

         Board and Policy Committee).


2.11     Are    call-out              lists       regularly updated?           If   not,      secure

         improvements.


2.12     Compile       a         comprehensive         central        resources        list      (as

         indicated          in    Appendix           1, Form    1).      Store      the    central

         resources list on a computer (or in a filing system)                                 whi’fch

         is    accessible on a 24 hour basis to                        officers      responsible

         for emergency response.                    Ensure that the resources list                is

         regularly updated.


2.13     Are   there gaps in the central resources list that                               require

         filling,       perhaps           with       co-operation        from       neighbouring

         authorities?


2.14     Is there an adequate 24 hour notification procedure for all

         day-to-day emergencies requiring a 24 hour response?


                                              4
3.00   Establish or Amend the Council'a Ma.ior Peacetime              Dlaaster

       Procedures


3.01   It i8 assumed that with the Council's day-to-day               emergency

       procedures      in   place and operating effectively,          and   with

       arrangements for liaison, co-ordination and            'referring-up'

       agreed    and   understood,    the     elements    necessary     for    an
       effective Major Peacetime Disaster Scheme are established.


3.02   Check:
       a) that Departmental emergency procedures are in place

       b) that the point at which the officer with           responsibility

          for    emergency    planning      should   be   involved     in     the
          response to emergencies is understood and accepted

       c) that resource-lists and call-out lists are              satisfactory

          and up-to-date

       d) that stand-by and call-out arrangements are satisfactory

       e) that a 24 hour emergency call-out telephone link is                 in

          operation covering key departments' services.


3.03   Assess the need for the following central facilities:

       a) 24    hour   access for officer responsible        for     emergency
          planning to central control point
       b) an    earmarked emergency control centre         with    facilities
          for rapidly introducing:
                   extra telephone lines
                    fax machine

                   computer terminal



                                  5
                    map-boards

                    radio

                    television

       c) nominated administrative and support staff

       d) an interview room for the media

       e) separate telephone lines for handling:

                 i) operational business

                ii) media inquiries

            iii) inquiries from the public

       £) annual     publication of revised Major Peacetime           Disaster

          Scheme     with     more frequent updates of call-out          lists

          as necessary

       g) computerised      updating    of call-out lists     and     resource

          lists,      including      outside    agencies      and     external

          resources, with an index

       h) communications equipment (eg. cellnet) which may be used

          as a communications link from a forward control point.


3.04   Assess     the Council's cross-Departmental plans for           meeting

       the following key tasks and prepare or revise as necessary:


       a) Control     and    Co-ordination - control by        an    Emergency

          Management Team over the         mobilisation and         deployment

          of Council personnel and         resources and      co-ordination

          of voluntary organisation            involvement (involving      the

          Chief     Executive's Department,         Departmental       Liaison

         Officers and Social Service            Department)




                                 6
b) Liaison     -     ensuring         adequate     liaison      with       statutory
   bodies, the emergency services* other local                           authorities
   and   voluntary bodies, (involving the                  Chief         Executive's
   Department        and     the Officer responsible               for     emergency
   planning)


c) Communications            -         arrangements          for         emergency

   communications          may include additional telephone                    lines*

   teleprinters or radio contacts (involving Administration
   Department)


d) Resources - an          up-to-date record enabling                 mobilisation
   of the Council's resources* as required* and                          indicating

   external        sources       of    supply or       support*     when       needed

   (involving        the     officer      responsible           for        emergency

   planning)


e) Alert and Standby - procedures for warning staff and the

   public     in    the event of an             approaching       hazard*       e.g.*
   flooding*         storms           (involving        Chief         Executive's

   Department*       Press and Public Relations Officer*                       Police

   and      liaison        with Meteorological           Office          and   Water
   Authority).


f) Evacuation       -   liaison          with    the     Police       to       remove
  vulnerable        people to safety (involving Social                     Services

  transport        and liaison with bus companies;                  and     Housing
  and    Social      Service Departments            when     evacuation         from
  Council properties)


                             7
g) Rescue - providing          back-up or heavy rescue resources to

   support     the    Fire     Service    (involving        Engineers         and

   Surveyor's Department)


h) Rest     Centres - accommodation         during,        or     immediately

   after, the emergency in day centres,                  training       centres,

   Sports centres, Leisure centres, School or Church                        halls

   (involving        Social    Services, Education          and     Recreation

   Departments, and Voluntary groups)


i) Feeding - utilising the School meals services, meals-on-

   wheels or WRVS or Salvation Army (involving Education or

   Social Service Departments and Voluntary groups)


j) Overnight     accommodation - temporary               accommodation        for

   the    homeless      in hostels, halls         or    hotels      (involving

   Housing Department)


k) Welfare     - providing       clothing    and       bedding      (involving

   Social    Services Department and liaison with DSS and                      DH

   and Health Authority)


1) Victim    Support - counselling          for        injured     or     shocked

   people      and    the     bereaved,     including       a      help      line

   (involving Social Services and voluntary groups)


m) Temporary     Mortuary        -   providing         temporary        mortuary

   facilities (involving Cemetries and Minicipal Services)
n) Disaster Fund - assistance to local community groups                      in

   establishing      a       public      appeal         (involving        Chief
   Executive's,      Finance,          Legal      and     Social        Service
   Departments and Voluntary groups)


o) Repair, demolition or clearance - of buildings or                      roads

   or   trees     (involving     Architects,            Building       Control,

   Engineers, Cleansing,              Recreation Works Departments)

p) Environmental Monitoring - specialist advice on chemical

   spillages,     pollution,      asbestos     hazards,           foodstuffs,

   disease, methane gas, clean water, and so on                    (involving
   Environmental     Health,     Trading       Standards      and        Public

   Analysts and liaison with British Gas, Water                   Authority,

   Waste Management and so on)


q) Cleansing, Drainage        or Sanitation - removal             of     flood-
   water,   debris    or foul matter (involving              Cleansing       or
   Engineers Departments)


r) Public   Information - dealing with the media,                  providing

   information     to the public (involving              Public    Relations

   and Libraries and Liaison with media)

s) Transport - provision of transport for people, equipment
  and supplies (involving various departments and                      liaison

  .vrith 'private hauliers and transport companies)




                         9
       t) Outside     Contractors - procedures   for   hiring    outside

            contractors in an emergency (involving Chief Executives,

            Finance and other Departments)


       u) Insurance, Liability and Financial Control -          (involving

            Chief Executives, Finance and Legal Departments).


4.00   Further Specific Elans

4.01   Once the major peacetime disaster procedures are in         place,

       your     authority may wish to conduct a Hazard   Appraisal      to

       identify the major threats which might affect your district

       or     London Borough.   When priorities have been   identified,

       specific (or contingency) plans can be developed.




RO/JL
12 May 1989.
ulmSW*


                                                       Appendix I


 PEACETIME EMERGENCY PRQgBSUBES
 A QUESTIONNAIRE £Qfi COUNCIL DEPARTMENTS

         The questionnaire is to be completed by Council Departments
         and returned to the Officer responsible for emergency
         planning
         AND/OR
         it can be used by the Officer as a checklist for discussion
         with individual departments.


  1.     What are the types and frequency of day-to-day emergencies
         involving members of the public to which your Department
         responds on a regular basis, including out-of-hours?

               Type                       Frequency




  2.   What formal written procedures for emergencies        involving
       members of the public does your Department have?
       (Please list them and enclose a copy of each)




  3.   What is your Department's definition       of    an   emergency
       involving members of the public?




                              1
4. Have your emergency procedures been revised, or are they
    likely to be changed, as a result of restructuring following
    the introduction of competitive tendering?
                                          Yes/No

5.   If so, what are the changes that competitive tendering     has
     brought about, or what are they likely to be?




6.   Is there a Senior Officer or a section of your   Department
     most concerned with responding to emergencies?
     (Please Specify)




7.   What are your Department's procedures for liaising    in    an
     emergency with:

         a) the emergency services (Police, Fire, Ambulance)




         b) other Council departments




         c) other public bodies




         d) the Voluntary sector?




                           2
 8. How often* under present procedures, does your Department
     inform the officer responsible for emergency planning about
     an emergency incident? (Please tick one box)

        A                 /\                  /\
        \/    Never       \y       Rarely     \/       Regularly

 9. In what circumstances would your department contact the
     Council's Officer responsible for emergency planning and ask
     him or her to co-ordinate liaison with other departments and
     external agencies?




10.   Are incident reports prepared?               Yes/No


11.   Are   copies of incident reports        sent to the          Officer
      responsible for emergency planning?        Yes/No


12.   Does your Department have a procedure  for informing the
      relevant Committee Chair or Ward Councillors about an
      emergency incident?                   Yes/No

      If so, please describe the procedure:




13.   At what point would the Council's Chief Executive be
      informed about an emergency incident in which the Council's
      involvement is principally through your Department?




                               3
14.   How developed and extensive are your Departnent'8       emergency
      call-out lists?
      (Pleaee describe)




      How frequently are they updated?

        /\                     /\                /\
        \/      Annually        \/ Six-monthly   \/   more often
        /\
        \/      Whenever necessary

15.   What stand-by arrangements are followed:
             a) during office hours?




             b) out of hours?




16.   What payments, or other incentives are offered
      to staff on stand-by:

             manual or craft                      APT&C
17.   What payments or special concessions are made to             staff
      called-out to deal with an out-of-hours emergency:

          manual or craft                       APT&C




18.   What resources, obtained from the Council's own resources,
      from other public bodies or from private contractors or
      consultants, are available for use during an emergency?
      (Please fill in the attached Form 1)


19.   Is   a list   of   these resources   available      within   your
      Department?           Yes/No

      If so, how often is the list updated?

          /\                       A                 /\
          \/   When necessary     \/ Annually        \/ Six-monthly


20.   Is this list made available to the Council's             Officer
       responsible for emergency planning? Yes/No

21.   Does your Department possess information on resources which
       may be available in an emergency from other         Council
       Departments?        Yes/No

      Is so, which Departments?   (Please specify)




                            5
22. Doyour staff review their emergency     procedures regularly?
                                       Yes/Ho
     If so, how often?

         /\                             A
         \/       When necessary         \/        Annually
23. How   oftendo you undertake                 training   or   exercises        in
     emergency procedures?

             A              A                              A
          \/        Never   \/       Occasionally          \/   Regularly

24. Does    your Department have a central point to which                        all
     emergencies are reported as soon as they occur:

         A                                  A
         V       24 hours line              \/    Out of hours line only

         A                                        A
         V       during office hours only         V   other (please specify)

25. Are   there specific contingencies for which your Department
     has drawn up action lists?      Yes/No
      If so, please specify:




26.   What are your Department's procedures for                 scaling     up    to
      respond to a major disaster?




                                 6
                                  Appendix 1:     Questionnaire;   Form I

PEACETIME EMERGENCY PROCEDURES: RESOURCES LIST
Question 18:    What resources, obtained from the Council's    own
resources, from other public bodies or from private contractors or
consultants, are available for use during an emergency?
   Rasource                       Number         Location      How obtainable


1. fjihmir (please list under
   different functions, e.g
   drivers, plumbers, joiners;
   or teams, e.g demolition,
•  asbestos removal).




                           7
   Resource                           thimbmr       Location   How ohtalnat

2. Spaclaliat afclllfl or         !             !
   professional advice            !             S
   (including consultants)        i             S




3. standby Taama out of hours




4. Contracts and Subcontractors
   (please indicate function)




                             8
  Resource                        Number/    Location   How obtainable'
                                  Quantity
5. Materials and gUPPllfla
   (Please list normal stock
   levels of construction
   materials, or heaters* or
   bedding etc)




6. Fuela StQrad (Please
   list the average holding
   at anyone time of each
   type of fuel stored).




                              9
   Raaouraa                     Hmhmv/     IaCtttiflP   Hqh obtainable
                                Quantity

7. Machinery (Please list all
   major items which might be
   useful for cleansing,
   demolition, clearance,
   flooding etc.)




8. Generators & Independent
   Power Sources (Please
   indicate power rating)




                           10
  Resources                        Humber/    Location
                                   Quantity
9. Tools (please list handtools,
   power tools or structural
   tools (e.g scaffolding,
   ladders)




10. Vehicles (please list
    vehicles, including plant
     and specialised vehicles,
    by size, weight and
     function)




                           11
    Resources                     Number/      Location   How
                                  .Quantity;
11. rrnnmunieationg EquiPPflnt
    (Please indicate type and
    extent of any mobile         I
    communications systems used).




12. Stores and Depots (Please
    list addresses, contact
    points, and main functions)




                           12
Resources                      Number/    Location
                               Quantity
         (Please list
or attach lists of main
premises which may be used
as emergency rest centres,
overnight accommodation)




Range of Activities (Please
list the range of activities
normally undertaken by your
organisation).
The A etby Baad of the Administration               Bln E Buhforth
and Legal Department                                Principal Solicitor

13 June 1989                                        Mr D Bownea
AH/dG                                               Licensing Officer
4018


SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT lfT#    ____
REVISED SAFETY CERTIFICATES AND PERIMETER FENCING
With reference to the various communications received towards the end
of May from the Fire Service and the Police respectively, and to the latest
communication from the Police dated 7 June, concerning the new Safety
Certificate Conditions, I believe it would be useful, as soon as time permits,
viz-a-viz the Hillsborough Inquiry, for a further meeting to be set up
between ourselves, the Fire Service and the Police, to discuss first of
all the issue of perimeter fencing, and whether or not it should remain,
and if so, whether it should be extensively modified before the next season.
Clearly here time may be of the essence although I am loathe* to take
any precipitative action in the absence of recommendations from Lord
Justice Taylor.
Secondly, I think we ought also to discuss, as a small Sub-Group, the various
outstanding conditions regarding the new Certificate, although at this
stage I am inclined to agree with the comment from Mr Watson that it
might be preferable to await the outcome of the Inquiry before issuing
the new Certificate.
In any event I would welcome the opportunity to discuss the various
correspondence with yourselves.
TELEPHONE:
SHEFFIELD ( 0 7 4 2 ) 7 6 8 5 2 2


                                                                                      S O U T H YORKSHIRE POLICE


                                                                                                                   S3 8LY
                                                               I ADMINISTRATE?! ^ IP § ^ h D
                                                               !           D rr-r       * ''> = 5 b s <
T. W ATSON, BA
                                                                   A                                      jL s .
A S S IS T A N T C H IE F C ONSTABLE

                                                                   B         12       J U t H & f * PAA
                                                                   C     O .S .M .j    Lis   j   ELNS     PSol
                                                                   GS                                      CC I

The Administration & Legal Department                                   Your Ref:            GP262/DMB
Town Hall
SHEFFIELD                                                               Our Ref:             MS/DD/JW
S2 2HH
                                                                        Date:                7 June 1989
For the attention of M r M Webster



Dear Sir

SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS -
DRAFT REVISED SAFETY CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

I write with reference to your letter of 4 May last.

I am pleased to note that you are now agreeable to the inclusion in the certificate of a
condition requiring the provision of special police services on the occasion of a specified
activity. With regard to the wording of the condition, may I suggest the following for your
consideration:-

          “The holder shall make arrangements with the Chief Constable of the South
          Yorkshire Police for the provision of special police services on the occasion
          of a specified event at the stadium for the purposes of maintaining lawful and
          orderly behaviour amongst spectators, and the extent of the provision of those
          services shall be determined by the Chief Constable and he and his officers
          shall be allowed full access to all parts of the stadium”.

As to the other matters contained in the final draft of the new certificate, I would refer you
to my letter dated 4 August 1987. In that letter I raised eleven points with regard to your
original proposals and I am pleased to note that you have incorporated points one. two.
ten and eleven in the draft. With regard to the other points I still consider that tho
requirement for twenty eight days notice of a specified activity (point three); the power to
require activities to be “all ticket” etc (point four) and the restriction on the parking of
vehicles (point five) should be made conditions of the certificate and I ask that you give
further consideration to this.

On a minor point I would draw your attention to the omission of the word “not” in the
second paragraph on schedule three of the draft.

On the matter generally, you may feel it prudent to delay the issue of the certificates until
after the recommendations of the current public inquiry are made known. You may feel
that a meeting to discuss these matters would be beneficial and I shall be happy to make
my officers available should you so wish.

Yours faithfully



Assistant Chief Constable
Management Services
                                                                                                              /vr-
South Yorkshire County Fire                                                                                  pvice
H. E. Wright, Q.F.S.M., M .I.F ireE , F.B.I.M.                                                 Command H.Q.,
             Chief Fire Officer                                                                Wellington Street,
                                                                                               Sheffield,
                                                                                               South Yorkshire S1 3FG
                                                                                               Telephone: Sheffield
                                                                                               STD (0742) 727202

Our Ref:    FP19/2/4       : RG/MS               Your Ref:   gp/262/dmb                        Date: 25.05.1989

This matter is being dealt with by ..Piyisipnal.Of ficer R . .Grimshaw.                        Ext. No. . . 2 7 1 ...........

 City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council,
 Administration and Legal Department,                                       A!    NATION & LEGAL
 Town Hall,                                                                           SHEFFIELD.
 SHEFFIELD                                                                 A K or-PT. {ASSISTANT
                                                                             /filAU Of
                                                                                       1) HEAD L.S.
 Si 2HH
                                                                           B     3 1 MAY 1989 PAA
 Dear Sirs,                                                                C O.S.M.j LIB | ELNS PSOf
                                                                           GS                   <*1
 SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975 -
 DRAFT REVISED SAFETY CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

 In reply to your letter dated 30th March in connection with the above,                                          please
 find below the observations of this Department.

 The final revised Safety Certificate Conditions have been examined and the
 four points referred to in your letter have been reconsidered.

 With regard to the four points referred to

  (a)      It is agreed that the wording of Condition   11 should be satisfactory
            without stipulating an age range but the experience in Barnsley, where
            they have some difficulty recruiting suitable stewards was that fifteen
            year old boys were being appointed and it was felt that at that age they
            may not be able to cope with an emergency situation.

  (b)      On the Police knowledge of the whereabouts                     of a    doctor,         there        are      no
            further observations.

  (c)      Should any match be such that large numbers of the press, TV or radio be
            attracted, it would help the Police and club officials if all personnel
            belonging to these organisations were identifiable, particularly where
            they have access to areas beneath stands whilst a match is in progress.

  (d)      The attendance of a competent electrician is required within the period
            prior to 3 hours before the commencement of any game in order to test
            the general and emergency lighting and fire warning systems. Should an
            electrical fault occur whilst a match is in progress, it is felt that
            this should be investigated and rectified immediately in order that the
            match can continue with complete crowd safety. This was a condition of
            the County Council Certificate.




                               All communications to be addressed to the Chief Fire Officer.
Other matters noted are

(a)   In the "Interpretation of the General Safety Certificate" the Definition
      of the Certificate has been modified. In the previous draft reference
      was made to what the Certificate was comprised of, this has now been
      omitted.    Should the fact that the Certificate comprises the general
      conditions,   schedules, plans and 'Guidance for Safety Certificate
      Holders', be recorded at this stage?

(b)   In Schedule 4, the requirement       to test emergency lighting and fire
       warning/public address systems "not more" than three hours prior to a
       specified   activity   taking   place   should   read "not less" than
       three hours prior to a specified activity taking place as in the
       original South Yorkshire County Council conditions. The reason for this
       is to allow the batteries for such systems to become recharged prior to
       the event commencing.     You have extended this requirement to all
       lighting systems (excluding the emergency lighting) and all doors, gates
       and turnstiles etc.,    specifying the three hour time limit in each
       instance.  The three hour time limit is only critical in respect of
       emergency lighting and fire warning public address systems for the
       reason specified above, therefore, as regards normal lighting and doors
       etc.,  subject to them being tested on the day of the event, no specific
       time limit is considered to be necessary.       It could certainly be
       considered to be onerous to require all such tests within three hours of
       an event commencing.

(c)   Following my previous comments, Condition 12(a) has been modified to the
       effect that stewards must prevent overcrowding under the direction of
       the Safety Officer or the Chief Steward or an Authorised Officer.
       Whilst this may be satisfactory when considering migration from one
       section to another once spectators are within the ground,   it is felt
       that this matter can be more reliably controlled by strictly limiting
       the numbers admitted to each section at the turnstiles. As each section
       is filled, the turnstiles, which are capable of recording this fact
       should be locked. This may not be considered to be a relevant condition
       for   inclusion   in   the   Certificate but certainly needs further
       consideration before any Certificate is issued or amended.

(d)   There is no Schedule 3 setting out the capacities of each section of the
       ground attached to the draft conditions. It is recognised, however,
       that these need further consideration by the Officer Working Party
       before finalisation since figures will be needed for each part of a
       ground from the Police, Building Control and Fire Service to determine
       the actual limits.

(e)   Schedules 1 and 2 detailing numbers of stewards to be on duty at a
      specified activity and the duties to be carried out will need detailed
      consideration and again it is felt that these are matters for discussion
      with the Officer Working Party for final resolution by yourselves.

It is now hoped that you will be able to finalise the adoption of the General
Safety Certificate conditions as quickly as possible in order that the
outstanding amendment to the Certificate issued to Sheffield Wednesday FC and
the issue of the Certificate to Sheffield United FC can then be progressed.

This will entail a full evaluation of all aspects by the Officer Working
Party, i.e. ground capacities,    stewarding arrangements,  firefighting and
emergency evacuation procedures etc. This will require the provision of up to
date plans of all buildings, stands, terraces, etc.
The County Fire Service are willing to give every assistance to   achieve   this
aim.

If you have any further queries on these matters, please do not hesitate to
contact the Officer concerned.

Yours faithfully,




Chief Fire Officer,
SOUTH YORKSHIRE FIRE AND CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY


South Yorkshire County
H. E. Wright, Q.F.S.M., M.I.FiraE., F.B.I.M.                                                 Command H.Q.,
             Chief Fire Officer                                                              Wellington Street,
                                                                                             Sheffield,
                                                                                             South Yorkshire S1 3FG
                                                                                             Telephone: Sheffield
                                                                                             STD (0742) 727202

Our Ref:    a s /m s                           Your Ref:   g p /262/ d m b                   Date: 25.05.1989

This matter is being dealt with by ..Assistant.Chief Officer. Seaman                                            one

                                                                                                 as:

 City of Sheffield Metropolitan District,
                                                                                             A
 Administration and Legal Department,
 Town Hall,
 SHEFFIELD
                                                                                             B
 SI 2HH                                                                                      c     O .S .M .j   LIB   | ELMS   PSO!
                                                                                                                               CC
 For the attention of the Acting Head of Department


 Dear Sirs,

 THE FUTURE OF PITCH PERIMETER                    FENCING      AT    SHEFFIELD    UNITED          AND       SHEFFIELD
 WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUBS

 Thank you for your letter dated 17th May, 1989 regarding the future of pitch
 perimeter fencing at the above grounds. My simplistic response is to advise
 you that the South Yorkshire County Fire Service did not ask for the fences to
 be provided and would be happy to see them removed.

 However, this is seen as a matter for particular consideration by the Police
 since the query relates to a crowd control aspect and the Guide to Safety at
 Sports Grounds recommends measures for crowd control.

 If the pitch perimeter fences are removed it will still presumably be
 necessary at both grounds to provide a lower perimeter wall which will need to
 have access gates (paragraph 205 Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds).

 It would seem important to note that the perimeter fences at Wembley
 are to be replaced again after the pitch invasions during the Cup Fin
 Saturday.

 If it is decided that the pitch perimeter fences must be retained because of
 the danger of pitch invasions, I would recommend that consideration be given
 to the existing fences being replaced by a new design of fence in which each
 section is capable of converting into an outward opening gate. This type of
 fence, which was recently featured in a television programme, showed the fence
 installed at a French football ground and it looked very effective.

             if hf n lltr




 Chief Fire Officer.




                             All communications to be addressed to the Chief Fire Officer.
TELEPHONE:
SHEFFIELD (0 7 4 2 ) 7 6 8 5 2 2
                                                               —
                                                            S O U TH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                               SNIG HILL




W. W. JACKSON
A S S IS T A N T C H IEF CONSTABLE



Hr          FCIS MBIM                                      ACC(0PS)/HMW
Solicitor                                                  24 Hay 1989
Administration and Legal Department
Town Hall
Sheffield
SI 2HH




Dear Sir

The Future of Pitch Perimeter Fencing at Sheffield United and Sheffield
Wednesday Football Clubs

Thank you for your letter dated 17 Hay 1989 regarding pitch perimeter fencing.
In view of the overlap in responsibilities, ie: all emergency services
concerned with this particular question, I would suggest that a meeting is j
held with all interested parties so that the total views can be taken into |
consideration at the same time.

At present there is still a policy expressed in the Green Code and obviously
no-one would wish to pre-empt the recommendations anticipated from the Public
Enquiry.  However, we would be quite happy to discuss this issue as outlined in
your letter.

Yours faithfully




Assistant Chief Constable
Operations
    R3719                                                                               Sch 9 1 6 0
                               C IT Y OF S H E FFIELD — M E M O R A N D U M

From        City Treasurer                             To       All Chief Officers


Date        8th June,   1989                                    c.c. Mark Webster
Ref.        MD/BAKL                                                  Pat O'Neil
Tel. Ext.   4302 -                                     Ref.          Terry Evans




                                                                                DRAFT
            HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY



            Following the last meeting of the Policy Committee the Chief Executive and
            myself have been requested to prepare a comprehensive report on the
            Hillsborough tragedy. In addition the Council has been asked by the Home
            Office to provide an estimate of the total cost of the Inquiry, for which
            they have undertaken to reimburse the Council for the costs incurred.

            In order that I have as full a picture as possible, therefore, and that a
            reasonable assessment can be made of the effects on committee cash limits
            and all proper costs are reclaimed from the Home Office, I should be
            obliged if you would provide me with the following information

                1.    The actual costs incurred to date plus the estimated total costs
                      relating to the conducting of the Inquiry. These costs should
                      include the direct costs (including officer time, hire of rooms
                      etc.) and additional costs resulting from the Inquiry (e.g. hire
                      of alternative accommodation or loss of income because facilities
                      are not available for other uses).

                2.    Actual and estimated total costs relating to the operational
                      aspects of the Disaster itself (including the Inquest).

                3.    Ongoing costs arising from the Tragedy.

            It would be helpful if you can provide as much detail as possible on the
            costs incurred but in particular all costs need to be divided between what
            is merely an allocation of expenditure that the Council would have
            incurred anyway (e.g. officers' time) and that which is extra expenditure
            (e.g. overtime, car allowances etc.).

            As far as the need for a review of the Council's peacetime emergencies
            plan is concerned, the Chief Executive will be writing to you separately.

            I should be obliged if you could let me have the above information by 16th
            June and, in the meantime, if you have any problems or queries please ring
                         (Ext. 4302) or             (Ext. 4416).




            City Treasurer
    R37 19                                                              CU.<>               iSlS              ' r J b S M
                                   C IT Y OF S H E FFIE LD -    KIE M O R A w jifuM                       *       I

From          City Treasurer                               To     Head of Administration and Legal
                                                                  Department

Date                                                                             ADMINISTRATION & LEGAL
             8th June,      1989
Ref.         MD/BAK                                                                  r=PT., H & f H s s S v
Tel. Ext.    4302 -                                        Ref.                     H5A:> C /jASSriTAMT
                                                                                A                           L.S.

                                                                                B        m w r a i i r PAA

                                                                                C     O .S .M .j   Li'J       ELN'S   PSO
                                                                                GS                                    cc


             HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY



             Following the last meeting of the Policy Committee the Chief Executive and
             myself have been requested to prepare a comprehensive report on the
             Hillsborough tragedy.  In addition the Council has been asked by the Home
             Office to provide an estimate of the total cost of the Inquiry, for which
             they have undertaken to reimburse the Council for the costs incurred.

             In order that I have as full a picture as possible, therefore, and that a
             reasonable assessment can be made of the effects on committee cash limits
             and all proper costs are reclaimed from the Home Office, I should be
             obliged if you would provide me with the following information:-

                 1.      The actual costs incurred to date plus the estimated total costs
                         relating to the conducting of the Inquiry.  These costs should
                         include the direct costs (including officer time, hire of rooms
                         etc.) and additional costs resulting from the Inquiry (e.g. hire
                         of alternative accommodation or loss of income because facilities
                         are not available for other uses).

                 2   .   Actual and estimated total costs relating to the operational
                         aspects of the Disaster itself (including the Inquest).

                 3.      Ongoing costs arising from the Tragedy.

             It would be helpful if you can provide as much detail as possible on the
             costs incurred but in particular all costs need to be divided between what
             is merely an allocation of expenditure that the Council would have
             incurred anyway (e.g. officers' time) and that which is extra expenditure
             (e.g. overtime, car allowances etc.).

             As far as the need for a review of the Council's peacetime emergencies
             plan is concerned, the Chief Executive will be writing to you separately.

             I should be obliged if you could let me have the above information by 16th
             ■June— an^—  the meantime, if you have any problems or queries please ring
                          (Ext. 4302) or             (Ext. 4416),




       z/cV City"Treasurer
     v
                              CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM

•From     Director of Health and Consumer       To    Acting Head of A d m i n istration & Legal
                             Services                                                Department


Date      22nd May, 1989
Ref       EPU/JCH/YG
Tel Ext    4609 - Mr.                           Ref                         (U       F


                                                                        SLQjAi"
          SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
          SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB

          Many thanks for your memo of the 12th May, 1989, I would wish to make the
          following comments:-

          With regard to making an assessment of the meeting of the 27th April, I
          enclose copies of notes of that meeting made by three of my officers
          immediately after the meeting and completely independent of each other.        I
          am of the opinion that these notes and the ones made by your Chief
          Licensing Officer accurately represent both the statements made and the
          general mood of the meeting.

          I am assured by my staff that the re-scheduled inspection of Bramall Lane
          commenced as agreed on the 16th May and has proceeded in a most
          satisfactory and constructive manner.  Representatives of the Club have
          been most helpful and have expressed their regret as to the way events
          proceeded on the 27th.

          Though I take exception to some of the rather derogatory and inaccurate
          comments made by Dr. Eastwood during your meeting with him, in the light
          of the relationship which now appears to be developing between officers of
          this Department and representatives of the Club I would consider that
          entering into a protracted debate on the events of the 24th and 27th April
          would to a large extent be pointless and could be counter-productive.
          However should you wish to discuss the matter further then the relevant
          officers of my Department would be glad to assist you.

          In the wider complex of inspection procedures for the purposes of
          enforcing the 1975 Act, I feel that the comments made by Dr. Eastwood and
          the memo to yourself from the Building Surveyor would indicate that there
          is still some confusion among certain parties as to the policy which is
          currently being operated.  I feel that it is appropriate that, for the
          current ground inspections, the policy as laid out by your Chief Licensing
          Officer in his memo of the 26th April, 1989 should be continued.  However
          I also feel that we should, as a matter of urgency, critically assess the
          way in which the inspections are carried out and the manner in which the
          Working Party operates in its role of providing technical and expert
          advice to the City Council to enable it to adequately fulfil its
          responsibilities under the Act.  I am sure that as part of this review we
          will find that some of Dr. Eastwood's more constructive comments will have
          merit.




           Director of Health and Consumer Services


           Enc.
                     SAFETY IN SPORTS GROUNDS INSPECTION



           BRAMALL LANE STADIUM - 27TH APRIL, 1989      - 10.00 A.M.




After a brie f i n g r the inspecting team, comprising myself (              ),
           1 1                1,                  >
            and                  departed for the Bramall Lane Stadium.



We arrived at the ground as arranged at 10.00 a.m. and were asked to
assemble in the Director's Suite.



I was introduced to Dr. Eastwood (Eastwood and Partners), Mr. Dooley
(Chairman S.U.F.C.), Mr. Capper (Secretary S.U.F.C.).   Other agencies
represented at the meeting included D. Bownes (Licensing O f f i c e r , Admin.
                  and Legal), Building Surveyors (later identified    and as
Arthur Butler), South Yorkshire Police, South Yorkshire Fire Services
and the club's groundsman.


On my introduction to Mr. Capper I cordially informed him that my team
consisted of a relatively large member of staff because I intended to
inspect the ground comprehensively but with as little inconvenience to
the club as possible.  Mr.  Capper stated that he understood and
appreciated my approach and concern.



Dr. Eastwood called the meeting to order and asked if David Bownes would
like to take the Chair.  David Bownes said that we would like to get on
with the inspection.  At this point Dr. Eastwood then began to recount
at length his displeasure at the incident of the 24th April, 1989 when
officers from this Department were asked to leave the stadium.



I pointed out that the events of Monday 24th April were due to a
communication problem and should be resolved outside the current
meet ing.


Dr. Eastwood replied that he was not going to allow a similar occurrence
and that he was going to lay down the rules for the meeting (he refused
to refer to "inspection").   The "rules" included the following:-

  i)   Inspections would be made only following adequate
       prior notice to the club.

 ii)   Delegations would be limited to two or three
       senior experienced officers from each agency.

iii)   The tour of inspection would be carried out
       en-masse accompanied by Dr. Eastwood and
       discussion would take place at that time.

 iv)   Inspecting officers would not be allowed to run
       around unaccompanied.
I pointed out to Dr. Eastwood that my remit was quite clear and that I
had written guidance from the Certificating Officer (David Bownes) that
the purpose of our visit was to inspect the premises in order to glean
information as to the general health and safety provision at the ground.
Also, that any consultation and discussion with the club or its
representative would take place after all inspecting agencies had met to
discuss their inspection findings.  David Bownes confirmed my
interpretation of the reason for the visit.


Dr. Eastwood further reiterated that accompanied inspection was
essential"and that he would accompany me.  I pointed out that I intended
to inspect the ground in two teams so as to minimise the time taken to
inspect the ground.


Dr. Eastwood reiterated that he did not wish unaccompanied inspection to
take place and repeatedly referred to how things used to be with the old
authority and how good relationships had been maintained until this
Department (Health and Consumer Services) had become involved.  He again
repeated his requirement for accompanied en-masse inspection.

I stated that the inspection suggestions as put forward by Dr. Eastwood
were not satisfactory to me and that in the circumstances I had no
alternative but to withdraw from the inspection and began to leave.
David Bownes also stated that he would not take any further part in the
inspection.  As he left David Bownes enquired as to what action the
other parties intended to take.  I am of the impression that the others
present intended to continue with the visit.


Immediately outside the building I agreed with David Bownes that we
would attempt to contact           and Mark Webster as soon as possible
to appraise them of the situation.   I was unable to contact
by mobile phone so returned to the office at approximately 11.00 a.m.
when I disturbed Management Team to report the outcome of the visit.

 At approximately 11.30 I contacted David Bownes by telephone and was
 assured that Mark Webster was fully in support of our actions and that a
 letter was being drafted to the club which will be available for our
 approval this afternoon.




S^. Head ley
 27       .
 (MMGAED)
              fodi :                                        ^        /CJ G 0           ft7V f

                pttUU4i                                          (JhxLlo{         ^c&tidl                                       j   (li'csMi-dlloMf,




                h                                                             ^Uh                Cw         /bdc        oJr fti’ODQ-r/l                     . dc             ffciM.

             .Skriw-ztL         j & Z ' (jh*h                    ( W         C*                                                      (mJ         r &s m
                                                                                                                                                                /
             o il                                               (A&ft fit
    W       ■•'J/V • ' Z ^ r         W^/Tt             rJrTTH                      iwwi           tp i * " i'~r^        J       C r ^ J f o . .                 " T f " iClS-S

#            A.t/a         ^             IfcT         ''inspjifc**               A&G&cLuhe                                                 ffc
                                            , mfilcurtirf?
                                                /fe ^ C <di                                U<rdcL
               i^cJLUp o^fcrsM-dt X i^ ^\Jfj't^nA^CJ(K u* Ck fy'/i1'-^ ^LCLCi^i^dMf£&( (-pj l^j^T<l^f.
               lie                 ^wttwM                       r    Ll      (M*lc\              /l&*4 (j<M1                    M ! /bt*J d^r_
              fund'JtfcjC ihy^ttw Z'^                                              /y b r * i* ( fet Ccwfi-e*/ ^C ^A r' fa&>d~                                               ctk.

              £XpJiUi*.          HQ             cU&U^£uCJL                    ’fcrifu T ' 9ym,uC^ o J tiV                                          y ljUw ( tt* .
             c J m Jo          l*!fc >    *u~A& u X c f£                         lA «           iL j : {    J r-^ U   A / /W/W<l >fc                                        K < -S

             Ivxd Vt'ufcU J k c Ofi-^uC^'                                          &*-</                              't/tty^                      7%vL               ftu*
            Jzjjuj &~j,                                                                            tZj^-LixJr J ^ W                  QytUisi ■                  ^           f

    — '                                         •    1-J
                                                       wrnv
                                                        f • u-c
                                                    ■ y j   v v l^
                                                                i            /)/
                                                                              / I *.               ^    ■



0           l-jl'dsi        Gwr*/e*Jr~' f h r ‘H<y\iLC&Jn^                                                                                          J   ^ -iO



             uM p j      i/lilrUTwL          <£v k / u £            Cfyy /^ jt^ A j^ M                 !// 'r to ti/J tift/                /   n ^ M c tu ’VK ^         1

             ^j){'                 U)cn^i/ /
                                           ^iXt-Ci                         ^Ci$\         [fao               bySZtdw t o d
              Ikxt                                     um lcl 4% art ct^jl y f e w                               "     &c((mlaH/tt( ly^Lu^oc^j
          (^rt                     c^
                                    j A slM                                   1±                                      <ud£rt(teA                                        La,

            d^C M A ^ t \                                   v                '
                                                                                                        itytLoiu^        Ojzr^^i £*-

                   JjZZl                   s1wrrmm              1tfCS
                                                                  t—w                     «. i
                                                                                             ^r'
                                                                                               jz■
                                                                                                 ,
                                                                                                 »          d'<icu4fau\
                                                                                                            —‘x ’ "- * -u/viUM.
                                                                                                                            — * ^£jh\
                                                                                                                                y i»  fU>u_J.
                                                                                                                                      j ~
          UaaX j I'     4 JsJA\r             tjasi                          &iMc / ^ W / w * ^                              6       ik t*”         3    .           a Juq    ^/

        ftitt\/h        $ [z e a l d& f>h                              (                                                                                                    y,
    ^y.                            crdo/                            vtv^.               Czr/’
                                                                                            ^isfdwt

        hc$ 'trdt ftrym/

                      ^fkSAM
                                                                                                  u

    tfa    9r /tr ^ i 4                   A                                a ^ c ( J       ^      ^          /V£
    C ^ /r u frs j~ -lb ~ '                   (y              .      .     A    /      /                      J
    ^Qsdct $au*2A £<x/lUi*-lC'( f a r ftkuccJ]                            fJ ^ fs   kT         (j)f- i/l<rzd.
                                yjjfdtjxi                /^       H)\-    J% ^ J n ^ d                  'kg^.

     Jy&       J)rtCMtfir*         fcu\                U<ddd       l^di    <rU-                jfc~


                          rjg^i /X**C{         Jh£)^     UUKJ               &w L d h c          idfad' %          axmx   .

       fjo       _M-      j U f y ' / & x /                                ,>              , & ~ L c / rUy

9     yW
       M iLlL*? 7/                        f                         ik\T C $ d h    yh



          Wz         [h r
          uT' \.CL0~s\ S x O                                                                                             U



                             “         3




                                                         **^<^S^QjJLk                L — c t n <=s_        V o        cxsr-v_                                                _______

           Q _         VjO<2^ Q _ 8                  K ! 3 ^ 0             - W         Q><r^ik,^s»Vj<^.                                                     _____________

    f v ^ o o                 ^>-0<^ga.V                             r e ^ Q ^ ^ s ^ J n o ® - ,           Q<-^ M            ... - P ^ r ^ . ^ p ^ U ^ C L . ^ -

     V^'^^Acl>xs c ^                                               q_^\cd                     ^                                    ^    o   -_Qc^r\_-^<^^sa.o.


    o - ^                                                    . .         ______            ______ _____                   _________________________ _
     C A j s ^ io            <c S 2 ^ ^ ^ = > r x _ ^                     ) C c z > -^ o c X ^ -^ 9 s ^           .. <^C1^        t^ ^ S p < S r > 4 ^ o Q ^



               A S c i s ^ o ^ . ^                            ^ ^ o k o ^ v ^ \                                   ^       <^_                            ij* ^    L     _


    ' ^    r     - Q    ^    Q     ^       z ^   a   o   k          £ y * ^ \     i o s c ^ n                                      ^ ^ ^ . . . Q $ U o ^ c a > v - .,

    cx\-. O v ^ r                                                               cs^fecs        o    __o O .                                    .*^^_ApO~\                                   -~ -_




                 ___________________ C x ^ x O e c ^ ,                               vQ-                                                             W     ^ p u v i - ^                           „.

    <S-Cv<2            52>V^M^_ -CxT\C^-                               O^CxJLV" U j J^ a                    ^SQ-^p<<J2x J(<cX M , C^vc^ -t fc A ___
.Leo.— Cfc5v^S^.._„ p'CD                                                                                                               ^       _~u_
                                                                                                                                                             k ^ C ) -----------------------------------
    vKs        _                                               -£l-^<sr\                                                                         _   _________



    J o o ^ o                     O    k -                               ..T^hiC      -Qocfcw          ^

<P^~.V~^£> 0                < ^ “ S-'yv rs_ _ _ <=*•£“                   ^ _ c 2s .r :... ^lb > , S Q r n . o l       ; ^ T ^ ^ e ^ v e /v o g o i o ,Q ? iq (> a
^ < ^ = !^ S                QSXS^jL^.                    _c1^0<J&^q>C\ —. ^ o ^ _ O v S . i _ . ^ < o ^ C j                                      ^ < 2 jQa^€«-X.
                                 O ^ L ^ X S S jQ 1                P -v C ^ S     V -^ S ^ v -A ^      -^ C ^ A                             O ^ O C C SV --\                              ocA‘
j   3 2 s£ >                                                                                               Aic^ y i ^ /                c^c J
                                                                                                                                                                                                  -*‘*
                                                                                                                                                                                                  * - -j
 4   k

                                                  0^2)               V V r                                          U sesfcS-A.                                  t^ve^

 X'CvCl}         <^<^OC2b~               '        1^         ^            C       T      ^     O      ^         i          (OcJpC^           i“

 H   r                                            “t f e r ^           ^ S ^ ^ S A           -k d y ^ K ^ K


                 vC\-^          -    ^        O    ^                                     A = ^                            - £ c ^ W         g     - ^       . ^ O q J

 (' O c » - ~ A ^ >                                              ^ \J L ~                              - ^"vc^LvAC\            L c x J le J '     gyy^)      -^ -4 ^ r \:

 OCiv             -fct         q U A )                  V                                                             .

v V       -G^^-cs^ook                                                             4 L = d r          w ^ t x V l feUv^> c ^ e ^ s f e - ^ V
           ■Q—        ^'C3skjO<^^                                O    A        '"m i^ Q j                     ^ c x b        c 4 , ^ x s j ^                o ^

           c^.         V— C X 2 > V ^ —                «^J                                                tCrV^>           ^vxa__                   /^>-0)

^Cxj--AvrNp!                                           /y^\c^_                  rx^Aj^O            -Qo<r~                           L r ^ ^ ^ s d c ^ o i o ^



W'* v»
    r                                        S rss ^
                                             ^     o ooss^ N^Av.              x o ^ ^ - A     v-^Oc2_
                                                                                              v-^vj<2_                                rO~ y
                                                                                                                                          d =X^ A- r \VoO

0 > r r ^ ' o ^ rS Q k         O t - A                 ^a.           w \ 3 p < s c i > < c i r s)         v^r\^>j^/'                        rx ^ _ V < s ^        <v > )

          _ T v D c s g * f \ -^>

VV        ^ £s^ x^ c> «^o                         cx J ss^                    ^ o j^ r       Gr^cJv           c ^ C to a c )                            ^cJt-y^'O
^vji^vsxJr-                         v—                       Q(3*r\ci                        c f e '      'X X * ^ c ^                      0   &       QS^S^-4

                         ^TS^>s\cC5^-\                                                ^Cx^ctb          ^ P V O < p k * \ o          V * < £ v O ^            (


' ^ J L                                           \s3        ~fei_              C>(^\ c ^             <*3—            <Si-=C*_Jt-         I C ° ^ f “\
Sheffield Libraries and Information Service
                                         REPORT
               R e p o r t to :     P olicy Committee



              R e p o rt by:        Dir e ct or of Libraries and Information Services



                       D a te :     23rd May,   1932-----



                  S u b je c t :    The H/lls b or ou g h Tragedy:   The Libraries Response
                                                        ^    --------------------------------------------

                 P u rp o se:       To inform Members of the involvement of Sheffield
                                    Libraries and Information Services and to make
                                     recommendations for the future




 R e c o m m e n d a tio n s :

                  1.   To note the arrangements made by S he ff iel d Libraries and
                       Information Services to operate the Hillsb oro ug h Helpline

                  2.    To investigate the potential for developing arrangements
                        for establishing a "Helpline" as part of the Plan for
                        Peacetime Emergencies




 R ep o rt p re p a re d by :       Owen McDowell
                  P o s it io n :   Information Projects Co-ordinator

             T e le p h o n e :     734257



 B ackg ro u n d p ap ers:

                                                                      For full details of what
                                                                      constitutes Confidential Exempt,
                                                                      please contact the Departmental
                                                                      Agenda Officer,Tel 734708.




                                                                      c   1   r   r
                                                                                      "WLibraries
                                                                      C O J * CI        I sr.d !nf:rms!;cn Ser/icss
         The Hillsborough Tragedy: The Libraries Response


Following the tragedy at Hillsborough Football Ground in which 95 people
were killed and many more were injured there was an urgent need for
Council Departments to work in a concerted effort to assist those who
had been involved.  To this end this Department approached Family and
Community Services with the offer of running a telephone service as a
way of coping with the many demands being put upon it for information
related to the tragedy.  Family and Community Services accepted this
offer, and this Department's Information Projects Co-ordinator was
requested to bring it into operation as soon as possible.  This report
provides a brief review of this service after two weeks of operation.

On Tuesday, 18th April - three days after the tragedy - a meeting took
place between officers from the F & CS Divisional Office and from
Libraries Department.  This decided what form the telephone information
line should take and it drew up a list of key telephone contact numbers
between the two Departments.  It was agreed that the service would be
based at Hillsborough Library and that it would be called the
"Hillsborough Helpline".

Publicity for the Helpline was of paramount importance so this
Department circulated a news release to the two local radio stations,
"The Star" and other newspapers, and the two regional television
services.  Posters and leaflets were produced and sited in shops in the
Hillsborough area and throughout the Libraries service. Besides the
initial publicity "The Star" agreed to :arry a daily free advert
inviting readers to call the Helpline.

For the first three days the Helpline was in operation it was extremely
busy. Requests for help fell into the following categories:

(a) People wanting to find out if relatives or friends had been involved
    in the tragedy;

(b) Survivors wanting to re-establish contact with people who had helped
    them in the aftermath of the tragedy;

 (c) Requests for counselling services from people who had suffered
     trauma from the event;

 (d) Enquiries from bereaved relatives in relation to the Disaster Fund;

 (e) Many calls from all over the country asking about methods of making
     payments into the Disaster Fund;

 (f) Many offers of assistance - people offering free transport between
     Sheffield and Liverpool for survivors and bereaved families, offers
     of accommodation.

 The Helpline was staffed by volunteer helpers who usually staff the
 Department's annual Winter Hotline and by staff at Hillsborough Library.

 To ensure that as much information as possible was provided to callers
 Close liaison between this Department and other agencies was maintained.
 The co—ordinator attended the daily F & CS Task Team meetings which
                                      2


     consisted of Hillsborough F & S staff, hospital social workers and a
     representative of South Yorkshire Police.  The co-ordinator also met
     with voluntary agencies in the city which were providing counselling
     services for those who had been deeply affected by the tragedy.

6.   After two weeks of operation the Helpline is now much quieter, dealing
     mainly with requests for information concerning donations to the
     Disaster Fund.  The Helpline will be kept open for the next couple of
     weeks, and the decision to close it down will be made in consultation
     with F & CS and with relevant voluntary groups.

Conclusions

The experience described above demonstrates that the City Council does have
the ability to set up and operate a Helpline Service very quickly and
effectively.  With foresight the "Helpline" could have been operating from
the evening of the tragedy.  This suggests that arrangements for setting up
an emergency Helpline should be specifically written in to the Planning for
Peacetime Emergencies.

Recommendations

1.   To note the arrangements made by Sheffield Libraries and Information
     Services to operate the Hillsborough Helpline.

2.   To investigate the potential for developing arrangements for
     establishing a "Helpline" as part of the Plan for Peacetime Emergencies.




May 1989                                     Patricia M. Coleman
                                             Director of Libraries
                                             and Information Services
                  S H E F F IE L D M A G I S T R A T E S ' C O U R T
                                                                                      CASTLE STREET
          J O H N R IC H M A N , B.A.
                      SOLICITOR                                                        SHEFFIELD S3 8LU
            CLERK TO THE JUSTICES
                                                                                      TELEPHONE No (0742) 768 53 5
              F. S. T . DEALY,                                                         FAX; (0742) 720129
                      BARRISTER
        DEPUTY CLERK TO T HE JUSTICES



        O u r Ref..                 10970                  Y o u r Ref.               16th May, 1989

                                                                                                                           R3869




                       Dear Mr. Bownes                                                                               Lf-    S -fF   ■

                                                   Safety of Sportsground Act, 1975

                              I am aware that as a result of the Hillsborough tragedy the
                       conditions attached to the Safety Certificates at the two football
                       grounds in Sheffield are to be reviewed.   The   Courts Committees
                       in South Yorkshire have recently met to discuss the implications of
                       the Hillsborough events, and in particular, the possibility that the
                       removal of fencing within grounds may lead to an increase in hooliganism
                       and offending inside football grounds.     Clearly an increase in
                       offending has implications as far as the court is concerned and
                       contingency plans with regard to sentencing policy and planning of
                       courts need to be put in hand.

                              In view of this I would be grateful if I could be given an
                       early indication of any policy changes that you intend to introduce
                       in respect of the Safety Certificates in question.



                                                            Yours sincerely




                        Mr. D. Bownes,
                        Chief Licensing Officer,
                        Sheffield City Council,
                        Town Hall,
                        Sheffield.




                                                                          Mr                                    269
                                                                                               EXT. No.
FOR TELEPHONE ENQUIRIES ON T H IS M ATTER PLEASE ASK FOR
       V
                                 CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM

From         Director of Health & Consumer         To    Mark Webster, Acting Head of Admin
             Services                                    & Legal
                                                         For fhp qt~t~ent~a on-of Mg-B-ftownes
Date         15 May 89                                         ADMINISTRATION & LEGAL
Ref          JH/ML
                                                                  D EPT., SHEFFIELD. _ _
                                                   Ref             HEAD b T iA S S T S T A N T
Tel Ext      4609 - Mr                                              DEPT. 1        HEAD ___




                                                             1 C   O .S .M .I   LIB   | ELNS     PSO
                                                             !C
                                                                                                 cc

             HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY

             Having read the letter from the Treasury Solicitor dated 9 May 89 re the
             above I would wish to make the following comments.

       1.    Stadium capacity and means of escape are specific areas on which South
             Yorkshire Fire Service were asked to comment under the existing
             administrative system for the certification process, similarly crowd
             control and evacuation procedures are within the remit of South Yorkshire
             Police.  On a general note however the central pens at the west end would
             appear to be too small to warrant separate access/egress gangways.   The
             area immediately surrounding the exit to the tunnel is yellow cross
             hatched to identify this as a gangway area.

       2.    The provision of directional flow exit and emergency exit signs are a
             specific function of the grounds safety officer and also an integral part
             of a comprehensive safety management plan.  You will recall that as a
             result of advice from this department the Club have been encouraged to
             appoint the Club Secretary as Safety Officer with effect from October
             1987.  However with the exception of this appointment no significant
             progress has been made in drawing up a comprehensive safety management
             plan.   My officers are of the opinion that the sign provision is both
             inadequate and ineffective.

       3.    The location and strength of crush barriers should have been adequately
             covered by the Building Surveyor's report and the annual report of the
             Club's Consulting Engineer.  However the enclosed plan of the west end
             drawn up after the events of the 15th April indicate that the barriers do
             not fully comply with the Green Guide in terms of height and spacing.

       4.     The statement that the access tunnel is not of a constant gradient is
              correct.  The enclosed drawing shows the relevant changes in gradient
              from 1:23 to 1:6. Whether or not this constitutes a potential hazard is a
              subjective assessment which of course is much aided by hindsight.

        5.    I am not in a position to comment on the references to the height of the
              turnstile wall.

       6      Access to emergency vehicles is once again a central element of the safety
              management plan which the Club has, until very recently i.e.  post
              distaster, been reluctant to progress save for, as recently mentioned, the
              appointment of the Club Secretary as Safety Officer.

              With regard to the provision of First Aid facilities and equipment; this
              has been the subject of extended correspondence between this department
              and yourselves between August 1987 and February 1988 (copies can be made
              available).  The essence of the correspondence has been an attempt to
              secure an adequately constructed and equipped First Aid Room and a
              formalisation of the arrangement for attendance of First Aiders.
I trust you find these comments of use and assistance.  If you wish to
discuss these or any other matters further then please do not hesitate
contact me on the number shown.




D W Purchon
Director of Health & Consumer Services
   R 371 9                                                                                Sch 9 1 6 0
                             C IT Y OF S H E FFIELD — M E M O R A N D U M

From The Building Surveyor,                         To Acting Head of Administration and
     Department of Land and Planning                   Legal Department

Date 12th May, 1989
Ref- KWSB/K27ACA/KTH
Tel. Ext.4i69 - Mr. Blount                           Ref.GP/262/DMB




       Hillsborough Disaster - boundary wall running from                   W-rrrrn   t    :
       South Stand to Leppinqs Lane end
                                                                            Igs j
       I refer to your memorandum of 8th May, 1989. Might I say at once that the
       entreaty contained in your fourth paragraph whilst understood is quite
       unnecessary; we are all well aware of our responsibilities in the matter.

       Turning to the matter of the condition of the wall the short answer is
       that its condition had not caused concern to inspecting officers of this
       Division prior to April 15th, 1989, nor, so far as I am aware to the
       Club's consultant engineer advisors. Nevertheless an examination of the
       wall by Gordon Levers and myself after the events of April 15th showed
       that it was capable in places of being 'rocked' and was out-of-plumb to
       varying degrees along its length.

       To give amplification to the above statement I can state as follows:-

       The fact of such a wall being out-of-plumb is not necessarily significant
       in the context of performing its function. In this case calculations
       indicate and usage proved that the wall was capable of sustaining normal
       lateral loads, such as wind, which it is reasonable to suppose that it
       would be subjected to. The wall acts principally as a boundary wall
       running parallel to and dividing the flow of spectators entering or
       leaving the ground and it is certain that its original design would not
       have allowed for the high lateral forces which can be created by masses of
       people pressing against such a wall from one side or the other.

       The fact that the wall could be 'rocked' in places after the events of
       April 15th leads one to the probability that it could be due to damage to
       the ground bedding courses caused by tensile stresses created by such
       excessive lateral pressures, from one side or the other.

       The wall, as with other structural elements in the ground, had been
       viewed as part of the regular visits to the ground by the former S.Y.
       Working Party prior to 1986 and subsequently by your Advisory Group team.
       So far as I am concerned none of my inspecting officers can recall, nor do
       the files present any evidence, that the wall had given any cause for
       concern as to. its stability on these inspections. According to records
       the wall has been required to be re-pointed at regular intervals to
       preserve its strength and integrity, but currently there is a clear need
       for fresh work in this regard. A few years ago a former A.R.P. building
       was removed adjacent to Gate C, on the advice of the police as I
       understand it. This did of of course remove some lateral support to that
       part of the wall as a consequence, but the wall is slightly thicker at
       that point than elsewhere.

       One final point; the action taken by me to deal with this wall as a
       potentially dangerous structure was taken under the Building Act
       1984 sections 77 and 78. This will if necessary be justified on the
       grounds of the condition of the wall as found after the disaster and in
       view of the then intended re-opening of the exit route from the
       South Stand to Leppings Lane as the Club resumed its business.
It is my view that this wall did not fall within the category of a wall
"used to divide spectator accommodation" as described in paragraph 103 of
the Green Guide which would have caused a designer and/or the licensing
authority to view it as a wall likely to be subjected to high lateral
loading. In this context the wall as it stood, prior to the events of
April 15th, could be described, in my view, as satisfying the relevant
requirements of the Green Guide, apart from the question of preventative
maintenance referred to earlier.
Acting Head of Department                     Director     of      Land   and
Administration and Legal                      Planning

12 May 1989                                   For the Attention of
GP/262/DMB/GW                                 Mr A Butler
4690 - Mr Bownes                              iBnildlncr Surveyors)




HILLSBOROUGH XVQOUOr

As you know, the Council is preparing its statement to the Hillsborough
Inquiry*   Counsel has requested that the Building Surveyors submit
a report on the technical aspects of the Leppings Lane end of the
Stadium. The report should include

      Crush   barriers,   radial   fences,   perimeter   fences,    gangways,
      etc.

Obviously# reference should be made to the Green Guide and comparisons
drawn# where appropriate.   It is apparent that your report can only
be based on the information which you have to hand at the moment;
it should contain comments as to its limitations, if appropriate.
Please bear in mind that you may be required, in due course, to give
evidence before the Inquiry.   Would you please let me have the first
draft of your report as soon as possible as Counsel for the Inquiry
expects to receive the Council's complete statement by Thursday 18
May 1989.   You should also be aware that I have asked Mr           to
report on his recent involvement at Hillsborough.
Acting Head of Department                   Director   of   Land    and
Administration and Legal                    Planning

12 May 1989                                 For the Attention of
GP/262/DMB/GW                               m   T1          |
4690 - Mr Bownes                            (Bnildlp^ Snrwtyora)




HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY

I refer to the recent works which you      have initiated at Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club.   As part of     the Council's submission to
the Public Inquiry I have been advised    to obtain a detailed written
statement from you about all aspects of    the problems you have dealt
with.

Pleaser therefore, let me have a draft (as soon as possible) of your
statement, which should include your professional judgement as to*-

(a)   whether or not any problems with the wall and related        areas
      would have been apparent, prior to 15 April 1989 t and

(b)   how the defects are likely to have arisen.

Please^bear in mind that you may be required to give evidence before
the Inquiry at a later date.
 The Acting Head of Adnlnistration                 The Building Surveyor,
 r.nd Lc-gal Department.                           Department of Land snd Planning.
                                                   f.a.o. Mr. P..    G. Blount
 6th May, 1989
 GP/262/DMB
 4690 - Mr. Eownes




Hillsborough Disaster - Unstable        Uall running fron the
South Stand to tiv:- Loppings Lane      End of Sheffield Wednesday Stadium

I reie to t ilC VcJ 1 \rhich, p.s you   know, has recently been subject   to works
supervised by your Public Safety        Unit.

Obviously questions will be asked about this wall at the inquiry and I suspect
chi’t particular reference will be made as to whether or not the Council was
aci'rE of its condition prior to the disaster.

yculc! you please therefore ascertain from your staff whether or not any of
then lied any knowledge of difficulties with the wall.

It is vitally important that any information obtained during the course of
your enquiries is both properly recorded and entirely accurate.

Obviously the Inquiry is shortly to reeonnsence and your urgent attention to
this natter is requested.  I look forward to hearing from you shortly.
Acting Head of Department:                    Mr I L Podmore
Administration and Legal                      Chief Executive

9 Hay 1989
AH/GW
4018 - Mr Webster




STRICTLY PRIVATE AMD CONFIDENTIAL




LICENSING OP SPORTS GROUNDS - MEMORANDUM BY COUNCILLOR BETTS

With reference to the communication of 25 April concerning the above
topic# I have now obtained David Bownes ' views which I will set out
as follows:-

(1)     The work on drawing together a "Code of Practice" has in fact
         now stopped owing to the work required on the Hillsborough
         Inquiry and it is not at all olear when it can be re-started.

(2)     The third paragraph of your memorandum of 25 April in so far
         that it relates to Sheffield Wednesday is# in David's view#
         a little over-stated.   He feels he tried to give the impression
         that Sheffield Wednesday is a well run club which does generally
         co-operate but he would not# however# use the words in the
         last two lines of the third paragraph.

(3)     David feels that the first part of paragraph (4) is reasonably
         accurate but the reason for the "extra leeway" is that in the
         absence of a Certificate the Council cannot require certain
         works to be done.  These works are mainly of a "house-keeping"
         nature and do not pose an immediate risk to spectator safety.


        David would also comment that# with regard to the second
        paragraph# that the reasons for pressing forward with the draft
        revised Safety Certificate Conditions is to place the Council
        in a position where it can require works to be done.       Such
        work is now proceeding and a draft certificate could be put
        before the meeting of the General Purposes Panel in June.
        This would enable certificate issue to take place immediately
        after the meeting and for any matters discovered on the annual
        inspection to be required under the appropriate certificate
        condition.

        Moreover# failure to comply with the requirement would amount
        to an offenae which the Council could take action upon.        In
        view of the terrible events at Hillsborough he feels# as do
        I, that it is plain that officers will have safety uppermost
        in their ninds when they visit all stadia and as a result
        although Clubs' views will be taken into account speedy decisions
        and action should follow (notwithstanding the recent problems
        with Sheffield United!).

(4)     David feels that paragraph (5) is actually wrong in that the
        Counoil aerely has to determine whether or not a person who
        applies to actually hold a certificate is a suitable person
        to do so.   The Council clearly has other powers in relation
        to unsafe stadia.  Finally# David feels that he ought to point
     oat that the conversation ha had with Councillor Batts was
     ■omawhat briaf and that parhaps fro* hia part ha fallad to
     fully axplaia tha cartifioation procaaa.

Mo doubt if you raquira any furthar information you will lat mm know.
Mit tik          -

   Z            1)0                               l i f t 1/6


   f it A             O f-        16.       //v     A




                                                                            Ca
   hu&                        tilt.                      ^ rr? .



               "[\< tfc fo                  U4/ W       fy^r A/L       T ^ t/}-r



   P in ,             M       T         &                 u > ITK& 1        fic $


        fa *          P   d   //wv
NOTE FROM COUNCILLOR BETTS - SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS



1.   The work on drawing together a "Code of Practice" has in fact now stopped
     owing to the work required on the Hillsborough Inquiry.  I am not sure when
     it can be re-started.

2.   The third paragraph of Councillor Betts' memorandum of 25th April in so far
      as it relates to Sheffield Wednesday is perhaps a little overstated.  I
      tried to give the impression that Sheffield Wednesday is a well run club
     which does generally co-operate.   I would not however use the words in the
      last two lines of the third paragraph.

3.   The first part of paragraph four is reasonably accurate but the reason for
      the "expert leeway" is that in the absence of a Certificate the Council
      cannot require certain works to be done.    These works are mainly of an
      "housing keeping" nature and do not pose an immediate risk to spectator
      safety.  As to the second half of the paragraph the reason for pressing
      forward with the draft revised Safety Certificate Conditions is to place the
      Council in a position where it can require works to be done.    This^work is
      now proceeding and I see 1no i-euuon why a draft certificate should'■aot be put
      before the meeting of the General Purposes Panel in June.    This would enable
      Certificate issue to take place immediately after the meeting and for any
      matters discovered on the annual inspection to be required under the
      appropriate Certificate Condition.    Failure to comply with the requirement
      would amount to an offence which the Council could take action upon.     In
      view of the terrible events at Hillsborough I think it is plain that
      Officers will have safety uppermost in their minds when they visit all
      stadia and that although Clubs' views will be taken into account speedy
      decisions and action should follow.

4.   Paragraph 5 is actually wrong'in fact the Council merely has to determine
     whether or not a person who applies to hold a certificate is a suitable
     person to do so.  The Council has other powers in relation to unsafe stadia.
     I think I should point out that the conversation with Councillor Betts was
     quite brief and perhaps I failed to fully explain the Certification system.




D.M. Bownes
3rd May, 1989




PB/27/DB35
                               C IT Y OF S H E FFIELD        MEMORANDUM

From        Councillor Clive Betts                      To      Mr. I. Podmore
            Leader                                              Chief Executive

Date        25 April 1989
Ref.        CJCB/DCS/1                                                           F EXECUTIVE
            4240                                                  C .P.U .
Tel. Ext.                                               Ref.                    SMEF'IRD       O-P.O.^
                                                                  -m -.                                         *h
                                                                             2 7 A P R 1989    PPR
                                                                  PTS3.iT                      M» /.   .»   —


                                                                             R.E.U.JPi.aUJ A -
                                                                   U.P.
            PRIVATE A ND CONFIDENTIAL
                                                                                     ».... /                         h .f a g m

            I thought I had better put down my memory of a conversation which   I had                                .,   *
            w i t h David Bownes with  regard to   licensing of  sports  grounds. The
            conversation took place on the 14 April; one day before  the Hillsborough
            disaster.

            I was    speaking to David Bownes w i t h regard to some work he was doing in
            trying to collate   the various   features      of football      grounds which we
            license,   together wit h the   requirements        that w e make under the various
            Codes of Practice and, also, the procedures and manuals which the Police
            and the Football Club use to control crowds.            The idea was that we would
            put together a detailed Code of Practice whic h could be used on a national
            basis as a counterproposal to the Gove r n m e n t ’s Membership Scheme.

            During the course of the conversation I said to Mr. Bownes that it was, of
            course, important that I understood what relationships had been like with
            the  clubs in the past.     I asked whether Sheffield Wednesday had ever shown
            any unwillingness to carry out any requests we had made under the safety of
            sports ground      legislation and Mr. Bownes replied that they had always co­
            operated w i t h everything that we had requested of them and,   indeed,  that
            they were      generally only too willing to do extra work to ensure that the
            ground met the requirements.

            W ith regard to Sheffield United, Mr. Bownes indicated  that  there were a
            number of    items where we had had problems persuading United that money
            should be spent.   Indeed, on some matters, we had given them extra   leeway
            and   further time   to make   improvements.   I suggested that we had to be
            absolutely certain about matters with regard to safety under the Act    and,
            on   this years inspection we should make it clear to United that there was
            no room for leeway and that they had    to ensure   that all matters were
            brought up    to an adequate and acceptable standard before the next season.
            I suggested w e ought to take a very firm line with United on such matters.

            Mr. Bownes agreed and indicated that the time might have come when we might
            have to refuse a certificate unless United were prepared to comply in every
            way w ith the appropriate requirements.

            I thought it might be appropriate for me to put down my    recollection of
            this  conversation.   You may   like to check it with Mr. Bownes to get his
            confirmation of it.




              CT. C. BETTS
M     t       A V T ~ iL   (ft-

'JHa .          o m ^ t    p/iy

    llh * > v d h .



          O /f^ p
    In i / 1S*                     C IT Y OF S H E F F IE L D — tVjEftlOKAftSDUWi

                 Councillor Clive Betts                    To        Mr. I. Podmore
From
                 Leader                                              Chief Executive


Date             25 April 1989
                                                                                   JCHicr EXECUTIVE
Ref.             CJCB/DCS/1                                             C.P.U.
                 4240                                       Ref.                   jf   S H E ~iaD    o .p .o   .
Tel. Ext.
                                                                         -MtSt
                                                                          Rjjo     2 7 A P R 1989                                  •w)
                                                                         r-**v5*7 i                                 - 4»—
                                                                                 4 fi.B.U. IP.£.C.U.|
                                                                          U.P. |
                 PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL                                                             — ^4- ~ 2             k $ g a ^ .-.


                 I thought I had better put down my memory of a conversation which   I had
                 w i t h David Bownes w ith regard to   licensing of  sports  grounds. The
                                                                                                                                   *-c
                 conversation took place on the 14 April; one day before  the Hillsborough
                 disaster.

                 I was    speaking to David Bownes w i t h regard to some w ork he was doing in
                 trying to collate the various    features     of football    grounds which we
                 license,   together with  the  requirements     that w e make under the various
                 Codes of Practice and, also, the procedures and manuals which the        Police
                 and the Football Club use to control crowds.        The idea was that we would
                 put together a detailed Code of Practice which could be used on a national
                 basis as a counterproposal to the G o v ernment’s Membership Scheme.

                 During the course of the conversation I said to Mr. Bownes that it was, of
                 course, important that I understood what relationships had been like with
                 the clubs in the past.      I asked whether Sheffield Wednesday had ever shown
                 any unwillingness to carry out any requests we had made under the safety of
                 sports  ground     legislation and Mr. Bownes replied that they had always co­
                 operated w i t h everything that we had requested of them and,   indeed,  that
                 they were      generally only too willing to do extra work to ensure that the
                 ground met the requirements.




                 w ay w i t h the appropriate requirements.

                  I thought it might be appropriate for me to put down my     recollection of
                  this  conversation.   You may   like to check it w ith Mr. Bownes to get his
                  confirmation of it.




                      . C. BETTS
Counc il lo r J Fiore                                 All Members of the
Chair: MEGS                                           Licensing Section
                                                      Administration and Legal
11   May 1939                                         Department




r»* saraif o f s u m    g r o o m *s m    «m   bxllsbobougb    m gn tBY

Further to the        recent memorandum from theChief Executive thanking
everyone for their efforts with regard to the arrangements for the
a bove inquiry,     I thought it appropriate that I pat on record my
a p p re ciation of the work a n d commitment shown by all members of the
S ection in p r eparing the documentation for the Inquiry in a very
professional m a n ne r in a very         short   timescale,    whil st   at   the   same
time en suring that a service is         maintained  to the    public.

X feel that the above is merely yet another example of tooth the
commitment and    integrity which I have come to appreciate from all
members of this area of the Department and X am anxious toreassure
everyone* at least as far as I am concerned that It is very much
appreciated and it is not taken for granted,
                                                                               ®k     \J
 Sheffield City Council                                                                     ills-
 Chief Whip:   Councillor Alan Wigfield                                  Labour Group Office,
               Tel: 0742-735589                                          Town Hall,
                                                                         Sheffield S1 2HH.
 Secretary:    Councillor Howard Knight
                                                                         Facsimile: 0742-735003
               Tel: 0742-735588


HK/HC



9th May 1989




Cantril Farm Labour Party
Members Branch

Stockbridge Village
Liverpool
L28 4EJ



Dear

Thank you for your letter expressing the gratitude  of Cantril Farm Labour
Party to the people of Sheffield for the support, care and kindness they have
shown to the people from Mersyside following the Hillsborough tragedy.

I read your letter to the Labour Group members   of the City Council     last
night, and I am sending a copy to various Chief Officers so
that  they can pass on your thanks to officers of the City Council who have
been heavily involved in trying to respond as far as we have been able to the
needs of people from Merseyside.

There  is  still a considerable amount of grief in Sheffield about the events
at Hillsborough as people felt that we failed as hosts to our visitors.   One
of  the things that has provided support to them in recent weeks has been the
continuing letters and messages of thanks from people in Merseyside  for the
way in which the people of Sheffield responded.

I hope   that out of the tragic events will arise a new understanding and
relationship between Sheffield and Merseyside.

If there is anything which the Labour Group can do   to   assist        this     process
please do not hesitate to contact me.

Our best wishes and thanks

Yours fraternally



                                                             fSTRATION & LEGAL
COUNCILLOR HOWARD A. KNIGHT
                                                             s i. ^S H E F FIELD.
                                                            AD OFlASSiSTANT . e
Copies:       City Treasurer                                 ->3T   I     HEAD     L-°-
              Director of F. & CS
              Shirley Lanstone
                                                            - 9     m     1989    PAA
              Chief Executive
              Acting Head of Admin & Legal
              Director of Health & C.S.
                                                                                                                                                                                           Secretary
                       MEMBERS BRANCH
                                                                                                                                                               b'tockbridge Village.
                                                                                                                                                                                                   -2 < X , L Z $
                                                                                                                                                                                                               9

                                                                                                                                                                          ^           2=T? i c ^       S   y ^ < T


                       <7*1
                                                                        ^                                                                   <uU                                              W             £         M
                                                                    M       A /O /   :    / / v > » i/ a   /       -/j)                         <        y;         i                              J                     I'
          Ov^-7




                                                      /       „ w       ^                            lU>Vx^ (r)


;                                     W               ft*                                                                 .


I                                                                                    /m               3        c   l: c       / a   ^       ^            t u            / ^       r    u      ^        s       ,



|W 4 h f a ( X O K                                         f / o r f t o g , 4 / f a g 6 tV K O ^ f s ,                                                         jUtlUicl

    l/l/ja-fa hcud Jo /M a^ J/oFiis c//ka,d6iess                                                                                                              /^ 4^ iJuohHsic/
               $   o    /n    S   C   ^ $ iU   \, £   ,@       6        }                                                                       j    3
                                                                                                                                                     '        /fh   $         <   3    ?



    / n    &   J   f   ^ W                .%               5 ,                                                                                                                                             -




    M * '#& & £■                          w                AucAf& h $ 3 J a id k r ^ '
    J s iM U M < $ & / / & $                              M         o i£ j e^ £6 ^                                        /J y U t,v t                                            /

    fe f i j $ ^ c ^ A 6 z                                              & ar-/^ o^ p^ t ,?//& *£$
                                                                                                                          £/< m         s                 4tf?i



                                                                                                                                                    2? &
            HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER CO-ORDINATING GROUP

                    Meeting held 3 May 1989


Presents     Messrs M Webster, D Bownes,          and R Sewell
             (Administration and Legal Department);      Mr K
             Blount (Department of Land and Planning); Mr
                          (Family   and   Community   Services
             Department); Mr D Purchon (Health and Consumer
             Services) and Mr P O'Neill (Personnel Department)




                                                                 ACTION

(1)   MINUTES

      The Minutes of the meeting of the Group held on 28
      April were received and arising therefrom the Group
      noted:-

      (a)    the arrangements which had been made for     the
             Inquiry to begin hearing evidence on 15      May
             in the Council Chamber; and

      (b)    the problems which these arrangements presented
             regarding the venue     for the Annual Meeting
             of the City Council on 17 May.

(2)   INSPECTION ARRANGEMENTS

      Bramall Lane Stadium

      The Group were notified of correspondence which had
      been received from Sheffield United PC following
      the   inspection   of   the   Bramall   Lane  Stadium.
      Consideration was given to the terms of a measured
      response to the points raised in the correspondence        Mr M Webster and
      which would form the basis of a reply to be submitted      Mr D Bownes
      to Sheffield United within the next 24 hours.

      Hi 11 sboroucrh Stadium

      The Group was informed that the West Midlands Police
      had notified Sheffield Wednesday PC that they had
      no objection to the resumption of football at the
      Hillsborough Stadium on the understanding that the
      West   End   Terrace   remained   closed  and  certain
      unspecified safety measures were carried out.     This
      notification had not been conveyed directly to the
      Local Authority although the Club were now looking
      to make arrangements to hold the match with West
      Ham United on 9 May.    Furthermore, the Club had also
      requested  the   Works   Department  to undertake  the
      necessary remedial work on their behalf in view of
      the shortage of time available.
The  Group   e xp ressed  considerable  concern   at   the
circumstances o u tlined and it was agreed that:-

(a)   the Works Department should not undertake any
      safety or remedial repair work at the stadium
      in view of the Council's role as Licensing             Mr M Webster and
      Authority for the Stadium, and the Director            Mr K Blount
      of Works be advised forthwith;

(b)   the Club be informed that the provision of             Mr M Webster,
      the    required   safety  work   remains   the         Mr R Sewell and
      responsibility of the Club and their appointed         Mr D Bownes
      private contractors;

(c)   arrangements be made to contact the West Midlands
      Police over the next 24 hours to clarify the           Mr M Webster
      circumstances under which football may resume
      at the Stadium so far as they are concerned;

(d)   arrangements be made over the next 24 hours
      to identify any outstanding safety issues at           Mr K Blount
      the Stadium and the time-scale for the remedial
      work required; and

(e)   a further inspection of the ground be carried          Mr D Bownes
      out on completion of the required safety work.

NEXT MEETING

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Group
be held in the Head of Administration and Legal
Department's office at 8.30 am on Wednesday 10 May
1989.
       City of Sheffield
                       Metropolitan District
                                                                    < s u 4     j   l



                                               Councillor C. J. C. Betts, BA(Cantab.)
                                               Leader
        Mr. Mark Webster
                                               Sheffield City Council
                                               Leader's Office
                                               Town Hall
                                               SHEFFIELD
                                               S1 2HH Tel. 734701


        15.5.89.

                                               w ith com plim ents

TV74
TELEPHONE:                                           SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

SHEFFIELD (0742) 768522                                POLICE HEADQUARTERS

TELEX: 547996                                           SNIG HILL

FAX: (0742) 523243                                        SHEFFIELD S3 8LY


P WRIGHT CBE OSt J CBIM
CHIEF CONSTABLE                                           5 May 1989




 Councillor C J C Betts BA
 Leader
 Sheffield City Council
 Town Hall
 Sheffield SI 2HH




 At the Special Police Authority meeting on 21 April 1989 you asked whether
 or not I was able to release to the Sheffield City Council, as licensing
 authority under the Safety of Sports Ground legislation, a copy of the
 Police Operational Order for the ill fated semi-final at Hillsborough,
 together with a breakdown of police resources deployed both inside and
 outside the football ground. At the meeting I informed you that I would
 need to consult the legal officers for the Public Inquiry in respect of
 the evidential status of that information.

 I have now been advised by the Treasury Solicitor that it would be
 inappropriate to release that information prior to it being introduced
 into the public domain during the course of the Public Inquiry. I regret
 therefore that I am unable to assist.
                                                      KEEBLE HAWSON
                                                                  SOLICITORS
                                                      Incorporating Branson Bramley & Co.

   A. H. GREGORY                 N.   T . HAWSON                                            OLD CATHEDRAL VICARAGE,
   C. J. PRYCE                   G.   CONNELL
                                 A.   J. COOMBE
   P. A. SEALEY
   K. L. WEBSTER                 C.   M. M . AYRE                                                   ST. JAMES’ ROW.
   M . A. PLATT
                                                                                                              SHEFFIELD,
   Consultant:
   A . H. CONNELL
                                                                                                                      S1 1XA.
                                                                                            TELEPHONE 0742-722061

                    Mr. M. Webster,
                                                                                             MDX NO. 10537
                    Acting Head
                                                                                             FAX NO. 0742 - 700813
                    Legal & Administration Department
                                                                                             FAX NO. 0742 - 750243
                    Town Hall
                    SHEFFIELD 1.
                                                                                            9th May,            1989

                                                                                            W HEN YOU TELEPHONE OR CALL PLEASE ASK FOR:.
   OUR REF:                                         YOUR REF:



AHG/AG/HILLSBOROUGH                                  AH/DG                                  Mr. Gregory




                    Dear Mr. Webster,

                    Hillsborough Inquiry - Sheffield City Council

                    I enclose a copy letter from the Treasury Solicitor dated
                    the 9th May, 1989 for your information.

                    Yours faithfully,




                    k e e b l e T^s   Xw s o n




                               THE FIRM IS REGULATED BY THE LAW SOCIETY IN THE CONDUCT OF INVESTMENT BUSINESS
            THE TREASURY SOLICITOR
            Queen Anne’s Chambers
            28 Broadway London SW1H 9JS
            Telephones D irect Line 0 1 -2 1 0 2109
                             Sw itchboard      0 1 -2 1 0 3 0 0 0
            Telex 9 1 7 5 6 4         GTN 2 1 0
            Fax No. 0 1 -2 2 2 6 0 0 6 - 2 1 0 -3 4 8 8
            D X No. 2 3 1 8 V icto ria        _____________________ _____________

Messrs Keeble Hawsons                                       .                Please quote
7 St Jam es Row                                                              L89/2117
Sheffield                                                                    Your reference
SI 1XA
                                                         Date
For the attentio n of Miss Gregory/Miss Ayre____________ 9 May 1989



                                              BY FAX AND LETTER




HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL


You will recall th a t a t th e pre-inquiry m eeting on 28th April Lord Justice Taylor
indicated th a t any body against whom any allegations was to be made would be
informed of it and the substance of the evidence supporting it

You will appreciate th a t the task of assembling the evidence for th e Inquiry is a
formidable one and statem e n ts are still being taken. However, it seemed right to let
you have what must be a preliminary indication of criticism s which may be levelled at
the City Council, as the local authority responsible for the safety c e rtific a te s under
the Safety of Sports Grounds A ct, 1975, as soon as possible before the com m encement
of the Inquiry.
The following are the main criticism s which so far appear from the evidence available:-

t.     The pens on the te rra c e s a t the Leppings Lane e n d of the ground constituted a
       potential danger if crow dcJ. The mediis o£ egress onto the pitch were
       inadequate and you should have insisted th a t there were more gates, th a t they
       were properly signed, th a t there were means of access laterally between the
       pens, again properly marked, and th a t all gangways were properly marked.

2.     The directional signs w ere inadequate, so th a t those entering were necessarily
       channelled to the tunnel leading to the cen tral two pens.

3.     The crush barriers within the pens were not properly positioned and one a t least
       was of insufficient strength.

4.     The tunnel giving access to the te rra c e was not of a constant gradient but
       sloped steeply a t the te rra c e end: this was potentially hazardous if a large
       crowd cam e down the tunnel.
5.    The wall at the turnstiles was not adequate to prevent persons climbing into the
      ground
6.    A ccessby ambulances or fire engines to the playing a re a and the surround was
      not adequately provided for. Furtherm ore, the provision of first-aid equipment
      was insufficient.

Should any further m atters deserving of criticism come to our attention , we will of
course le t you know of them .                                        ■' "  ■ ~--v ;  "




                               Assistant Treasury Solicitor
       R 371 9                                                                        Sch 9 1 6 0
                                  CITY OF SHEFFIELD — M EM O RANDUM

From                                               To
             The Building Surveyor                         The Acting Head of Administration
                                                           and Legal Department
Date
             9th May, 1989
Ref.
             BSD/KW33/EH/K27ABX
Tel. Ext.                                           Ref.
             4169




          Safety of Sports Grounds - Sheffield United Football Club

          I refer to your memorandum of the 5th May regarding the above subject,
          and particularly its last paragraph.

          My principal District Surveyor and my Principal Structural Engineer
          attended the working party meeting at Sheffield United F.C., on the
          27th April for the purposes of carrying out the annual inspection of the
          grounds. Their attendance was in response to a telephone request from
          your licensing officer and at the time of their visit they were both
          unaware of your memorandum dated 26th April, which was only received by
          them later that day simultaneous with the withdrawal of Health & Consumer
          Services Staff, your Chief Licensing Officer also left the meeting,
          despite the iritimation from my staff that he should be present for the
          inspection. This therefore left my officers as’being the only council
          staff to carry out the agreed corporate annual inspection.

          Initially they boith were accompanied by Dr .Eastwood and the Club
          Secretary, whilst the police and fire authority representatives were
          accompanied by other club staff.

          Whilst on the Bramall Lane terracing Dr. Eastwood made comments
          pre-supposing that the pitch perimeter fence would be taken down, and
          continued to make observations as to how he proposed that this would be
          achieved, so as to retain an adequate crush barrier on that same line.

          The supposition of removal of the pitch perimeter fencing was not
          connmented on by my staff, however, comments of a technical nature were
          made regarding the positioning and design of the restraint bracing which
          could act as part of integral design of the remaining crush barrier. From
          then onwards for the remainder of the morning, my staff were accompanied
          almost solely by the Club Secretary, although Dr. Eastwood remained on
          site.

          As in previous annual inspections certain items of a factual nature were
          brought to the attention of the Club's representatives, but I am quite
          satisfied that matters of a more contentious nature were simply noted for
          future discussion by the full working party.

          After a full day on the site, the club were advised that my staff had not
          completed their inspection, and therefore my division will be represented
          at the reconvened meeting on the 16th May.
MEETING WITH DR EASTWOOD - 9 MAY 1989


Dr Eastwood concerned re running of licensing procedures - not just
a comparison with South Yorkshire - he deals with 5 other Authorities.

South Yorkshire System

                - Administrator South Yorkshire.    Created     right
atmosphere in group - knack of obtaining consensus - get co-operation
from clubs.

His  system   - WP   had pre-meeting   - were    occasions  when  club
representatives invited to address it and they left - frequent visits
by individual members to ground.     Valuable things were the twice
annual meetings at ground - usually had a significant meeting/round
table talk content - go through club and WP matters/advance airing
of views + walk round where items discussed or to be subject of future
meeting were looked at as a group. Eastwood found it useful.

(1)   On no occasion since SCO ran it has any of clubs been asked
       to WP meeting - unhappy incident at SUPC club 1 hour's notice
       of major inspection - inappropriate.   Eastwood conceded that
       we have the right to inspect - but I agreed that we would give
       resonable notice.

(2)   WP meetings - usefulness of minutes of walk round.   Contained
       references to just about every item of charge and set out who
       thought what and what was described.

(3)   Once a year     almost meaningless - DMB called meeting last year
       at SUPC and    he didn't turn up - no minutes! Therefore no proof
       of meeting    at SUPC lastyear.   Eastwood not asked to provide
       information    of what went on.    Described as chaotic by those
       present.

(4)   Recent meeting - note utterly misleading and when minutes      are
       written it will be completely changed to reflect truth.

(5)   Meeting of WP - Graham Mackrell - said he would like guidance
       as he hadn't a Safety Certificate.

(6)   Meeting opened with coffee/nothing happened and Dr Eastwood
       said DMB in the chair and DMB said lets go round the ground.
       Dr Eastwood    said meeting valuable as    in going round ground
       had seniormembers of departments     there    to discuss issues,
       therefore useful to stay together.      Mr          indicated not
       prepared to go round with others - Dr Eastwood then referred
       to 24/4 meeting and in effect said that there would be other
       opportunities to do what they intended.     Correct that DMB asked
       club's comments   re 24th to be put in writing.        Dr Eastwood
       did not: say club was laying down ground rules as this isn't
       a phrase he    uses and at no stage did he say all inspecting
       officers must be accompanied. Did say club has right to observe.
       Dr Eastwood    said club reserved right    to accompany not: that
      inspection not allowed without the above.
Dr Eastwood did say during the meeting that there was advantage
in officers staying together - did say that people in these
meetings usually senior and therefore valuable to talk together.

Final para of note is a travesty — Dr Eastwood stated Mr
eM3t> go anywhere he wished but went on to say that if party
splitting up he would chose to go with him.        He said "free
to go where you wish but I'm coming with you".        Made clear
by Dr Eastwood that if all splitting up they were free to go
where they wished       Club, Fire Brigade and Police have all
commented to him that meeting was as he indicated.

New minute needs to make the above clear.

Mr         :hen indicated he was not prepared to be accompanied
and he was leaving the meeting.   DMB got up and left with them.
Dr Eastwood assumed he was going to have a word with them outside
- 10 minutes later realised not coming back.

Meeting then decided to carry out inspection - Dr Eastwood
discovered door under John Street stand and asked everyone
to have a look.     All had a discussion about way in which
perimeter fence could be modified if agreed by Council.

Fire Brigade and Police apparently not told of purpose of meeting
- called at short notice.      Dr Eastwood believed at request
of Department of Health and Consumer Services^ John Strange
out of town - therefore Dr E attended a meeting .

Most concerned with last 2 paragraphs of note.

Police and Fire Brigade commented to Dr      Eastwood over last
2 years that Health and Consumer Services    are over eager and
inexperienced.

Dr Eastwood re-stated that he went out of his way to reiterate
       could go anywhere but Dr E would accompany him.
                             CITY OF SHEFFIELD — M EM O RA NDUM
 '\ '        .

From The Building Surveyor,                     To Head of Administration and Legal
     Department of Land and Planning               Department

Date 24th April, 1989
Ref. KWGB/KTH
Tel. Ext.4169 - Mr. K. W. G. Blount             Ref.                                      os 107
                                                                                  9/161




      Hillsborough Disaster Co-ordinating Group

     Re. meeting held Thursday, 20th April,
     Item 4, minute (part) states:-

          "David Purchon to be fully informed of the
          comparison between the requirements of the
          'Green Code' and the specification of the
          new Don Valley Stadium".                   - Action K. Blount

     Whilst I fully appreciate the need for the Council to ensure that this
     stadium, being/designed and built under its control, should not be found
     deficient if used for a purpose designated under the Safety of Sports
     Grounds Act, I cannot respond to this minute in the manner envisaged.

     The responsibility for ensuring compliance in this first instance rests of
     course with the Director of Design and Building Services, whose officers
     and mine have had discussions related to these matters in connection with
     the plans submitted for building regulation purposes. At this stage I can
     only state that the "requirements" of the 'Green Code' have been examined
     as part of that process, which is ongoing. The stadium is being designed
     for athletics purposes primarily and I believe that Mr. Wood made it quite
     clear in a TV interview (Monday, 17th April) that the design would be
     reviewed if the Inquiry came up with new recommendations and/or the use of
     the stadium was widened.




     Copies to: Mr. D. Purchon,
                Director of Environmental Health and Consumer Services

                 Mr. A. Wood,
                 Director of Design and Building Services
              HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER CO-ORDINATING GROUP

                Meeting held on Wednesday 10 May 1989


Present:         Messrs     M
                           Webster, D Bownes and            and Ms
                            (Administration and Legal Department);
                 Mr D Purchon (Health and Consumer Services);
                 Mr             (Family and Community Services);
                 Mr P 0'Neill (Personnel Department); Mr P Dent
                 and Ms               (Publicity Department); and
                 Messrs G Levers and                (Department of
                 Land and Planning)




                                                                          ACTION


(1)        MINUTES

           The Minutes of    the meeting of the Group     held   on   3
           May 1989 were received and noted.

(2)        INSPECTION ARRANGEMENTS

           Bramall Lane Stadium

           The   Group  noted   the   current   position and the
           developments which were    taking place in connection
           with the inspection of the Bramall Lane Stadium.

           Hillsborough Stadium

           The Group noted the arrangements which had been made
           to enable 'First Division' football matches to resume
           at the Hillsborough Stadium on 9 May.     It was stated
           that a charge would be     made in respect of certain          Mr-
           work carried out by the Authority in this matter.                ----------

           Attention was also drawn to recent speculation within
           the press regarding potential problems which might
           arise on Saturday 13 May due to the anticipated influx
           of many fans from     Middlesborough, without tickets
           for the match.

           It was agreed to enquire what arrangements the South           Mr P O'Neill
           Yorkshire Police were making to deal with this problem.

(3)        INQUIRY UPDATE

           It was reported that Lord Justice Taylor had extended
           his thanks to the City Council for their co-operation
           and  assistance in the arrangements  for the Inquiry
           to commence on 15 May.
Widespread press coverage was anticipated, particularly
during the first few days of the Inquiry although
it might well be possible to release certain elements
of the accommodation    'earmarked' for the Inquiry,
including a part of the Reception Suite, if and when
the level of demand becomes clear.

It was also reported that the Coroner had expressed
the desire for similar arrangements to be provided
for the resumed Inquest.    This was viewed with some
caution by the Group at the present time, pending
clarification of the implications, particularly with
regard to finance and accommodation.

FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS OF INQUIRY

It was reported that the Home Office had agreed to
meet all reasonable costs arising from the Inquiry
by Lord Justice Taylor.

As costs were being incurred by a number of departments
throughout the Authority, both in respect of the
Inquiry and the wider implications arising from the
disaster, it was agreed that an approach be made
to the City Treasury to establish a structure to          Mr
collect and evaluate all the financial data and cost
implications to the Authority, with a view to the
preparation of an appropriate submission to the Home
Office and, if necessary,      a report to the Policy
Committee in due course.

With this in mind, officers were reminded of the
need to record details of any action taken and costs      All Members
incurred in connection with the disaster.

LICENSING DOCUMENTATION

It was reported that a meeting would be held this
day with Counsel to consider the Authority's position
as respects the Inquiry.      It was suggested that,
if possible, the Authorityshould aim to put forward
positive recommendations to the Inquiry.    Attention
was also drawn to the rigid nature of the Authority's
powers in the area of safety/licensing and it was
considered that a greater degree of flexibility might
well be recommended as a way forward.

REPORTS TO POLICY COMMITTEE

The Group were reminded of the need for all reports
relating to aspects of the       Hillsborough Disaster
to be submitted to the Policy Committee via Mr M
Webster.   It was stated that a formal report on the
disaster would be prepared by Mr D Purchon for            Mr D Purchon
submission to the Committee as soon as possible.
Discussions were to be held with the Leader and/or       Mr M Webster
Deputy Leader to obtain their views on the method
of dealing with the financial/staffing issues arising
from the disaster.

OTHER ISSUES

It was noted that, at the request of the West Midlands
Police, a copy Qf the Council's Scheme for Major
Peacetime Emergencies had been forwarded to their
Inquiry Team.   Interest had also been shown regarding
the actions taken by the Council immediately following
the disaster, although no request for a formal report
on this action had yet been received.

FUTURE MEETINGS

It was agreed that future meetings of the Working
Group be held on an ad-hoc basis as and when required.
             TTTT.T.SBOROCTGH   d i s a s t e r c o -o r d i n a t i n g g r o u p

                        Meeting held 3 May 1989


Present;       Messrs M Webster, D Bownes,          and R Sewell
               (Administration and Legal Department); Mr K
               Blount (Department of Land and Planning); Mr
                            (Family   and   Community   Services
               Department); Mr D Purchon (Health and Consumer
               Services) and Mr P O'Neill (Personnel Department)



                                                                                     ACTION

( 1)   MINUTES

       The Minutes of the meeting of the Group held on 28
       April were received and arising therefrom the Group
       noted

       (a)    the arrangements which had been made for the
               Inquiry to begin hearing evidence on 15 May
               in the Council Chamber; and

       (b)    the problems which these arrangements presented
               regarding the venue for the Annual Meeting
               of the City Council on 17 May.

(2 )   INSPECTION ARRANGEMENTS

       Bramall Lane Stadium

       The Group were notified of correspondence which had
       been received    from Sheffield United FC following
       the   inspection    of  the   Bramall   Lane  Stadium.
       Consideration was given to the terms of a measured
       response to the points raised in the correspondence                           Mr M Webster and
       which would form the basis of a reply to be submitted                         Mr D Bownes
       to Sheffield United within the next 24 hours.

       Hillsborough Stadium

       The Group was informed that the West Midlands Police
       had notified Sheffield Wednesday FC that they had
       no objection to the resumption of football at the
       Hillsborough Stadium on the understanding that the
       West   End   Terrace   remained   closed  and  certain
       unspecified safety measures were carried out.     This
       notification had not been conveyed directly to the
       Local Authority although the Club were now looking
       to make arrangements to hold the match with West
       Ham United on 9 May.    Furthermore, the Club had also
       requested   the  Works   Department  to undertake  the
       necessary remedial work on their behalf in view of
       the shortage of time available.
      The  Group   expressed  considerable   concern  at   the
      circumstances outlined and it was agreed that:-

      (a)    the Works Department should not undertake any
             safety or remedial repair work at the stadium
             in view of the Council's role as Licensing          Mr M Webster anc
             Authority for the Stadium, and the Director         Mr K Blount
             of Works be advised forthwith;

      (b)    the Club be informed that the provision of          Mr M Webster,
             the    required    safety work   remains   the      Mr R Sewell and
             responsibility of the Club and their appointed      Mr D Bownes
             private contractors;

      (c)    arrangements be made to contact the West Midlands
             Police over the next 24 hours to clarify the        Mr M Webstei
             circumstances under which football may resume
             at the Stadium so far as they are concerned;

      (d)    arrangements be made over the next 24 hours
              to identify any outstanding safety issues at       Mr K Blount
              the Stadium and the time-scale for the remedial
              work required; and

      (e)    a further inspection of the ground be carried       Mr D Bownes
              out on completion of the required safety work.

(3)   NEXT MEETING

      It was agreed that the next meeting of the Group
      be held in the Head of Administration and Legal
      Department's office at 8.30 am on Wednesday 10 May
      1989.




4 May 1989
GW
toA-t-k:

          f^QT hi              fH ft        6 WtLtVl         -t     M /i fltfiACMf*

p tfu .           flLiMT 1 ■            X        h A v*.            fo     Yffn

                      fib               M l /"C         rv        C^t           W*

^fi+h-Vi             Of-        tt'Al!            £**“"*>(
ZulU) l*/>          It'S VO *sU*b              fsv       T*t>        T>AiliyA/

0ft           TVih.            ST A~k> IU /vxi          U/i’Mtfi**         Awutf




 fa'          ftoA          &t,P ^                            lr*        ** f     tv

  T>D                 TV        fts*/,4/*T>              n          f*6i4

 fU. CU h*>T\ r                 MlF              ftffa-



  P & f(hfy/> i                        lrsM>         /b LC U *** n         (H 0

  Qh.         ^ 4 P4.            Ty          Pt>4<?]

                                                      jf &M) U.fi
 ill                           WfT             K Y ci ^Chfu<j>              £4

   f/vl/O L\,f*t>.



                                                     'ih/to.
                              CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM

From      D. W. Purchon                       1 To    M. Webster
          Director of Health and Consumer     1       Head of Admin, and Legal
                                 Services     1
Date      28 April 1989                       1
Ref       DWP/PAF                             1
Tel Ext   4614                                1 Ref                        Cc-    M   ■>
                                              1




          HILLSBOROUGH CO-ORDINATING GROUP - NEW ATHLETICS STADIUM

          I have been copied Ken Blount's memo of 24 April 1989 in which he
          apparently raises a demarcation dispute or stands on his and others
          dignity.

          It appears to me that this is a matter for corporate concern and it is
          hardly a matter of "if" the new stadium is to be designated under the
+         legislation.

          I have no argument as to whose responsibility anything is in the first
          instance. The Head of Admin, and Legal is responsible for licensing and
          signing certificates and my only concern is to help the corporate cause at
          a difficult time and in particular to assist you.

          I have no objection to being excluded from the review of the design of the
          new stadium but suggest that the members will want an unequivocal
          assurance that the new stadium meets every possible recommended safety and
          safety management standard.  I accept that others can give that assurance
          and recommend that they should do so in more positive terms than
          Ken Blount's memo.




          D. W. Purchon
          Director of Health and Consumer Services




                                                       ADMINISTRATION & LEGAL I
                                                          DIPT,, SHEFFIELD.
cf* ^?oNtX\.e,
City of Sheffield   M etro p olitan District



                                               Administration & Legal Department
                                               R o g er P en s am , FCIS, M B IM , S o lic ito r
   </VYOv(< C O O ca JL&I                      H ead o f D e p a rtm e n t

                                               T o w n H all
                                               S h e ffie ld S1 2H H

                                               T e le p h o n e 0 7 4 2 -7 2 6 4 4 4
                                               F a csim ilie 0 7 4 2 -7 3 5 0 0 3
                                               T e le c o m G o ld 76 : L M X 0 8 6
                                               T e le x 5 4 2 4 3 SH FLIB G o r
                                                        265871 M O N R E F G (q u o te re f L M X 0 8 6)




R4602                                          w ith com plim ents
                                                                      u

                              CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM

From      D. W. Purchon                        1 To    M. Webster
          Director of Health and Consumer      1       Head of Admin, and Legal
                                 Services      1
Date      28 April 1989                        1
Ref       DWP/PAF                              1
Tel Ext   4614                                 1 Ref
                                               1




          HILLSBOROUGH CO-ORDINATING GROUP - N EW ATHLETICS STADIUM

          I have been copied Ken Blount's memo of 24 April 1989 in which he
          apparently raises a demarcation dispute or stands on his and others
          dignity.

          It appears to me that this is a matter for corporate concern and it is
          hardly a matter of "if" the new stadium is to be designated under the
          legislation.

          I have no argument as to whose responsibility anything is in the first
          instance.  The Head of Admin, and Legal is responsible for licensing and
          signing certificates and my only concern is to help the corporate cause at
          a difficult time and in particular to assist you.

          I have no objection to being excluded from the review of the design of the
          new stadium but suggest that the members will want an unequivocal
          assurance that the new stadium meets every possible recommended safety and
          safety management standard.  I accept that others can give that assurance
          and recommend that they should do so in more positive terms than
          Ken Blount's memo.                                                  ■




          D . W. Purchon
          Director of Health and Consumer Services




                                                       | A.DfMTRATION & LEGAL
                                                           J fP T ,, SHEFFIELD,
                                                            HEftf


                                                        B    28 APR1989     PAA
                                                       0 O.S.M.I LIB I ELNS wo
                                                       9?
                                  i#i I   t   u r   o n crn ck u   — m cmunM ivuuivi


    From        CHIEF EXECUTIVE                                    To      CITY TREASURER

                                                                           DIRECTOR OF SOCIAL SERVICES     .
v   Date        3RD May, 1989
w               C.EX/RF
                4000                                                       URGENT
    Tel. Ext.                                                      Ref.



                                                                                                 ftn , 1Jvci
                HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER


                I enclose a copy of a telex I have received from Liverpool
                which I have had an opportunity of discussing with the
                Leader who has no objection to a national approach of this
                type, but thinks it should be on the basis that our costs
                are seen as separate from the Merseyside authorities and
                will be quantified separately.

                Could you please let me have your comments as a matter
                of urgency.
          trv.:-   Hr. ».I. Hurray. City Solicitor Secretary to the Council.
                                       Liverpool City Council.



          To:-     The Chief Executive'ofi-
                   Nottinghamshire County Council

                   Sheffield M.B.C.'

                    Lancashire C.C.

                    Cheshire C.C.

                    St. Helens M.B.C.

                    Knowsley M.B.C.

                    Wirral M.B.C.

                    Sefton H.B.C.



           Communication   — 3 sheets•




y C J L      IK o A           lA o J b -o W              A /c
                 City                                  W. I. Murray, LL.B.
                                                       City Solicitor, Secretary to the Council
                 of                                    P.O. Box No. 88
                                                       Municipal Buildings
                 Liverpool                             Dale Street
                                                       Liverpool    L69 2DH
                                                                                                                   f

                                                       Telephone: O eC O aeagaM B ':       0 5 1 -2 2 5 -2 3 7 3
                        FAX ( 0 5 1 ) 2 2 5 -3 9 1 6

                                                       Your ref
                                                       Our ref     DM/JB.
                                                       Date        3rd May, 1989.




Dear Sir

                                 Hillsborough Tragedy

     yoHawing iast .Saturday's aeeting of Council Leaders in Liverpool
discussions tarc 'taken p l a c e informally with Civil Servants. They stressed
the need to sake a clear and concerted approach to Government.       The attached
letter has *>een produced following the meeting and it is hoped to dispatch it
to Secretary of State for Social Services over the signatures of Leadership of
the nine wntlwrities-

     Would s'ou please -esk your Leader/Leadership if they would be prepared to
co-sign Hie letter and, if so, fax a signature(s) with details of their role to
be added to -the letrter *hlch will be dispatched forthwith.

    Thank you for your assistance in this setter.

                                    Tours sincerely



                                    City Solicitor, Secretary to the Council.
  Dear Secretary of State,

                                         Hillsborough Tragedy

       Since Hillsborough seven Local Authorities in Merseyside, plus Cheshire
  and Lancashire, together with Mersey Regional Health Authority, Merseyside
  Probation Service and numerous voluntary organisations have been providing a            _
  ordinated response.   On Saturday last, the 29th April, the Leaders^of these                seven
  local authorities and the Leaders of Nottinghamshire and Sheffield C o u n c i l s j ^ t o
  consider a joint approach to the provision of services which will continue 1 » * e
  necessary for several years to come •

        The attached report, prepared under the independent Chairmanship of the
   Professor of Social Work at Manchester University, was agreed in principle. 33*
   report recommends the establishment of a Regional Unit to provide a core of t e a
   services, including:—                                                                     ..

 ^          i)              A Helpline to receive calls from anywhere day and night;

             ii)            The Co-ordination of counselling services both within and outside
                             the nine local authorities provided by voluntary as well as
                             statutory agencies;

             iii)           A Database capable of dealing with all requests for assistance '*nd
                            offers of help;

             iv)            A continuing training and staff support programme in this     previously
                             unfamiliar area of work;

             yj             The management of media contacts    and publicity.


            It was agreed to reconvene the meeting following exploration o f a l l
    sources of finding.       Recognizing that services will need to
    nine local authorities and be available nationally on a scale not previously
  experienced by an authority or group of authorities, our first but not only app
  4 $ funding is addressed to Government. Further work is being undertaken ^
  T r i v a t e industry, charitable bodies and E.E.C.   Already the iocal social s « r v ^ «
    authorities in the North West have agreed to jointly sponsor an additional training
     officer.

          The Department, we anticipate, would wish to be associated
     initiative and through Government may be able to make
     Regional Unit at a coat of (£350,000 per year) for a period of threeJ3rT ^ \ _*l m t
     all the participating local authority areas it will also be i
     action to strengthen staffing in order to directly help individuals
                                                                                                   SSiee      I!
     according to the scale of the problems which they are facing. * * * * *                                  p
     have not been fully assessed but when aggregated are unlikely to be ess ttan                             V
     per year, spread across the North west.   The Government we hope would wish                  tobeaware   ;
     of this and may consider making resources available to assist in            direct
                                                                              service                         ,
     provision as well as the establishment of the Regional Unit.                                             |

           It is of coursc, appreciated that Government has already donated £500,000 towards                  *
      the National DisaSter flnhd.      This fund has quite properly focusSedita a t t e n t i o n            r
      £   ^ l i e ^ o r individual ha-dahip. and will provide financial help d ~   c        £      y          !
      but will not do away with the need for other help of a non-finaneial kind to be
      provided.                                                             /cont'd.......                    [



                                              0512253916                                           P .03
0 3 -0 5 -1 9 3 9   11:34
Secretary of State,                                                           3.5.89.

/continued....




     Given the nature and extent of these services this letter has been copied to ,
the Secretary of State for Environment and the Secretary of State for Social Security
and also for information to officers in other agencies.

      In view of the importance of the Issues involved a copy has been forwarded to
thfi Prime Minister so that she, personally, can be aware of the state of service
rlAvelnpment and needs*


     £r\ eetrl’f deefglon on        simnnrt would be nost aoDreciated as it is
anticipated ~©sher~p©tential*.6eus6es-©f-£i«aRGe-will-await the response of "Government
 efore making a commitment.


                                 Yours sincerely,
From:   J M JONES MSc                        WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
        ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE            HEADQUARTERS
        (Operations)                         PO Box 52, Lloyd House
                                             Colmore Circus Queensway
                                             Birmingham B4 6NQ
                                             Telephone: 021-236 5000




                                                              V


        M Webster Esq
        Acting Head of Department           Our Ref: JMJ/VSC
        City of Sheffield
        Metropolitan District                           ’ON 1SR09AL 1 89
        Town Hall
        Sheffield
        S1 2HH
                                             1 7 MAY
                                          O .S.M .   L ie   j SLNS     PSO



        Dear Sir

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S INQUIRY INTO THE
        HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

        I hereby acknowledge receipt of your letter dated
        12 May 1989j plus enclosures.

        Yours faithfully




        Assistant Chief Constable
        (Hillsborough Inquiry)
Acting H««d of Department                    Sm   Circulation Below
Administration and Legal

16 May 1989
AH/Gtf
4018 - Mr Webster




n t H U M - W HB t I V I OOt M U K X R O i

X write to confirm tha discussion which took plaea today between
■ysalf, Councillors Skinner and Betts, regarding tha above visit
and tha advice which X tendered.

Basically* both Leading Counsel and Junior Counsel instructed on
behalf of the City at the Inquiry f*lt It was not appropriate to
have a meeting of this sort at the present time* although there was
nothing to prevent the City undertaking to pass oo a copy of lta
statement to the Inquiry as soon aa It Is available, together with
copies of other documents which It receives as part of the Inquiry
workings which may be appropriate to Liverpool* subject of course
to the not Inconsiderable costs which this may engender.

Accordingly* therefore, the arrangements for the meeting on Friday
are now cancelled and X confirm that X will be contacting my oppoalte
number at Liverpool (Mr Bill Murray) to discuss the situation with
him and that in all probability X will Inform him that the logistics
are such that It Is not appropriate. In light of everything else
going on, to have the meeting at this stage from an officer viewpoint.



<Srw»1«*4in

Councillor C J C Betts, Leader
Councillor D a Skinner
Councillor H A Knight
Mr 9 O'Neill, Safety Officer
Mr X Blount, The Building Surveyor
Mr D Purchon, Director of Health and Consumer Services
                                CITY OF SHEFFIELD         M EM O RA NDUM

            Councillor D. A. Skinner                         SEE BELOW
From                                                 To


            11th May,                                                L -o                     b o J               JL
Date                    1989
                                                                                    -   !
Ref.
            DAS/TJH                                                                                         -W'V'C
            5376
Tel. Ext.                                            Ref.                                                    9/161 R3719K



                                                                                        IV*

                                       Hillsborough Investigation

            Liverpool City Council have requested a further presentation on this
            matter for the benefit of their Leader, Keva Coombes, and the Working
            Party they have set up.  David Purchon has suggested that Friday, 19th May
            would be suitable from his point of view and we would expect to start
            around 11.00 a.m. (more precise details later) I would be glad if you or a
            representative could be in attendance.

            Although we have met some Liverpool Councillors once, immediately after
            the disaster, the City Council now wish to take a more considered and
            detailed look at what happened and my understanding is that there is
            nothing to stop us giving them a presentation of what we know, although at
            the present time I have made it clear that no documents or the video can
            be handed over to them.  Please confirm whether you can attend with my
            Secretary,               (x5376).




       ?P   Cl i
            SENT TO:       Mr. M. Webster, Acting Head of Administration & Legal
                                                                      Department ’
                           Mr. P. O ’Neill, Safety Officer
                           Mr. K. Blount, The Building Surveyor
                           Mr. Councillor C. J. Betts, Leader
                           Mr. Councillor H. Knight
                           Mr. D. Purchon, Director of Health and Consumer Services
                                                                  (for information)




                                                                                            —         ---------   --

                                                                               ADMINISTRATION & LEGAL
                                                                                  DEPT., SH £F8§feQ .
                                                                                 HEAD O F /A S S IS T A N T
                                                                              A    DPPT. 1      HEAD / L.S.

                                                                              B     1 2 M M 1589                   PA A
                                                                            ; 0                 LIB     j ELNS         PSO

                                                                            : fiS                                      cc
                               CITY OF SHEFFIELD — M E M O RA NDUM

From        The Building Surveyor                 To    Acting Head of Admin.   &   Legal Dept.
            Department of Land and Planning
                                                        F.A.O. Mr D Bownes
Date        16 May 1989
Ref.        BSD/ABu/AW
Tel. Ext.   4162 - Mr Butler                      Ref                                    9/161 R3719K




                                                                     tC
            Hillsborough Enquiry


            I refer to your memorandum of the 12th May regarding the above subject,
            and specifically to the request for a report on the technical aspects of
            the Leppings Lane End of the Stadium from Mr Butler.

            Your Licencing Officer expressed the view that this should include all
            known details of this end of the Stadium, and it will therefore be
            appreciated that the information will take some considerable man hours to
            complete it.  In the meantime, I would refer you to observations stemming
            from the recent annual inspection and my memoranda of 12 and 15 May

            A draft of the prepared technical report will be made available to you as
            soon as it is to hand.
Acting Hoad of Departmentt                Councillor C J C Betts
Administration and Legal                  Leader

16 May 1989
AH/GW
4018 - Mr Webster




INFORMATION RE TORH8TILES

(1) Extract from opening speech of Counsel to tho Inquiry setting
    out turnstile allocation.

(2) Extract from opening speech of Counsel to the Inquiry re metering
    system at Leppings Lane.

(3) Extract from background material submitted to the Inquiry on
    behalf of South Yorkshire Police re turnstile counting system
     (as yet not circulated to the public).

    Turnstile allocation is decided by the police in consultation
    with the PA and the Club.

    Admission to particular areas is monitored by the turnstile
    counting system.  Admission to pens is controlled by police
    and stewards.
Acting Bead of Department!                               See Circulation Below
Administration and Legal

12 May 1989
AH/GW
4018 - Mr Webster



HxxuBonooBB D i n a r a   c o -q u h u z i q   oaoo» -   hob   vALunr m o r a l

With reference to the communication of 24 April froa the Building
Surveyor and to subsequent commnication from the Director of Health
and Consumer Services, which I now copy to those previously not
receiving the same, I believe the paramount issue here is for someone
to be able to say totally unequivocably that the design of the new
Stadium will meet both current and anticipated requirements regarding
Stadium safety and in particular, as it will almost certainly be
designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act and any amendment
thereof, all the best recommendations which currently exist pursuant
to such legislation.

In this regard X understand that a meeting has now taken place of
relevant officers and X am pleased that the opportunity has been
taken to ensure that such consultation proceed, notwithstanding the
fact that X understand it is currently the intention to bring in,
as Consultants on the Stadium, certain of the better known experts
on Sports Ground Design and Stadia Safety in this country and
elsewhere.

However, it is clearly still necessary to make use of all the expertise
within the Authority relating to the Safety of Sports and I would
assume that the recent meeting was the first stage of such a process.




Circulation x

Director of Health and Consumer Services (Reference DWP/PAF)
Building Surveyors Section (Department of Land and Planning)
Director of Design and Building Services (For the Attention of Mr
T Wood)
Acting Head of Departmenti                    Building Surveyor
Administration and Legal                      Department   of   Land   and
                                              Planning
12 May 1989
AH/GW
4018 - Hr Webster                             B8D/KWJB/BH/K27ABX




s u m   (V 8 W W B CBKOOMDS - SHBTfZSLD U liU O FOOTBALL CLDB

I thank you for your communication of 9 May 1989 concerning the above
natter.  My purpose in writing is two-foldt first of all to respond
to your communication of 9 May and secondly to repeat the consents
nade at the meeting on the morning of Wednesday 10 May regarding
the obtaining of coanents on the note of the proceedings at the visit
to United on the 27th and, in particular, to draw a comparison between
those and what Dr Eastwood is now suggesting was said pursuant to
a meeting which took place with myself the other day.

Accordingly* I now enclose a copy of the note of such meeting which
should be compared with the note of the earlier meeting copied with
the letter to Sheffield United.     In particular I would be obliged
if you would get Mr Butler to look at the two versions of events
and to indicate which more accurately reflects the interchange of
comments which took place and the flavour of the meeting.

Moving on to the question of your communication of 9 May and the
statement in the second paragraph thereof, notwithstanding the apparent
late arrival of a communication from myself, the fact remains that
it was made totally and absolutely clear at several of the
Co-ordinating Group meetings what was to be the nature and manner
of carrying out future inspections of sports grounds. In other words,
that the officers from this Authority were to operate as a group
and in particular were not to discuss items with the club's
representatives prior to consultation with their colleagues.

I am pleased to note that this part of the instruction was followed
with regard to the more contentious items but there was clearly some
misunderstanding as to your assistant's position once the convening
officer from my Department had withdrawn from the meeting.         Can
I make it clear that, in future, if as now appears unlikely, that
this state of affairs ever rises again the withdrawal of one or more
sets of the Council's representatives signals the necessity for all
representatives of the Authority to withdraw.   This is not a matter
of discretion for individual department representatives, particularly
as I understand the Pire and Police representatives have also agreed
that this is by far the better means of proceeding in order to achieve
some modicum of co-ordination.



oo      David Bownes
        Licensing Officer
Acting Head of Department                   Director of Health   ana
Administration and Legal                    Consumer 8«rvio«s

12 Kay 1989
AH/GW
4018 - Mr Webster




8APBTY OF SPORTS GKOUHDS - SUEPPIUD UNITED FOOTBALL C U B

Purther to ay communication of 5 May, I eocloM, for your information
and attention* a copy of a communication from the Building Surveyor,
together also with a copy of my response thereto.

In addition, I also attach a copy of the rough transcript of the
meeting that took place between myself and Dr Eastwood the other
day and as I indicated in my communication to Mr Blount I would be
grateful if you could ask your officers to compare the statement
of events proffered by Dr Eastwood with that which accompanied my
earlier letter to Sheffield United upon the same issue, to see which
more accurately reflects the statements made and the tenor of the
meeting.




cc      David Bownes
        Licensing Officer
Acting Head of Departmentt                  Councillor   C   J   C   Batts
Administration and Legal                    Leader

12 May 1989                                 co   Coanolllor J Fiore
AH/GW                                            Chain M K S
4018 - Mr Webster                                Chief txecotiv*
                                                 D Bownes




Knzsnoaooaa xwoom    -   ofoat*


With regard to the above matter I attach, for your information and
attention, copies of various communications received from Mr Whalley
at the Hone Office on behalf of Lord Justice Taylor confirming first
of all that the Home Office will meet the Council'a costs in t e r m
of the Inquiry and secondly thanking staff for the arrangements so
far made and finally thanking the Members for moving the Annual Council
Meeting.

In addition on a different tack, I also enclosa a copy of a note
of the opening day of the Inquiry prepared by Lis Bashforth which
I believe gives a flavour of the events on that morning.

In addition, I also enclose copies of correspondence passing between
the Police, Sheffield Wednesday and South Yorkshire County Council
regarding the semi-final incident in April 1981 which apparently
resulted from large numbers of fans entering the ground at the last
moment.

Finally, I also enclose a copy of a letter from the Treasury Solicitors
setting out what they suggest will be the main criticisms so far
as this Authority is concerned, most if not all of which it is felt,
at this moment in time, can be answered. Obviously one of the first
steps in response to the letter would be to go back to the Treasury
Solicitors and ask them for details of the evidence they are using
to base their criticisms upon.

An outstanding issue is the matter of a formal report into the
Committee Structure concerning Hillsborough and in this regard I
have asked David Purchon to draft a factual document which I think
is the only report which is appropriate at this stage but there does
then remain the issue of how the Authority is going to deal with
the payment of overtime, etc, to staff who were Involved in dealing
with the aftermath of Hillsborough and I would welaone the opportunity
of discussing this with you as my own opinion, expressed to the other
members of the Hillsborough Working Group is that probably it would
be better to deal with this administratively, if at all possible,
rather than inolude it as part of such a document, although clearly
the individuals concerned do need to be paid without delay.
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH                      T h e Rt H o n Lord J u stic e Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                                   50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                                   London SW1H 9AT
                                                   01-273 2577/3602/2370


Ian L Podmore Esq
Chief Executive
City of Sheffield Metropolitan District
Town Hall
Sheffield
S1 2HH                ADMffSSTRATiCN & LEGAL                          5 May 1989
                            TJT O)irmr. ry         Date
                                   i l s ' «.NT|
                                   HFA D       j
                                                            CHi




                                                            - 9 MAY 198?        W8

HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM D ISA ST E R INQ UIRY                  R.E.U. P.E.C.U.   M       i
                                                     U.P.

Thank you for your fax of 4 May, received this morning, about
which I spoke to Mr Webster's secretary when I received it. I
think that your fax has crossed with mine of the same date, which
I hope gives you the answer you were seeking about the Home
Office meeting the costs of the Inquiry in principle. The next
stage is, I think, for us to start to look at the details. You
very reasonably make the point that you cannot enter into
commitments for not inconsiderable sums on the strength of verbal
assurances alone.  I hope that that position is now clarified.

In your letter of 4 May you also say that the members have agreed
to move the Annual General Meeting of the Council (scheduled for
17 May) from the Town Hall into other premises.  I mentioned this
to Lord Justice Taylor today. He has asked me to express his
gratitude to the members for their generous understanding in this
respect. He realises that this will involve disruption and
disappointment to some, but is glad that the momentum of the
Inquiry can be maintained in its first week.  I would therefore
be grateful if you could pass on to the members Lord Justice
Taylor's appreciation of their decision about the Annual General
Meeting.




                                                      R M WHALLEY
        28th April, 1989


                                      HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY


        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR
              On 15th April there was an horrendous disaster at Hillsborough.
        95 people died, many were injured.   I have been appointed by the Home
        Secretary to conduct an Inquiry into the disaster.

               May I convey my deepest sympathy to the bereaved and injured and
        the same from the Inquiry Staff.

              The terms of reference of the Inquiry are to investigate the events
        at Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground on 15th April and make
        recommendations in relation to crowd control and safety of sports grounds.

                I am solely responsible for the Inquiry, representation and
        rec ommend a ti on s .

              I am assisted by two assessors; Brian Johnson, Chief Constable of
        Leicestershire and Professor Maunder, a professor in Mechanical
        Engineering at Newcastle University.

              This is a preliminary hearing to set out the nature of the Inquiry,
        procedures and to hear applications from parties wishing to be
        represented.

              This is not a law suit where it is a case of winning or losing, it
        is not akin to a criminal trial.  No one is on trial.

                The Inquiry will look at:-

                (1)    What happened
                (2)    Why it happened
                (3)    The lessons to be learned and recommenations.

                If allegations are made I will consider them and if appropriate make
        a finding.

              The object is to find the facts with all speed.  I do not want this
        constructive purpose spoilt by accusation and counter-accusation .

              Regarding the scope and length of the Inquiry, because the people
        involved  as witnesses run into the 1,000's, West Midlands Police are
        carrying out the exercise of gathering evidence.  I welcome letters.  All
        relevant evidence should be available but I want the Inquiry to be quick
        and thorough.

              I want to keep oral evidence within bounds.  I will not allow oral
        evidence which does not add to that already given but written statements
        will be considered.

               The Inquiry will have three Counsels, Andrew Collins Q.C., Alan
         Goldsack and Bernard Phillips.  All witnesses who give oral evidence a r e
         called on my behalf.

                 That witness may also be called by their advisors.




HB3AAB/PGT/1
                 Before any witness is called they have to have first given a written
           statement.  The witness may be cross-examined but I will limit
           cross-examinations as I think fit.

                 If an allegation is made against a body or an individual, that body
           or individual must be informed and can call evidence in answer to the
           allegation.

                The oral hearing will commence on the 15th May at 10.30 a . m . , and
          will concentrate on the events of the 15th April and why it happened.       The
          Inquiry will be public.

                 The second part of the Inquiry - relating to the future- I will give
           directions later on how this will be conducted.

                 I would like to receive written submissions on recommendations for
           crowd control and safety at sports grounds as soon as possible.

                 The press will be given proper assistance and save in exceptional
           circumstances copies of statements made by a witness will be available to
           the press shortly before that winess is called.

                 There will be no photography or filming or sound recording during
           the Inquiry.  I can and will enforce that rule.

                I request the press not to interview any witness before they have
          completed their evidence to the Inquiry.  I believe that will only impede
          a difficult task.

                  I expect parties to be represented by lawyers.  Any person or body
           wishi ng to be represented must show good cause.  They must have a direct
           interest and it must be fair to be represented.

                 If there are several parties covered by the same interest they
           should join together.

                 Any decision today on representation is not final.

                 If a party does not wish to be represented they can offer to make
           evidence available through a statement as soon as possible.

                 In relation to costs, there are no statutory provisions.  The
           Secretary of State is able to meet costs and I make recommendations to the
           Secretary of State.

                 I will consider that at the end.   Costs would be on a c om mon fund
           basis.

                   I intend to make recommendations to pay the reasonable costs of
           anyone who ought to be represented who may not know if they can afford it.
           C er tainly the families of the injured and deceased.

                  I       will be sympathetic to football supporters, in particular
           Li verpool supporters.  I will be recommending that Liverpool supporters
           costs are paid.




HB3AAB/PGT/2
          REPRESENTATIONS
          Mr. King                        - consortium of solicitors within and outside
                                            Liverpool.  Already met.  Hillsborough Group of
                                            Solicitors.  74 firms representing 200 families.
                                            Contact through Liverpool L aw Society.

          Mr. Coombes                     - representing family of deceased and injured.     May
                                            combine with the c onsortium subject to
                                            satisfactory Counsel.

                    Lord Justice Taylor - will agree 1 team to represent families.

          Mr.    Makin                    - represents 7 deceased, 50 injured - not entirely
                                            happy with what took place at con sor tium meeting.
                                            Counsel very busy.  I represent so many interests
                                            already there may be difficulties in only one
                                            advocate.




                    Lord Justice Taylor - I don't see any difficulty.   If for good
                    reason, separate representation is needed, I will c o n side r it, but
                    it will have to be quite extraordinary.

          Mr.    Jackson                  - instructed by Football Supporters Association.
                                            National Association - strength in Liverpool.
                                            Information about travel to Sheffield, ticket
                                            allocation, crowd control.

                    Lord Justice Taylor - satisfied will represent Liverpool Supporters
                    - work out what part want to play in first stage and what better for
                    second stage.

                    Costs - I will probably recommend are paid by the Secretary of
                    State.

          N.B. If anyone wastes the time of the Inquiry I will consider the matter
          of costs very carefully.

          Mr.    Glasgow                  - Insurers.   Sun Alliance, of Club and Football
                                            League.   We will provide such assistance as you
                                            need.   No application for representation by C l u b
                                            or respective parts.

           Mr.   Purchas                  - representation of stewards, turnstile men and
                                            gatemen, casual employees of club.     Lack of
                                            consultation by the C l u b before the match.

                    Lord Justice Taylor - grant representation to the club but not
                    stewards (rep. by club).   Dr. Purcell - drove to Sheffield
                    We dnesday - medical position on the day.  Independent contractor.             <
                    other doctors, medical defence union for all 3.

           C a l a gha n   (Broomheads)   - Trent Regional Health Authority Am bulance
                                            Service.

          Hallam                            - Sheffield Health Authority 2 hospitals.




HB3AAB/PGT/3
                    Lord Justice Taylor - nothing to stop watching brief.   No
                    representation.

           Michael Murphy            - Sheffield City Council Licensing Authority.
                                       Assist Inquiry in any way possible.

                    Lord Justice Taylor - responsible for perimeter fencing - grant
                    representation.

           John Dyson                - Football Association.  Interest general and
                                       specific. F.A. Cup responsible for selecting
                                       ground, policing, took advice on dec isi on that
                                       Liverpool should be at the Leppings Lane end.

                    Lord Justice Taylor - I am not settling civil claims at this
                    hearing.  Will grant representation.

                    Interested parties will receive copies of written statements.

          Wood Q.C.                  - South Yorskhire Police - considerable   interest.

                    Lord Justice Taylor - will be represented.

          Robinson                   - Fire Services - Officers at match.   Als o involved
                                       Licensing Fire Certificate.

                    Lord Justice Taylor - will be represented.

          Co lvin                    - National Council for Civil Liberties - no
                                       appearance.

           Swainson                  - Liverpool City Council, Sefton, Knowsley, Wirral,
                                       St. Helens, Met. District Council. Lancashire and
                                       Cheshire County Councils.

                                       Representation in a collective capacity:-

                                       (1) unlike most disasters - particularly affects
                                       Merseyside.  Local Authorities can justifiably
                                       represent the wider people.

                                       (2) Authorities believe by granting
                                       representation can demonstrate awareness of need
                                       for fairness, openness and thoroughness.

                                       Degree of sensitivity and suspician of
                                       communities represented.

                    Lord Justice Taylor - country aware of loss/grief Liverpool.    For
                    the Inquirty representation to contribute to what happened and why.
                    Can't see what representation will add.    Want views of football
                    supporters.   D on't think need representations from the local
                    authorities to impress on me or the public the need for impartiality
                    and openness.    I reject the application - not through a lack of
                    sensitivity but from a sensitivity of the need to get on quickly.   I
                    respect your reason but am not persuaded.

           Wright                    - St. John's Ambulance.   Don't want representation,
                                       reserving our position.




HB3AAB/PGT/4
          NO MORE APPLICATIONS
                 Inquiry achieving purpose - will have to keep good time - tight ship
           • intend to do.  Conf ine to relevant matters. Avoid waste of time.

          King                      - application to change venue of Inquiry to
                                      Liverpool.

                  Lord Justice Taylor - no good reasons here - ground services - not
                  minded to move part of the Inquiry to Liverpool.  Wi ll co nsider
                  later.

                  - first part  - what and why
                  - second part - future.

          Ki ng                     - application to give statements direct   to the
                                      Inquiry and not through the police.

                  Lord Justice Taylor - don't have to go through the police, but has
                  to be a c omparing of information, but can present direct evidence.

          Ki ng                     - want assurance statements will only be used for
                                      the Inquiry, not civil claims.



                  Lord Justice T aylor - point will be considered.   All wi tnesses
                  expenses will be paid.   10.30 Monday 15th May.




HB3AAB/PGT/5
Sheffield Wednesdoy                                           ^   ^   .     ^        ^       11   C!ub
                                                                          Registered O ffic e -               ------ — -
                                                                          Hillsborough, Sheffield S 6 1S W
                                                                          T e le p h o n e :0 7 4 2 - 3 4 3 1 2 3 / 4
Chairman:      H. E. M cGEE             <■„ i
                                                                          Telegrams: W e d n e sd a y Sheffield 6
M an a g e r   J . L CHARLTON. O.B.E.
                                                                          Registered No. 6 2 4 7 8 England
Secretary:     E. E N G LA N D




                 South Yorkshi              County                           E/CB
                 County Hall,
                 Barnsley, S70
                                                Wctf'
                                                                             5th April 1981




                D e a r Sir,

                 SEMI-FINAL - 11TH AP RIL 1981          ' ~

                On the occasion of the above match, there was an incident
                at the Leppings Lane end of the ground, in the standing
                enclosure, which resulted in injuries to spectators
                because of crushing.

                F r o m our enquiries it appears the.crushing was caused
                through Tottenham supporters arriving late, due to
                problems on the Motorway, a nd rushing to their places
                after the game had commenced, thereby causing problems
                to spectators at the front of the terracing who had
                bee n in the ground a considerable length of time.

               According to our turnstile readings there were 335 in
               excess of the stipulated capacity for that particular
               a r e a j this was the result of Tottenham fans having
               purchased tickets from Wolverhampton and on arrival
               at Turnstile «N‘, Penistone Road, which was the
               Wolverhampton standing area, were directed b y the
               police to the other e nd of the ground where the
               Tottenham fans were standing.

                I give below details of injuries reported to me:-
                        30 spectators treated b y St. John*s Ambulance
                                     Brigade for minor ailments, etc.
                       Treated at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital
                                 _______________       Age 30 years
                                                     [ Corby.
                                  Badly cut hand - stiched*

                                                          Age 20 years

                                  Foot injury - two stitches
smith Yorkshire County Council                    15th April 1981


                                                  Age 21 years

                 D r u n k and disorderly - Hospitalised
                                      w i t h stomach upset.

T r eated at the Northern General Hospital - 5 Spectators.
a                      refuse to co-operate w i t h names, addresses,   etc.,
f    c S   on?yP « S   y o u that according to the police, injurxes
received w e re:—
                            2   - Broken arms
                            1 - Broken leg
                            1 - Head graze
                            1   - Not k n o w n

The overall report of crowd behaviour, b o t h inside and
outside the stadium, was very good indeed*.

Yours faithfully,




    Secretary.
                                                             SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                KCR5VU
                                                ^ M * 0,         SNIG HILL
                                                               . . .   SHEFFIELD S 3 8LY


J. H. BROWNLOW. Q.P.M.
CHIE F CO N ST A BL E                                         3 June 1981


The Secretary (E A Croker Esq)                                                  :ou;Wl
The Football Association
16 Lancaster Gate                                          Oeojntr.^01
LONDON                                                          to
02 3LW                                                                        ''lY,
                                                            cousn                iss
Copy to Chief Executive
Dear Sir

FA CUP SEMI-FINAL        -       11 APRIL 1981
                             •   * ••   . . .

X would refer to the FA Cup Semi-Final match between Wolverhampton
Wanderers Football Club*and Tottenham Hotspur Football Club, held at
Hillsborough Stadium, the home of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, on
Saturday 11 April 1981.                                            .

As you will no doubt be aware many similar Semi-Final matches have been
held at this ground without previous problems. The stadium is issued with
a certificate under the provisions of the Safety in Sports Grounds Act 1975.
This limits the total capacity of the ground to 50,174. The area of the
Leppings Lane enclosure has a capacity of 10,100.

Prior to the match itself, difficulties were envisaged because both sets
of supporters were obliged to use the Ml Motorway. This problem was added
to when a major road accident occurred on the Ml near to its junction with
the A38. The problem was exacerbated by a coach breaking down further along
the motorway, and by extensive road works. This set of circumstances
caused a large number of spectators, predominantly Tottenham Hotspur fans,
to be held up on the motorway for some 90 minutes. As you will appreciate
traffic jams built up and resulted in a sudden influx of large numbers of
football supporters to the area of the ground at around the time for the
start of the match when a fairly steady build up of support throughout the
afternoon could have been anticipated.

I now wish to outline an aspect of the problem which could have been avoided
and which should be anticipated for future similar occasions.

On the day before the Wolverhampton ticket allocation was put on sale to
the public, Tottenham Hotspur played Coventry City Football Club at Coventry
in a league match. Many Tottenham Hotspur supporters stayed overnight in
Coventry and travelled the short distance to Wolverhampton to obtain tickets
which were at a premium in London.    Others also made the journey from London
to Wolverhampton on the Sunday. This completely defeated the spectator
policy which is put into effect at these matches and which places the largest
groups of standing supporters a t_ opposite ends of the ground. Neither of
     •the two participating Semi-Final clubs saw fit to inform the South
     Yorkshire Police, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club or the Football
     Association about this situation and in that event the mixing of supporters
     was not properly catered for. The result of this was that some 400
     Tottenham fans had to be removed from the Spion Kop, in the interests
     of general safety and public order, and were accommodated in the Leppings
     Lane end of the ground,, which had been designated for use by Spurs
     supporters.              ..

     The capacity at the Leppings Lane end is 10,100 and this obviously contains
     a safety factor. At a previous match some 400 holders of forged tickets
     gained entry into this part of the ground and were absorbed without any
     apparent difficulty. However, on this date turnstile readings showed
     that 10,435 people were admitted to this part of the ground.

     A policy of packing spectators occurs at most football grounds where
     large crowds are in attendance so that all the available space is utilised.
I    On this occasion the Tottenham Hotspur fans, who had arrived early in the
 •   day and taken up advantageous viewing points, refused to move into the
     centre of this enclosure,’
                              - thereby creating a jamming effect at the
     extremeties of it. The late cirrivals caused an immediate problem upon
     gaining access to the Leppings Lane area because of rushing forward
     immediately upon entering after Tottenham Hotspur had scored a goal soon
     after kick off. This resulted in a number of crushing injuries on this
     terrace including broken arms, legs and crushed ribs. In all, some 38
     fans received treatment either at hospital or from the St John Ambulance
     representatives present at the game.

     As a. result of this the safety gates at the front oz trie .Lappings ^ans
     enclosure were opened and spectators at the front were allowed to go
     onto the playing area perimeter track to relieve the pressure within the
     terrace. Due to the problems being created by crushing, my officers also
     refused access to the Leppings Lane enclosure to spectators waiting to
     get in.   In my view no other course of action could have been adopted in
     the interest of public safety.

)    During the half time interval my officers attempted to move the spectators
     who were standing or seated within the tracks around onto the normal
     spectator areas.   During this manoeuvre some rather foolish youngsters
      did run onto the pitch but the situation was quickly brought under control
     by officers within the ground.

     In conclusion I would add that there were no other incidents either
     inside or outside the ground other than those caused by the circumstances
     I have described. The circumstances I have outlined have been discussed
     at length and will be borne in mind in the planning of future similar
     events. Discussions are to take place with my officers and officials
     of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club regarding suggestions for obviating
     the problems caused within the Leppings Lane terrace on this occasion.

     Yours faithfully




     Chief^Constable
              THE TREASURY SOLICITOR
              Queen Anne’s Chambers
              28 Broadway London SW1H 9JS
              Telephones Direct Line 0 1 -2 1 0 2109
                               Switchboard 0 1 -2 1 0 3 0 0 0
              Telex 9 1 7 5 6 4          G TN 21 0
              Fax N o. 0 1 -2 2 2 6 0 0 6 - 2 1 0 -3 4 8 8
              D X No. 2 3 1 8 Victoria

Messrs Keeble Hawsons                                                Please quote
7 5t Jam es Row                                                      L 8 9 /2 1 17
Sheffield                                                            Y o u r reference
51 1XA
                                                                     Date
For the atten tion of Miss Gregory/Miss Ayre                         9 May 1989



                                             BY FAX AND LETTER




                     4



HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL


You will recall that a t the pre-inquiry m ee tin g on 28th April Lord Justice Taylor

informed of it and the substance of the e v id en ce supporting it

You will ap preciate that the task of assembling the evid en ce for the Inquiry is a
formidable one and s t a t e m e n t s are still being taken. However, it seem ed right to let
you have what must be a preliminary indication of cr itic ism s which may be levelled at
the City Council, as the local authority responsible for the s a fe t y c e r t i f i c a t e s under
the Safety of Sports Grounds A ct, 1975, as soon as possible before the c o m m e n c e m e n t
of the Inquiry.

The follow ing are the main criticism s which so far appear from the evid en ce available:-

1.     The pens on the terraces a t the Leppings Lane end o f the ground c on stitu te d a
       p o te n tia l d a n g e r if c r o w d c d . T h e m e d i i s o£ egress onto the pitch were
       inadequate and you should have insisted that there were more g a te s , that they
       were properly signed, that there were means o f a c c e s s laterally b etw een the
       pens, again properly marked, and that all gangways w ere properly marked.

2.     The direction al signs w ere inadequate, so that those entering were necessarily
       channelled to the tunnel leading to the c en tral two pens.

3.     The crush barriers within the pens were not properly positioned and one a t lea st
       was o f in sufficient strength.

4.     The tunnel giving a c c e s s to the terrace was not o f a constan t gradient but
       sloped ste e p ly a t the terrace end: this was potentially hazardous if a large
       crowd c a m e down the tunnel.

                                                                1.




0                         a o u o n o s Aansv3ai                                            2.5:21 G0-S0-G8G
      5.    The wall at the turnstiles was not adequate to prevent persons climbing into the
            ground.

      6.    A c c e s s by am bulances or fire engines to the playing area and the surround was
            not adequately provided for. Furthermore, the provision o f first-aid equipm ent
            was insu fficien t.

      Should any further m atters deserving o f criticism c om e to our a tte n tion , we will of
      course let you know of them.




                                      Assistant Treasury Solicitor




                                                    2.




810                       y o u o iio s Aansy3ai                                          q C : 7 T   CO-C^-COCT
The Acting Head of Administration          The City Treasurer
and Legal Department

  10th May, 1989
  MRO
  4007 - Hr. Ogle



Financial Implications of the Hillsborough Disaster/Inquiry

At a meeting on 10th May, 1989, with officers involved with aspects of
the Hillsborough disaster and arrangements for the subsequent Inquiry by
Lord Justice Taylor, consideration was given to the financial issues arising
from the events. These would appear to fall into two categories as followst-

        (a) the financial issues arising from action taken by the Local
Authority in connection with the arrangements for the Inquiry which was
set up by the Home Office and for which the Home Office has undertaken
to meet all reasonable costs; and

        (b) the broader financial Implications arising from the operational
 action    taken by this Authority following the Hillsborough disaster,
including inspection/repair work and possible overtime/honorarium payments*

There are a number of Departments involved in the issues arising from the
disaster and there is now a need to establish a formal central mechanism
through which the financial aspects of these issues can be co-ordinated.

I should therefore be no3t grateful if you would undertake within your
Department, the collation and evaluation of the financial data and cost
implications to the Authority, with a view to the preparation of a submission
to the Home Office and, if necessary, a report to the Policy Committee
in due course.

Subject to your agreement as respects these arrangements I will arrange
for a memorandum to be circulated to all Chief Officers.
                                                                                         Sch 9 1 6 0
    R 3 7 19
                                   C IT Y OF S HEFFIELD — M E M O R A N D U M

From           Chief Executive                           To      See Circulation Below


Date           9 May 1989
Ref.           AH/GW
Tel. Ext.      4018 - Mr Webster                          Ref.




               re: JUDICIAL INQUIRY - FRIDAY 28 APRIL and MONDAY 15 MAY

               I thought it important that I write and pass on the compliments
               received, primarily from the Treasury Solicitor but also from others
               involved in the initial day of the Inguiry the 28th April, regarding
               the administrative arrangements made for that day as can        be seen
               from the attached copy letter from Mr Whalley of the Home Office.

               In particular, I would like to express my thanks to all those who
               worked so hard to ensure that the arrangements went offsmoothly
               and efficiently and to thank them for their initialeffort and their
               continued help in the future.

               Clearly, in a communication of this sort, it is perhaps wrong to
               single out individuals in view of the team effort that went on but
               nevertheless I feel that the work of the Administration Group and
               the Building Survey Group in the Estates Division of Land and Planning
               deserve attention, as do the efforts of the Licensing Section within
               the Administration and Legal Department, Mr              of   the same
               Department, Ms          and Tony Flannagan of Cleansing and  of course
               the efforts of Pat O'Neill and                in terms of overall co­
               ordination and liaison.

               Whilst guite obviously we would all have hoped that the arrangements
               would have been reguired for a happier purpose, I nevertheless repeat
               my thanks and appreciation and those of the Leader for the efforts
               put in so far and in the future.




               Circulationt

               Director of Land and Planning
               Chief Personnel Officer
               Director of Cleansing Services
               Acting Head of Administration and Legal

               cc    Councillor C J C Betts, Leader
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH                          T h e Rt H on L o r d ju stic e Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                                       50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                                       London SW1H 9AT
                                                       01-273 2577/3602/2370

 Ian Podmore Esq
 Chief Executive
 Sheffield City Council
 Town Hall
 SHEFFIELD
                                                            4 'May 1989
                                     A0 ^?:-i5TPi£?3N & LEGAL
                                         D":vr., SrEFFiELD.
                                                     O r {ASSISTANT
                                                            HEAD      |L S .
                                           -8               1989 jpAA
3)-(Lp ^            .MOU
           IW. ^ocJlr               UL
                                         O .S.M .j    LIB   | ELKS     PSO
                           )                                          | CC

HILLSBOROUGH D ISA ST E R INQUIRY


 I write in confirmation of our telephone conversation on 19 April
 and my visit to Sheffield on 20 April to discuss with your staff
 arrangements for the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry.

 Lord Justice Taylor is extremely grateful to the City Council for
 making the facilities of the Town Hall available to him for his
 Inquiry, and has asked me to write to you to express his
 gratitude.  He was particularly grateful for all the excellent
 arrangements made for the preliminary hearing on 28 April.

 May I add my personal thanks for the assistance of Mr Pat
 O'Neill, Mrs ____________ and their colleagues, who have been
 quite outstanding in the help and support they have already given
 to me and my staff.                           \.




                                                            R M WHALLEY
                                                                                                                     Sch
      R 3 7 19
                                      C IT Y OF SHEFFIELD — M E M O R A N D U M
  _   «
* rrom
           PHIL DENT                                        T°    PAT O ’NEILL                         1
           PRINCIPAL PRESS OFFICER                                ASSISTANT CHIEF PERSONNEL OFFICER
           PUBLICITY DEPARTMENT                                   cc Town Hall Superintendent
 Date                                                                  Sue Davis
           8th May 1989
 Ref.                                                                  Mark Webster
           PD/JMB
 Tel. Ext.                                                       ________ r)or?//v (r L&Crftl— PEP/ .
           4755




                 PUBLIC INQUIRY

                 In connection with the resumed hearing of the Inquiry from next Monday (15th
                 May) I thought you may wish to know that we have so far received requests f^r
                 broadcasting facilities from BBC Radio, Yorkshire Television, ITN and Radio
                 Sheffield.   There will no doubt be others that we will deal with when
                 received.   BBC Radio TV and ITN will be accommodated between the Old and New
                 Town Halls.   Radio Sheffield will use the Radio Car in the Central courtyard



•
                 with agreement of the Town Hall Superintendent's staff.


             ,                    ,




                                                                       ADMINISTRATION fir LEGAL
                                                                          DhPT., SHEFFIELD.
                                                                                           a s s is t a n t
                                                                      .**                      HEAD           L.S.
                                                                      a        11 MAY 1989 PAA
                                                                      c     O .S .M .I   LIB   I ELNS         PSO
                                                                      GS                                      cc
Ashddl Grove 6 0 WfestboumeRoad Sheffield S102QU Tel.0742 686185 Telex5 4 4 0 0


                                                    5th May 1989




Phil Dent,
Press Office,
Sheffield City Council,
Town Hall,

Sheffield 1.


        Hillsborough Inquiry 15/5/89 onwards.




Dear Phil,




     Many thanks for your help earlier in the week. This is to

 confirm our request made earlier this week to broadcast from

 a car in the courtyard area next to the council chamber. The car

 is a white Cortina NYN 290 Y,a former radio car. It will be

 connected to our existing Town Hall line via the point next to

 reception. It will be used primarily for live reporter pieces and

 relay of taped interviews. It is mainly for Radio Sheffield use

 -    but could be used by a network correspondent in the later stages

 of the inquiry. The      keys can be left with Town Hall staff to allow

'evacuation in an emergency - but we hope it won’t be necessary to

 move the car at all during the hearing. Hope this provides all the

 necessary detail. By the way, Bob Carter will once again be our

 reporter at the Town Hall.

 Yours -sincetfelv'
 CHris van Schaick, News editor.

           M W 1035k H z 2 9 0 m     VHF/FM104.1,8&6stereo
Acting Head of Department!                Chief Personnel Officer
Administration and Legal
                                          for the Attention of
9 May 1989                                Mr P O'— U l
AH/GW
4018 - Mr Webster




8TRICTLT PKBSOMH. MB)



rat ARRAH6BMKHTS VOS THE IWQCIHT

I write to confirm the discussion which took place regarding the
arrangements and in particular that I would# first of all# prepare
under the Chief Executive's signature# a letter to the Home Office
(copy enclosed) requesting     formal  confirmation of their verbal
assurances that the cost of the Inquiry will be met by them and
secondly a memorandum of thanks to relevant members of staff (copy
also enclosed).   in addition# I also confirm our discussion relating
to the use by the Judge of the Lady Mayoress' roan and the fact that
it should now be possible to make alternative arrangements for this
pursuant to what is# I think# quite a reasonable request from the
Lord Mayor Elect that this be avoided if at all possible.

Z think it would also be useful if we could ensure that the Reception
Room could be used for the evening of the Annual Council and I look
forward to you confirming that this is the situation following your
further discussions with the representatives from the Home Office.

Finally# I enclose copies of the latest letters from the Home Office#
offering their thanks to staff) confirming payment of costs and
thanking the Members for moving the Annual Council meeting.
Chief Executive                                            See Circulation Below


9 May 1989
AH/GW
4018 - Mr Webster




ro«   judicial   n g o m   -   ykxdxt   28   aprxl   and   noma   15   mat


I thought it important that I write and pass on the compliments
received* primarily from the Treasury Solicitor but also from others
involved in the initial day of the Inquiry the 28th April* regarding
the administrative arrangements made for that day as can be seen
fron the attached copy letter fron Mr Whalley of the Hone Office*

In particular* I would like to express my thanks to all those who
worked so hard to ensure that the arrangements went off smoothly
and efficiently and to thank then for their initial effort and their
continued help in the future*

Clearly* in a communication of this sort* it is perhaps wrong to
single out Individuals in view of the team effort that went on but
nevertheless I feel that the work of the Administration Group and
the Building Survey Group in the Estates Division of Land and Planning
deserve attention* as do the efforts of the Licensing Section within
the Administration and Legal Department* Mr             1 of the same
Department* Ms          and Tony Plannagan of Cleansing and of course
the efforts of Pat O'Neill and               Iin terms of overall co­
ordination and liaison*

Whilst quite obviously we would all have hoped that the arrangeaents
would have been required for a happier purpose* I nevertheless repeat
my thanks and appreciation and those of the Leader for the efforts
put in so far and in the future.




elrwnUtlQBI

Director of Land and Planning
Chief Personnel Officer
Director of Cleansing Services
Acting Read of Administration and Legal

cc      Councillor C J C Betts* Leader
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH                      T h e Rt H on Lord J u s tic e Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                                   50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                                   London SW1H 9AT
                                                   01-273 2577/3602/2370

Ian Podmore Esq
Chief Executive
Sheffield City Council
Town Hall
SHEFFIELD
                                                                   4“K a y 1989
                                     AOMJKISnifcfflN & LEGAL
                                        KPT., SHEFFIELD.
                                       U r-.O OF [ASSISTANT
                                         ngPT.   I  HEAD    L.S.
                                     B      - 8 MAY 1989 PAA
              PocJLto o m           UL
                                          O .S.M 1 LIB    j ELMS    PSO
                            )       1os                             cc
HILLSBOROUGH D ISA ST E R INQUIRY


I write in confirmation of our telephone conversation on 19 April
and my visit to Sheffield on 20 April to discuss with your staff
arrangements for the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry.

Lord Justice Taylor is extremely grateful to the City Council for
making the facilities of the Town Hall available to him for his
Inquiry, and has asked me to write to you to express his
gratitude.  He was particularly grateful for all the excellent
arrangements made for the preliminary hearing on 28 April.

May I add my personal thanks for the assistance of Mr Pat
O'Neill, Mrs             and their colleagues, who have been
quite outstanding in the help and support they have already given
to me and my staff.




                                                         R M WHALLEY
           AH/GW


            S Hay 1989


D Capper Esq
Company Secretary
Sheffield United Football Club
Bramall kane
SHEFFIELD
S2 4S0


Dear Mr Capper

ret XHSncnOHS OF SHEFFISLO UWITBD 8TADIUM

I refer to your letter of 29 April which* from examination of the
contents* It would appear to have crossed with mine of the 28th.

In particular, I believe that my letter makes the situation regarding
inspections quite clear and should* therefore* leave no doubt* either
in your mind or that of the Club, as to the future arrangements for
the Inspection of United*s Ground.

In this regard, as a matter of courtesy, and further to the working
arrangements which have previously existed and which I hope will
continue to exist between the Authority and the Club, I would inform
you that authorised Officers of the Council will attend at the Stadium
at 10.00 am on Tuesday 16 May 1989 to carry out an inspection and
that fro* the Health and Consumer Services Department’s viewpoint
such inspection would Involve three teams of two officers per team.
Basically* two of the above teems will inspect the Stadium itself
and the remaining team will deal with safety management matters.

As I would hope you would agree, has always been the ease, such
inspections will be carried out in a considerate and professional
manner and it is to be hoped that such an inspection can be completed
on that day but it may be neaessary for it to run over to the 17th
May and, of course* dependent on what is found, further inspections
may then be necessary.

Finally, regarding the offer contained in the ultimate paragraph
of your letter, I would point out that my Chief Licensing Officer
will be contacting the parties who remained at the Ground on 27th
to see whether or not they wish to make a further Inspection
accompanied by the other Officers of the Working Group or whether




                                                Mr Webster -
                                                734018
they wish, at this stage, to pass comments on to Mr Bownes so that
he is then in a position to forward the views of the Group as a whole
to the Club.   However, as I hope my letter of 28 April made clear,
in light of the fact that my Department has responsibility for
enforcement duties under the relevant legislation, it would clearly
be inappropriate for me, in carrying out such duties, to accept your
very kind offer of the Club drafting Minutes of such meeting.

I trust that I have made the position absolutely clear, if you require
any further clarification then please feel free to ring me.

Tours sincerely




MASK WEB8TKR
Acting Bead of Department
Acting Head of Departmentt                  Mr D Purchon
Administration and Legal                    Director   of  Health   and
                                            Consumer Services
5 Hay 1989
AH/GW                                       Mr X Blount
4018 - Mr Webstar                           Land and Planning




rat SAFEST? OP SPORTS GROTTOS - SHEFFIELD UMITHD FOOTBALL CKJB

At the meeting in my offices the other day, to discuss the progress
regarding Hillsborough and other grounds, I circulated to yourselves
a copy of response frora the Company Secretary of Sheffield United
to ny comnunication of 26 April.

I think, in light of the rather raebling and innaccurate nature of
the letter,    it is perhaps best not to respond literally to it,
particularly in light of the fact that they appear to have conceded
same of the issues in question, and I therefore attach a copy of
ray rather bland response.

I would add that Z have now been contacted by Dr Eastwood who would
like to cone and have a personal discussion with me regarding the
question of inspection of sports grounds.      Clearly Z have agreed
to sach discussion, if only to discover what he is trying to achieve
but Z will, of course, be reporting back fully to you once the meeting
has taken place early next week.

One point upon which Z would however welcome urgent clarification
is the suggestion that those aenbers of the Council staff who renained
on site on    the 27th entered into detailed discussions with       Dr
Bastwood’s representatives# contrary to the agreed approach to such
natters.  Can Z therefore ask that Z receive by return clarification
of whether or this did ocour, what preaisely was said and an assurance
that it will be re-occur at any future time.
City of Sheffield             M etropolitan D istrict

Roger Pensam, FCIS. MBIM. Solicitor                                                          Administration and Legal Department
Head of Department
                                                                                             Town Hall,
                                                                                             Sheffield S1 2HH

Our reference        MO

Your reference

Date
                     5th May, 1989


Lord Justice Taylor's Enquiry Team,
West Midlands Police,
Furnival House,
Sheffield,
SI 4QP.


For the attention of Inspector Burrows


Dear Sirs,

City of Sheffield - Scheme for Major Peacetime Emergencies

I refer to your recent telephone conversation with my office and am pleased
to enclose a copy of the City Council's Scheme for Major Peacetime Emergencies,
as requested.

As you will be aware, the Council's functions and responsibilities are
not primarily designed to provide an emergency rescue service and its Emergency
Plan is supplementary to the Police Scheme for major disasters.

In the case of the Hillsborough disaster, the Local Authority broadcast
an appeal for trained Social Workers to attend the incident and it was
in this area of care, comfort and counselling of the bereaved that the
Local Authority's services were primarily directed following the incident.
Further details of the action taken by the Council's officers can be provided
by the officers concerned, if required.

With reference to your query regarding specific emergency plans, I can
confirm that the role of the Authority does not require the preparation
of a specific plan for a major emergency within the Hillsborough Stadium.

 Yours faithfully._________________




 Acting Head of Department




 Enclosure



                                                                                        734007
 JD                       For telephone enquiries on this matter please ring.........................................(STD Code 0742)
                                                        Telex 54243 (Administration & Legal)             f/; r .   Q ^ le
             AB/Gtf


             5 May 1989


W I Hurray Esq# LLB
City Solicitor and Secretary to the Council
PO Box Mo 88
Municipal Buildings
Dell Street
LIVERPOOL
L69 2DH


Dear Hr Hurray

ret HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

With regard to your FAXed communication of 3 May# I have now had
the opportunity of discussing the contents of the proposed draft
letter to the Secretary of State for Social Services with both the
Leader of the Council and the Director of Social Services# Veil Kay#
and the position is that we would wish to support the bid for the
Merseyside Regional Unit for the sua of I350#000 on the basis that
such bid is distinct fron and over and above Individual authorities
oost*  Accordingly# to this end# I append hereto a copy of Councillor
Betts' signature# together with details of his role.

However# I an asked to point out that there does# in the view of
Sheffield# need to be an amendment to the sentence in the penultimate
paragraph on the first page of the letter which it is suggested should
read*-

*.........    spread across the Horth-West# Sheffield and Nottingham.*

So far as Sheffield's costs are concerned# as can be seen fron the
enclosed report# these are estimated as up to £110*000 merely for
the Social Services# and in addition there is obviously also the
Coroner's costs and other related staff costs which the Council has
Incurred and it is felt therefore that you nay wish to consider
amending the Cl million figure if this is only an estimate of the
cost to be incurred by the north-west authorities.

If you require any further information or clarification then please
do not hesitate to contact me.

Yours sincerely




                                                   734018
n n m m tin
Acting Bead of Peparfwm t
             AH/DG
             JMJ/VSC
             5 May 1989
Mr JM Jones
Assistant Chief Constable
(Operations)
West Midlands Police
Headquarters
PO Box 52
Lloyd House
Colmore Circus Queensway
Birmingham
B4 6NQ

Dear Mr Jones,

HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM - GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE

Thank you for your letter of 4th May 1989. I am giving your comments my
urgent attention and will contact you again shortly.
Yours sincerely,




Acting Head of Department
                                                  734018
                                                                                                                                                                                            ■f!Pf» f
                                                                                                                        «       '




                                                                                                                                                                                                    pys
           WAX.        tfKSSJ\QE
                                                                                                                                                                                                    f 1.^4 fh O


From   :   .£ . . r l ... i X ' i i )                                   .c.y                                            !               f           :           ^               ,’C.i.5                         ^




tq     j   .. . f t e ... P . o p . d . o f i - e ..............................
               C ti 16 f          £ K £ C U T l \1&
                                                                                                                                            »»*«■#*****#>#***%




                 <T    /<           ! g c]
Date *     *** *«*.j)«^»Wfr'•fig#-Hf




Po c; K3', " :




Add           tfo s
                            I   I   I   I   I   *   I   I   f   I   I   t   »   t   *   I   *   *   I   4   t   *   *   t   f       t   I   f   f   t   f   I   I   «   f   f   i   «   <   •   »   «   >   «



                            ************                                                • R • «




                                                                                                                                            *******£******»**
                                        i   i   »   »   t   *   t   *   *   *   *   t   «   #   »   #   ♦   *   I   I   *   *       *   *   »   »   I   f   I   ♦   «
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH                                                T h e i t Hem i n j u s t i c e T aylor !'
STADIUM DISASTER                                                                    •                                ■
                                                                             SO Queen Anne’s Gate
                                                                             London SWIH 9AT
                                                                             01-273 2T77/3602/2570

Ian L Podmore Esq
Chief Executive
City of Sheffield Metropolitan District
T ow n Hq.11
Shef?
51       2BH                                                                    ,                5 May 1®8§
                                                                             Date




                   1      Oi
                   *":     rctiim o m

m m sw m m m                stadium disaster inquiry


           .;'•» for your f a x o f 4 M a y , received this morning, about                : ;
flic :         g p o ke : o M r W e b s t e r 's secretary when I received i t .        7   ^
think that y o u r f a x h a s crossed w i t h m in e o f t h e sane d a t e # which, .'p-
             ~twm f o p t h e answer you were seeking about t h e Hop®
                "H ng the c o s t s o f t h e I n q u i r y i n p r i n c i p l e , Ite
s t a g e i s . 1 think, f o r us t o s t a r t t o l o o k a t t h e d e t a i l s .
• ‘ "v ' -sonably make t h e p o i n t t h a t you c a n n o t e n t e r into
f    i   n     f   n     r *       n o t in C O n * id e r s J b l© SUfflS On t h e s t P S B ^ th O'? "■
                   -      a lo n e ,    I h o p e t h a t t h a t p o s i t i o n is now ciariA '.**-•

la  your l e t t e r o f 4 May you also say t h a t t h e members                                &«v
t*'                A n n u a l G e n e r a l M e e t in g o f the C o u n c i l ( scheduled foie//: ;.,
I 1 !mj I from t h e Town H a l l i n t o o t h e r p r e m i s e s .          1 m e rit ieir*ii<ft tM,r.
t o L o r d Justice T a y l o r t o d a y ,         i e h a s asked me t o express his
gratitude to t h e members for t h e i r generous understanding in t f u #
respect. He r e a l i s e s t h a t t h i s w i l l i n v o l v e d i s r u p t i o n and
disappointment t o some, b u t is g l a d t h a t t h e momentum o f t i e
Inquiry c a n b e maintained i n i t s f i r s t w e e k ,                I w o u ld therefore
be g r a t e f u l i f y o u c o u ld pass on t o t h e members L o r d Justice
Taylor’5 a p p r e c i a t i o n ot t h e i r decision             -..'t t h e Annual Generai
Meeting.                                                                \
                                                                           Cv'Mo J'--'         X..




                                                                               R MWHRCIiSX
FRfiBSrlii^RUICES.-tttSPEC'taRfiTH/FElJ.                                                       NO, 3 :        P, 1




          From                    5>. .tl...




          to           =                                     ..................
                                 ..c j y j ^ e . ..          «£...... ........
                                 . :sa efa a ,c> .. .CIT.V.. .CGUMOU,
O
          Ea,e ,                                                    ............




                  ■''1 P»<i«8 :         ."i-i .. C l W W •    P°f




          A d d itio n a l In fo




                                                                              /6 c _
                                                                                       CP^s o     C P c/aJ)
                                                                                       'T<&u^|/ i .c .
    R E C E I V E D   F S   0M                                 5.   3.1989   23:40      Q lA             P,    i
JM B E SERUICES INSPECTORflTE/FED             p :, 04.19 S 9 . J 1 s 43
                                           - '•-N-
                                                                          . :N O , 3 , P , 3

         INQUIRY IN T O THE HILLSBOROUGH                     The Rt Hon T ordjusiice Taylor
         STADIUM DISASTER
                                                             50 Queen Anne's Gate
                                                             London SWIM 9AT
                                                             01-273 2577/3602/2370

         Ian Podiiiore Esq
         Chief Executive
         Sheffield City Council
         Town, Hall
         SHEFFIELD
                                                                          4 May 1989




         HILLSBOROUGH   disaster


         I am enclosing a formal letter on behalf of Lord Justice Taylor
         expressing h i s gratitude to the City Council for making the
         facilities of the Town Hali available to him for the course of
         his Inquiry,

         In due course, perhaps we could have a discussion about                 the costs
         which, are likely tc ©rise.as a result of conducting the                Inquiry
         in the Town Hall, Where these fall to the Inquiry they                  will be
         met by the Horae Office.  It "would h e very helpful to me              to have
         some indication from you of what these costs might be.




                                                                 R M WHAI.LEJT          ‘"4
G




    RECEIVED FROM                            3.1939      23:41                         P.   4
               SERVICES INSPECTORflTE/FElh                       05,04,1939 11:43             NO. 3        P, 2
                                                                                                                    '

              INQUIRY INTO THE H1LLSBOROUGII                                 T h e Rt H on Lord J u stic e Taylor
              STADIUM DISASTER
                                                                             50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                                                             London SW1II9AT
                                                                             01-273 2577/3602/2370

              Ian Podmore Esq
              Chief Executive
              Sheffield City Council
              Town Hall
              SHEFFIELD
                                                                                        4 May 1989




             3   W                 n.        - M C \J
                                        ^uti-i
                                                        )
               HIJ.LSBORODGH DISASTER INQUIRY
O
               I write in confirmation of our telephone conversation on 19 April
               and my visit to Sheffield on 20 April to discuss with your staff
               arrangements for the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry.

               :..oro justice Taylor is extremely grateful to the City Council for
              it-,akin*:.;
                        the facilities of the ’town Hall available to him for his
               '-Hairy, and nay asked me to write to you to express his
               gratitude. He was particularly grateful for all the excellent
               arrangements made for the preliminary hearing on 28 April,

              May i acid my personal thanks; for the assistance of Mr Pat
              O ’NeiXi, M r s ____________ |®nd their colleagues, who have been
              quita outstanding in tfte help and support they have already given
              to me and i t . / staff ,

                                                                                                      *)
O


                                                                                  R M WHALLEY




    Rt C E   I UED   F ft Q   [1                            5.   3.1989   23:41
         AH/GW



           4 May 1989




Mr R Whally
B om Office
Queen Anna's Gate
LONDON


Dear Mr Hhally

ret junuu w MMHfs van *nra im.unrmooaa uqouut

Further to the many discussions regarding the above matter between
primarily ay Assistant, Mr O'Melll, but also the Acting Bead of the
Administration and Legal Department, Mark Webster, I write first
of all to confirm that it Is the Intention and aim of the Leading
Members of the City Council to offer every assistance and facility
in the setting up and administration of the Inquiry which it is in
the Council's power to provide* In particular* as part of such co­
operation the Members have agreed to move the Annual General Meeting
of the Connell (scheduled for 17 May) in which the Lord Mayor is
elected, from the Town Hall into other premises, allowing the Inquiry
to go on Tin-interrupted, notwithstanding the very kind offer of Lord
Justice Taylor to adjourn for the day, which offer was much
appreciated.

However, in making the arrangements, the City Council has Incurred
to date a not inconsiderable amount of expenditure and will obviously
continue to do so* In the circumstances, le the urgency, such action
has been taken by Officers acting on their own initiative which in
other instances would leave them open to severe criticism due to
the absence of any specific authorisation from the City Council to
incur the relevant expenditure* To date, in the spirit of ensuring
that the matter proceeded as quickly and as efficiently as possible,
they have been prepared to rely on the verbal assurances from yourself
and your colleagues that letters were on the way from the Hone Office
confirming that it would be reimbursing the Council for all properly
Incurred expenditure relating to the Inquiry* My concern is, however,
that the afore-mentioned letters have now been in the course of
preparation for a little over 10 days and whilst I appreciate that
you have had many matters to deal with in the period, as Indeed have
we all, I feel that I most ask for some formal confirmation of the
arrangements by Monday 9 May at the latest.
I understand that you have had indicated to yon that I sight wall
feel obliged to writ* In this fashion, and would atraaa ay ao doing
la not Intended, In any way* aa being unhelpful bat I as sure you
will appreciate that the City Council, like any public body, cannot
siaply continue to enter into coaaitaenta, for not unconsiderable
suas, on the strength of verbal assurances alone, and I should
therefore be vary grateful if this ainor issue could be resolved
onoa and for all.

Yours sincaraly




Chief Saaeutive
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH            / The Rt Hon LordJustice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                     r     50 Queen Anne s Gate
                                           London S W 1 H 9 A T
                                           01-273 2577/3602/2370

Ian Podmore
Chief -Executive
Sheffield City Council
Town Hall
SHEFFIELD
                                                      4 May 1989
                                           Date




                       r
             D ISA ST E R INQ UIRY


I am enclosing a formal letter on behalf of Lord Justice Taylor
expressing his gratitud e to the City Council for making the
facilities of the Town Hall available to him for the course of
his Inquiry.

In due course, perhaps we could have a discussion about     the costs
which are likely to arise as a result of conducting the     Inquiry
in the Town Hall. Where these fall to the Inquiry they      will be
met by the Home Office.  It would be very helpful to me     to have
some indication from you of what these costs might be.

                                              Ytp   VAAp




                                             R M WHALLEY
                                                            The Rt Hon LordJustice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                                                50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                                                London S W 1 H 9 A T
                                                            01-273 2577/3602/2370


Ian.Podmore Esq
Chief Executive
Sheffield-City Council
Town Hall
SHEFFIELD
                                                                               y 1989
                                                  "A DM W Uk/flifrn & UCAL*
                                                       DEPT., SHEFFIELD.
                                                  A DEPT.OF ASSISTANT
                                                      HEAD
                                     '■J ••••'•
                                                                  HEAD LS .
                                                        - 8 MAY 1989 PAA
         !W.   P   oc   JLm CM                    Q &S5M.I LIB j ELNS PSO
                                 )                QS        .     • - .  cc
HILLSBOROUGH D ISA ST E R INQ UIRY


I write in confirmation of our telephone conversation on 19 April
and my visit to Sheffield on 20 April to discuss with your staff
arrangements for the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry.

Lord Justice Taylor is extremely grateful to the City Council for
making the facilities of the Town Hall available to him for his
Inquiry, and has asked me to write to you to express his
gratitude. He was particularly grateful for all the excellent
arrangements made for the preliminary hearing on 28 April.

    I add my personal thanks for the assistance of Mr Pat
0 Neill, Mrs             and their colleagues, who have been
                  in the help and support they have already given
to me and my staff.

                                                                                           )




                                                                 R M W haliIjISX

                                                                      CHisF-EXtGuOVfc jj
                                                                          sHema.0     k
                                                            U T.
                   Of<cju^cd        uJdtK
                                                                                                                      0
From:   J M JONES MSc                                           WEST MIDLANDS POLICE ^ „
                                                                                                                   K <Yt) ",
        ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                               HEADQUARTERS
        (Operations)                                            PO Box 52, Lloyd House /     I-wHQ u
                                                                Colmore Circus Queensway |'\ In        /a
                                                                Birmingham B4 6NQ        ^   ^i)    l/Apj
                                                                Telephone: 021-236 500)1                             <' T V>
                                                w y 3

            H M Webster Esq
            Administration and Legal Services Dept                 Our Ref: JMJ/VSC
            Sheffield City Council
            Town Hall
            Pinstone Street                                                       ADMINISTRATION & LEGAL
                                                                        1                                         ir r p iE f tt                         I
            Sheffield                                                                     UfcHi..
                                                                                                              m i
                                                                                                              a o e m c E B v .
                                                                                                                                               H w ai
            S1 2HH                                                                       MEAD           O r (A S S IS T A N T
                                                                              A              •J P P T .        V        HEAD           ^
                                                                                                                                               p



                                                                              B              -    5       M    A Y 1 9 8 9                     PAA
            Dear Mr Webster
                                                                              C        O .S .M .I             L IB      |    ELNS                  PSO

            HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM - GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE                                                                                      c c
                                                                         [   j£   L L ------------ -----------------------------------------


            From our preliminary examination of the General Safety Certificate and
            those related papers for the Hillsborough Stadium supplied by your'
            Department, it is quite clear that the Certificate was issued by the
            former South Yorkshire County Council in 1979.

           In the summer of 1986 we believe an application was made to increase
           spectator capacity for the Spion Kop by almost 6,000 persons to a maximum
           level of 22,831. Our understanding, on initial reading of the papers in
           our possession, is that your General Purposes Panel agreed to approve
           an increase to 21,000 subject to certain provisions. However, from the
           papers in our possession we cannot find any formal application to amend
           the Certificate in respect of spectator totals, nor was there any
           allowance seemingly made for additional stewarding.  If we are in
           possession of all the relevant papers it would appear that the Ground
           Safety Certificate does not reflect the current spectator capacity or
           necessary stewarding requirements.

           I believe it is important to draw this matter to your attention. I
           would also like to stress that this is my understanding from the papers
           in our possession; I accept that it is perfectly possible for others
           to exist which would counter the suggestion that the Certificate has not
           been amended. On the basis of the material we presently have in our
           possession I see it as appropriate that I draw this matter to your
           attention for your immediate consideration.  If you wish to gain access
           to the papers in our possession, please do not hesitate to contact Chief
           Superintendent Baker at my Sheffield office, Furnival House. We will,
           of course, wish to retain in our possession the original papers, but I
           have no objection to you having access or copies to assist you in your
           research.

           Yours sincerely




        -— -frsiistant Chi^^GcJistaMe^.     J
            (Operations)

           Copies To: Secretary, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Pic
                      Chief Fire Officer, Sheffield County Fire Service
                      Chief Constable, South Yorkshire Police
                               CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM
           *
 From      DIRECTOR OF SOCIAL SERVICES         To:    CHIEF EXECUTIVE


 Date:    3RD MAY 1989
 Ref:     NVK/SMJ
 Tel Ext: 4844                                 Ref:



                                                                CPI*
                                                                W-T.


           HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - TELEX


           The Merseyside Regional Unit bid for £350,000 is distinct from and over
           and above individual authorities’ costs and I hope we will support it.

           The sentence which needs amending is the one outlined, e.g. "spread
           across the North west, Sheffield and Nottingham". As our costs are
           estimated as up to £110,000 (see attached) they may also wish to amend
           the £1 million figure if this is only an estimate of the costs to be
           incurred individually by the North West Authorities.




           N.V. KAY
           DIRECTOR OF SOCIAL SERVICES




                    «C\!




         ^ ^   P                               tywCVVy*-<^




C0FABA
                         Mr. » . I . Murray, City Solicitor. S e c re ta ry to th e Council,
                From:-                       Liverpool City Council.        *     ---- ------



                To:-     The Chief Executive'of
                          Nottinghamshire County Council

                          Sheffield M.B.C.'

                          Lancashire C.C.

                          Cheshire C.C.

                          St. Helena M.B.C.

                          Knowsley M.B.C.

                          Wirral M.B.C.

                          Sefton H.B.C.



                 Communication   —   3 s h e e ts .




j   i   a   -




                                                                                        0 .FM
                City                                 W. I. Murray, LL.B.
                                                     City Solicitor, Secretary to the Council              ^
                of                                   P.O. Box No. 88
                                                     Municipal Buildings
                Liverpool                            Dale Street
                                                     Liverpool    L69 2D H
                                                     Telephone: O B W O W C J *# *® *:   0 5 1 -2 2 5 -2 3 7 3
                       FAX < O S l) 2 2 5 -3 9 1 6

                                                     Your ref
                                                     Our ref     DM/JB.
                                                     Date        3rd May, 1989.




Dear Sir,

                                Hillsborough Tragedy

     Following last Saturday's meeting of Council Leaders in Liverpool
discussions have taken place informally with Civil Servants. They stressed
the need to make a clear and concerted approach to Government. The attached
letter has been produced following the meeting and it is hoped to dispatch it
to Secretary of State for Social Services over the signatures of .Leadership of
 he nine authorities.

     Would you please ask your Leader/Leadership if they would -be^pacopared to  %
co-sign the letter and, if so, fax a signature (a) with details of their role to
be added to the letter which will be dispatched forthwith.

    Thank you for your assistance in this matter.

                                   Yours sincerely,



                                   City Solicitor, Secretary to the XSobrcU.
           -A
                %




 Dear Secretary of State,

                                          H i l l a b o m ngh Tragedy
                                                                                                                -'■1 -C




                                                                                                                 ...»
      .                                       j ^      5      ±        i a   r z     ^   . f e      S     r               .
 Z s s z
 £ £ * £ £ £ £ ? - * the Leaders of H o t t i ^ M r .                        “ £>
 consider a Joint approach to the provision of services «bxoh will continue to b
 necessary for several years to come.

          The attaches report,          prepared      under the        Independent a ^    ,T ^ L ? 1“ ’*
 Professor of Social W o r k at Hanchester University. was agreed in principle. The
                         establishment of a Regional Unit to provxde a core o f c o - o n
 services, I nc l u d i n g —                                                                            -*•'

          1)            A Helpline to receive calls fro® anywhere day and                       night;

 A        il)           The Co-ordination of counselling services both within and outside
 W                      the n i x * local authorities provided by voluntary                        wellae
                            .statutory agencies;

          iii)              A Database capable of dealing with all requests for assistance and
                            offers o f help;

          iv)               Acontinuingtrainingandstaff support programmeInthispreviously
                            unfamiliar area o f work;

          v)            The Management of media contacts and publicity.


          It was agreed to reconvene the meeting following e ^ i o r a t i o n of all p o s s ^ l e
     sources of fimding.   Recognizing that services will need to e x ^ n d beyond thcs
     nine local authorities and be available                                                             only approach

                       ii               to S v S S L l       * M * « » r k is being undertaken t o ^ r o a c h
                                            b o d ies and B .E .C . A lre a d y t h . lo c a l a o c l.l serv ic e a
 * E t £ r it le s     i T & e N o rth w est have agreed to j o in t l y sponsor an a d d itio n s ! tr a in in g
     officer.
           The Department, we anticipate, would wish to be associated witti this
     initiative and
                    p ^ ie ^ ^ T      L Il a u t h i r l t y a r - L   it .ill   a ls o be necessary to ta k e u rs e n t
   action t o ^ t r e n g t h e n staffing m order to directly help individuals y d their families,
   ^ r n r d i n * to the           of the problems which they are f a c i n g ^ ) As yet thege eoatti ^ ^ ^ i
 f-r—                       iJ                ■hffi Aggregated are unlikely to b e less than £1 nljj-icg/
                                      r£ ?   ■E £ tS w C&                Govawwent
     ^ F ^ T ^ B i a y consider making resources available to assist in direct service
      provision as well as the establishment of the Regional Unit.




      S
      provided.                                                                           /coat’d ........




                                                  0512253916                                                         P .03
Q3-Q5-19S9          ll‘
                      *34
                                                -2-


                                                                                        3.5.B&.
 •e re fe a ry   o f S ts te .


/continued....




       Giventhen.ture                extent cf the.e .^i;.;Jh.^etter^^ee^^^
t.h« Secretary of State for Environment and the s e e r e w u r 0 1
end also for information to officers in other agencies.

      In view of the importance o f the Issues involved a copy ha s been                      to
r.hn Prine Minister s o T . t .he. p e r . m U j r , c a n b e ,n»re of the .tat. o f ..rvice
riAVAlnnnent and needs*

        An             decision on         m t r m nr t mould be most annreciated M   it ia
anticipated w©fcfaerHp©taHtial~G«®ees-ef-fi»aHGe -will -await the response of Tkjverrrnent
oefore making a commitment.

                                         Yours sincerely,




                                                                                                   > ■4
f amt t .
        v   AND COMMUNITY SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

10TH MAY 1989


HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER/INVOLVEMENT OF F. & C.S. STAFF/PROPOSALS FOR FUTURE
ACTION


1. INVOLVEMENT OF F. & C.S. STAFF

    In the afternoon and evening of Saturday, 15th April and on Sunday, 16th
    April over 150 F. & C.S. staff were active in giving support and
    assistance to victims and relatives of the Hillsborough Disaster.

    Help given during this period included:-

     - Counselling relatives and friends of bereaved and injured people.

     - Assisting Police in organising reception and support of relatives
        coining to Sheffield to identify people in hospital or who had died.

     - provision of transport and food in support of the above.


     Since the weekend of the disaster there has also been substantial ongoing
     involvement:-

            Support and counselling to people in Sheffield who have been severely
            shocked by their experience of the disaster, including people who were
            close witnesses of the events or involved in helping.

            Support and counselling to people from Merseyside and other Local
            Authorities coming to Sheffield to visit relatives or friends in
            hospital or visit the football ground again.

            Follow up work and liaison with other Local Authorities over continued
            help to people who had been in Sheffield and who had been helped by or
            in contact with Sheffield F. & C.S.

     This ongoing staff work has been co-ordinated by a task team set up and
     based in the Hillsborough F. & C.S. Divisional Office. A review of the
     Department’s contribution to emergency services in major disasters has
     also been initiated and reports consequent on this review will be
     presented in due course.

2. PROPOSALS FOR FUTURE ACTION

     From their experience over the past three weeks it is the recommendation
     of the temporary task team that a task team needs to operate for a longer
     period; some months, and if necessary up to a year.

     This recommendation takes account of the advice we have received from the
     Kent Staff involved in the Zeebrugge Ferry disaster and Bradford Staff
     involved in Bradford City Football Club fire.
The prime focus of such a team would be ongoing work with people from
Sheffield.  There is a secondary focus of work, which is to support
Liverpool Social Services Department in anyway possible in their work
with bereaved families, or families of those injured (physically or
emotionally).  The only possible exceptions to this would be families
from outside Liverpool whose choice it was to work directly with
Sheffield.

We know that there will be key times in the future when support to
Liverpool Social Services Department will be more intense:- e.g. when the
enquiry findings are made public;  at the Coroner's Inquest or on
Anniversaries.  To some extent this work can be planned for in advance
because dates will be known.

All such work is as a support to Liverpool and secondary to the primary
focus.

The Task Team are of the opinion that the primary focus needs to
concentrate on Sheffield residents.  There are considerable numbers
involved:-

    Sheffield Wednesday F. C. Staff - 600

    Sheffield Wednesday supporters at the game - 1000

    Local Residents who offered help;      cannot be estimated at this moment.

    Red Cross staff - not known as yet.

    St. John’s Ambulance Staff - 3 5 + 2    ambulances.

-   South Yorkshire Police - 1111 (257 inside the ground) and unspecified
    number of special constables.

-   Staff from F. & C.S. and other helping professions, including clergy
    estimated conservatively at 300 plus environmental health/mortuary
    staff.
    (Some of these agencies will probably prefer to provide counselling
     within their own organisations)

The impact on such numbers, because of the sudden violent way in which it
happened, will have an effect on the Mental Health of the Community.

The Task Team believed that the on-going work following the disaster
should be seen in Mental Health Prevention terms.  If this does not
happen it seems certain that some of the people in the groups above will
go into crisis at some future date. We are informed that research shows
that some people can become chronic depressives if not helped in a
pro-active way.

One of the impressive features since the disaster is the amount of work
being done by Voluntary Organisations, the Churches, Area Health Staff,
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and the Local Authority.  There is so
much being done that one of the problems is co-ordinating, because
sometimes it is being done by individual organisations or sometimes in
pairs.
The temporary Task Team are convinced that there is a need to consider
the setting up of a longer term Task Team initially for six months, to be
extended as required if proved to be necessary, to establish a Mental
Health Prevention Service to Sheffield residents affected by the
Hillsborough Disaster, and to act as a support service to Liverpool
Social services Department and other Local Authority Social Services
Departments affected by the events at Hillsborough on the 15th April 1989

However the Temporary Task Team would want to ensure the ongoing
commitment of Voluntary Organisations, the Churches, Area Health and
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.

The following is therefore proposed:-

1.   The setting up of a Steering/Advisory Group with representatives of
     Voluntary Organisations;  the Churches; A.H.A;   Sheffield Wednesday
     Football Club; The Local Authority and the South Yorkshire Police if
     they wish to participate.

     This Group's remit would be:-

     "To advise the Manager and Task Team Leader about important issues in
     order to co-ordinate the range of services needed".


2.   The setting up of a permanent Task Team for one initial period of six
     months comprising of:-

     1 Team Leader (preferably with Mental Health
     Training) POld/e                                       £17,267)
                                                                   )
     3 - Level 3 Social Workers equivalent but able to                  )
     offer group work and community work skills             £45,349).
                                                                   )
     1 Admin Officer scale 6                                £12,852)
                                                                   )
     3 Clerks Scale 2/3                                     £27,000)
                                                                   )
     Printing, stationery, postages and telephones           £5,000)
                                                                   )
     Computer costs                                          £3,000)

                               TOTAL including on-          £110,468 full
                                                                     year
                                                                     costs

                                        six months costs     £55,234




It is also proposed that the District Health Authority should be asked to
second a psychologist to work with the team. Where possible existing
staff would be seconded to these posts and replaced by temporary
appointments

A further sum of money needs to be identified for running costs and some
initial training in Stress De-briefing Techniques.
          A review of the work, remit and composition of the Task Team should be
         conducted at quarterly intervals so that the Staffing levels and suppport
         costs can be adjusted as necessary.




         3.   This team should be based in Hillsborough (possibly at the Library in
              the rooms currently occupied by Helpline) and accountable to the
              Divisional Officer, Division 2, through to Assistant Director
              (Operations).




         RECOMMENDATION

         That approval in principle is given to establish a task team and that
         the Director of Social Services be asked to bring forward detailed
         proposals at the earliest opportunity and to initiate discussions with
         the City Treasurer to advise on appropriate means of financing these
         proposals.




         NVK/SMJ
         3.5.89




RPTABP
                                  VI I T w r o n E r r i K k w —   iv ib m v n m i v v m

    From        CHIEF EXECUTIVE                               To           CITY TREASURER
.   A *
                                                                           DIRECTOR OF SOCIAL SERVICES
    date        3RD May, 1989
    Ref.        C.EX/RF
                                                                           U R G E N T
    Tel. Ext.   4000                                           Refi




                HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER


                I enclose a copy of a telex I have received from Liverpool
                which I have had an opportunity of discussing with the
                Leader who has no objection to a national approach of this
                type, but thinks it should be on the basis that our costs
                are seen as separate from the Merseyside authorities and
                will be quantified separately.

                Could you please let me have your comments as a matter
                of urgency.




r




                 ,




                                                                                                         i
                                                                                                         f
                                                                                                         i
                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                         I
                                                                                                         I
                                                                                                         f
                                                            ID   051225391G


                                       ;; - '




iPli*#

                   M r* K . I . M u rra y , C it y S o l i c i t o r , S e c r e ta ry t o th e C o u n c il, • :
                                            L iv er p«i City (touncil *                                       .



         b:'-                                      i - ■—                                                     '

                    No ttinghaiashtr# County Council



                                                                                                 -             .
                    Lancashire C.C.                                                              .

                    Cheshire C.C,

                    St, miens *s.y.<

                    Ihowley i



                    S e fto n 1 .




         Coiraminication   - 3 sheets,
  .03.-:«5S-91              33       FROM                                                               "%O   /. a s 122533.16,;

      "" '


                                                                                             W, I. Murray,.LL.S.             ' '      :
                                                                                             City Solicitor. Secretary to the Council
                                                                                                       No.. 88

                                         Iiverpool                                           Dal# Street
                                                                                             Liverpool LiS 20H
                                                                                             Telephone: OBtxaOSKSSaWKII:
                                                    s*
                                                     ax
                                                    J* f t # &   V   m   a R ' . . - S y T



                                                                                             Your ref
                                                                                         ■   Our ref
                                                                                                                                                   :
                                                                                             Date                             *




                                                                                                                                                                    :
                                                                                                                                                               :•




          ••
'''
                                                                                                                                                           :




                                                                                                                                                   -   .




                                                      aieetim of Council Leaders
                       .Following last .Saturday's aeeting                      Leaden in Liverpool
                                    taken p l a c e informally w i t h C i v i l S e r v a n t s . Hhey stressed
               '•.the-              a clear a n d concerted aooroach t o Government. . .The attached
                'letter h                                                                                                          •p a tc h i t




              ;co-sign the 1
      , ' . , ;6ie siiied 'vt© ttie

                     ; ;f h i« k : f e u f o r •y o u r a s s i s t a n c e i n t h i s aatter. -.

                                                                     fXOUCT
                                                                       o u l ’s s i n c e r e l y ,




.;                          •    '   ,                               Ciigr Solicitor, Secretary t o the Gotmcil.




 /    .




                   mmm
                                                                     ceizT:^
H J-Wb-fcjy        I   i »                    M tU M                                                          1U                                      It*                         W          J




'.-.'• ...vJJiiatf''Secretary' or State,                                                                                                                    •                                         ; ;

 •••;'>••'.       ' •'•                   •                                  Hillsborough           Tragedy

        -:;:C .:5ince Hillsborough seven.boost Authorities in Merseyside, plus Cheshire
 '. •. . and I j m e ie liiiae»' together with Mersey Regional Wealth Authority, Merseyside
           Probation Service ™ d m ^ r o ™ voluntary organisation* have b ^ n p ^ v i d l n g a co-
 ;?    ordinated' response.    .On Saturday last, the 29th April, the Leaders of these seven                                                                                                              ,.
       local ;autti©rttiett.and the tenders of KottinjjhMwti'ire and Sheffield -Councils »et to                                                                                                       v
                                           provision of service* which will continue to be
                                                                                  Y~.   ».»j|                                          '' ','




. . '''.-report repMw^sftds- the astabl ishnent of a Regional. Unit to provide a eon
 ^     services,'including! *- .

                ’ :i).                • ..•A Helpline to receive calls fro* anywhere day and ni*»t;

                  •ii)- ’• .fl»-Co-ordinstiOft of coiinseiiing serv» oess both within and ®
                                                 the,nine local authorities provided by voluntary ss.well as
                                                 -Ll-t • - 1_ ~ t ' -llL»*l.lllf ja fly fl-t uf-| J-. -
                                                                                                      M M
                                                 statutory agencies.




                   iv>                         . A eontinui-^ ------ „
                                  .             'u n ffs a ilisr area of » * ;

                   vl                            The 'ssnseenent of media


                                to reconvene the seeingt following                 exploration of
                                                                   xo±iowing expAorsuun             w all pbssibl*
                                  •Recognizing that services will need to extend beyond then©
      •'fdlfife -local aiatborif&ea and be available nationalXy on a seel** wot:              not papreviftiisly
       '■       • ' ' , F-i•*
                            -«   *«   rl# #
                                          %#"
                                            *• CMF-TIIl**_#»_
                                                  N      oT  _iI.nOi
                                                            3i •«««tori
                                                                   ** 1 tilf
                                                                        ties,io* €
                                                                                 oiir first    K**4- s
                                                                                               but'not
      /'experience# toy * ■ authority »                              ®»    •     •  *  «* _ *        ji-« _ _                                    j
                            j i        JS.      ' ris.   n r l   ■ ♦ “***.   /?

                                                                                        read, the local social b * M                                                                       c *b   .
       .   'Authorities               •
                                                  TO# H©F%f$ west nave agre^w 'to
                                                                               w jointly  sponsor «t
                                                                                  joiriuy »pon»or ^ a d d i t il»AUIiaA
                                                                                                                 onal
           "officer.

            ’      Hie 'JMiM                                                                    would wish to. be. associated with
                       ■■   «             •




           'action-, to
                                                                                                                                                                y«t these
                                                                                                              are unlikely to be leas than £1
                                                                                                              ,— ii....,— .,.i.,i.JL    *»*«*.   ItkjKtKA         ^   Ur'S i»i%   ♦*<«%.   I’"


           or this and.say consider maKing resources avaiianio w
             cvision as well as the sstsblishBani of the Regional Unit

 ' -. /    It -is,.' of course, appreciated that GavsnaMot has already
      the National                     Thtn fund has ouita erouerljf foct
                   VI :34     FROM                                                         05 1 2 2 5 3 9 IS



                                                                         -2-   -- ■                    ■■      'V   ;-;


         ! >■               Sltttf!                    /    • •• ■   •          ■                                         3 .5 .8 ® .




                                                           b Of ■
                S^tttnr'of                                     and the S e c re ta ry of S
                                                 to officers in other agencies.

                                .tlw .I.-p o rtw ie e of th e Issues involved a copy h a s been   to
                        'liilstei* so that she, personally, can be *«*re of the state of service
                         it.api need®*                                                        . -                                       '




;.>://   /before:'m a k in g a    c o n p ita e n t.


 0                                                           fours sincerely»




                                                                                      'V




                -1909     11:34
            TTTT.T.qb o r o u g h   d i s a s t e r c o -o r d i n a t i n g g r o u p


                           Meeting held 3 May 1989


Present!       Messrs M Webster, D Bownes, ________ and R Sewell
               (Administration   and  Legal  Department);  Mr   K
               Blount  (Department of Land and Planning); Mr
                            (Family  and    Community   Services
               Department); Mr D Purchon (Health and Consumer
               Services) and Mr P O'Neill (Personnel Department)




(1)   MINUTES

      The Minutes of the meeting of the Group held on 28
      April were received and arising therefrom the Group
      noted

      (a)      the arrangements which had been made for                                  the
               Inquiry to begin hearing evidence on 15                                   May
               in the Council Chamber; and

      (b)      the problems which these arrangements presented
               regarding the venue for the Annual Meeting
               of the City Council on 17 May.

(2)   INSPECTION ARRANGEMENTS

      Bramall Lane Stadium

      The Group were notified of correspondence which had
      been received    from Sheffield United FC following
      the   inspection    of  the   Bramall   Lane  Stadium.
      Consideration was given to the terms of a measured
      response to the points raised in the correspondence
      which would form the basis of a reply to be submitted
      to Sheffield United within the next 24 hours.

      Hillsborough Stadium

      The Group was informed that the West Midlands Police
      had notified Sheffield Wednesday FC that they had
      no objection to the resumption of football at the
      Hillsborough Stadium on the understanding that the
      West   End   Terrace   remained   closed  and  certain
      unspecified safety measures were carried out.     This
      notification had not been conveyed directly to the
      Local Authority although the Club were now looking
      to make arrangements to hold the match with West
      Ham United on 9 May.    Furthermore, the Club had also
      requested   the  Works   Department  to undertake  the
      necessary remedial work on their behalf in view of
      the shortage of time available.
      The  Group   expressed  considerable   concern  at   the
      circumstances outlined and it was agreed that:-

      (a)    the Works Department should not undertake any
              safety or remedial repair work at the stadium
              in view of the Council's role as Licensing         Mr M Webster ac
             Authority for the Stadium, and the Director         Mr K Blount
              of Works be advised forthwith;

      (b)    the Club be informed that the provision of          Mr M Webster,
              the    required    safety work   remains   the     Mr R Sewell and
              responsibility of the Club and their appointed     Mr D Bownes
              private contractors;

      (c)    arrangements be made to contact the West Midlands
              Police over the next 24 hours to clarify the       Mr M Webster
              circumstances under which football may resume
              at the Stadium so far as they are concerned;

      (d)    arrangements be made over the next 24 hours
              to identify any outstanding safety issues at       Mr K Blount
              the Stadium and the time-scale for the remedial
              work required; and

      (e)    a further inspection of the ground be carried       Mr D Bownes
              out on completion of the required safety work.

(3)   NEXT MEETING

      It was agreed that the next meeting of the Group
      be held in the Head of Administration and Legal
      Department's office at 8.30 -am on Wednesday 10 May
      1989.




4 May 1989
GW
                                CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM

From      Director of Health and Consumer         To    Mark Webster,
           Services                                     Acting Head of Administration and Legal
                                                        Department.
Date      3rd May, 1989
Ref       DWP/MRM
Tel Ext    4614 - Mr. Purchon                     Ref




          CORRESPONDENCE FROM SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB DATED 28.4.89.


          I refer to the letter received by you on the 2nd May, 1989 and made
          available to me on the 3rd May, 1989.


          I have now had the opportunity to read the letter and discuss it with my
          staff who do not agree that the content is a true report of events.
          I feel that nothing will be gained by entering into debate with the Club,
          or its representatives, as to what did or did not happen on the 24th and
          27th April, 1989.


          I feel that it is worth reiterating my Department's stand on inspections
          of sports grounds. It is my intention that we carry out our inspections
          in a considerate and professional manner utilising an appropriate staff
          resource and timescale. Club representatives are, of course, welcome to
          accompany my staff during the inspection.


          I do feel that the role of Eastwood and Partners needs to be clarified and
          that your advisers should thrash out any problems before entering into
          discussions with representatives of the club.


          It has been reported to me that on the 27th representatives of Building
          Control, who remained at the ground after your officers and mine had left,
          did enter into detailed discussions with Eastwood's representatives. This
          is clearly in breach of our agreement and I look to you to reiterate your
          policy in unequivocal terms.




                                                          A!3MJNISTRA710N & LEGAL
          D.W. Purchon,                                       DEPT., SHEFFIELD.
          Director of Health and Consumer Services                   OF lA S S 'S T A N T
                                                         A       DFPT.  1 HFAD              L.S.
                                                         G       - 5 MAY 1989               PAA
                                                         C    O .S .M .)   LIB   |   ELNS   PSO
                                                         GS                                 CC
    O ifl^ U X o J i                                                                          - -r -                ^


           HOME OFFICE        '
           Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT                                                 a MAY 1983
8                                     D irect line   0 1 -2 7 3     3 099             O .S .M .I   UB   |   EL: '
                                     Switchboard     0 1 -2 7 3 3 0 0 0




    Mr M Webster                                                     Your reference
    Administration and Legal Department                              AH/GW
    City of Sheffield Metropolitan                                   Ourreference
      District Council                                                    ENT 77 477-19-32
    Town Hall                                                             Date
    SHEFFIELD    SI 2HH                                                   2 May 1989



    Dear Mr Webster

    SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 - HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM

    Thank you for sending me so promptly a copy of the safety
    certificate for Hillsborough Stadium and for quickly following
    this up with copies of the stadium plans.

    In his statement to the House of Commons on 17 April about the
    Hillsborough Stadium disaster the Home Secretary said that he had
    asked for factual reports from the police and other services, the
    local authority and Football Association. A copy of the page
    from Hansard which records the Home Secretary's statement is
    attached.

     I have been in touch with you by telephone requesting factual
     information but I thought I should follow up the telephone
     conversations to confirm in writing the request for a factual
     report.

    I am most grateful to you for your help in providing all the
    factual details so far in the form of the safety certificate and
    plans.  I would now welcome any additional information on the
    action taken by your authority.  I stress that we are not seeking
    judgments about the issues arising from the tragedy. These are
    for Inquiry led by Lord Justice Taylor. But if there is any
    further factual information which you can provide it will be most
    appreciated.
                                                                          Yours sincerely




                                                                  Fire and Emergency
                                                                  Planning Department
    R3719
                               C IT Y OF SHEFFIELD — M E M O R A N D U M

From        Director of Land & Planning              To      All Chief Officers               ..

                                                             Acting Head of Admint~^/^''-'"
                                                             & Legal Department
Date        2nd May, 1989
Ref.        AD/DM/E80                                                      4 -
Tel. Ext.   5048 - Mr. H Z                           Ref.




            TOWN HALL MEETING ROOM ACCOMMODATION
            JUDICIAL ENQUIRY ~


            The preliminary hearing of the Enquiry into the Hillsborough Disaster took
            place on 28th May and proceedings will recommence on Monday 15th May. For
            an as yet unknown period the Civic meeting room accommodation will, with
            the exception of the Conference Room, be out of use from that date and,
            additionally, some of the rooms will be out of use from 10th May in the
            preceding week to enable the accommodation to be set up for the Enquiry.
            Limited alternative arrangements for meetings are being made and these are
            as follows.

            a)    Committee, Sub-Committee and Panel Meetings

                  The Conference Room, together with a number of Departmental meeting
                  rooms, will be used for Committee etc. meetings and the
                  Administration and Legal Department (Group Services) will endeavour
                  to accommodate Sub-Committees etc., in accommodation within
                  Departments most closely connected with the Programmes Area concerned
                  (the Conference Room will be reserved for Programme Committees).  It
                  has been agreed with Councillor Betts that all Departmental meeting
                  room accommodation will be used primarily for these purposes in order
                  that the Council's business can proceed with the minimum of
                  disruption.

             b)   Departmentally Arranged Meetings

                  The accommodation which can be made available for Departmentally
                  arranged meetings is severely limited. In order to facilitate its
                  allocation I should be pleased if you would nominate one Officer in
                  your Department to liaise on your requirements for accommodation and
                  arrange for all bookings to be made via this Officer. Can you please
                  advise me of the name and telephone extension number of the Officer
                  nominated.

                  The accommodation which has been identified as available (excluding
                  that which is to be used for Committee purposes) is as follows and I
                  would suggest that your liaison officer should inspect this with the
                  appropriate Building Surveyor in this Division to assess its
                  suitability for your purposes.




                                                                                    /cont.
     Accommodation Identified                    Building           Ext.
                                                 Surveyor           No.

     St. Pauls Parade    - 2 small rooms                            4549
                           1 dance studio

     The Moor              Shop Unit                                 4548

     Town Hall Chamber    Lecture Theatre         (managed by the Director
                                                  of Health & Consumer
                                                  Services).

     17 Matilda Street - 1st and ground                               4548
                         floor offices

     48/62 Pinstone St.- 2nd floor offices                            4560
                         (3 rooms)

     Palatine Chambers - 4th floor offices                            4548

     Barkers Pool House- 2nd floor (2 offices)                        4548
                         3rd floor (1 office)


With regard to existing bookings for Committee Rooms etc., my staff will
be contacting you shortly in connection with advising you of specific
cancellations.  If you still wish the meeting(s) concerned to take place
this will have to be within the accommodation detailed above unless I am
able to identify any Departmental meetiog rooms which are not required for
Committee purposes.

I apologise for the inconvenience which this will cause but I am sure that
you will appreciate the exceptional nature of the circumstances.




Director of Land and Planning




AG4AAY
From:   J M JONES MSc                                                 WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
        ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                     HEADQUARTERS
        (Operations)                                                  PO Box 52, Lloyd House
                                                                      Colmore Circus Queensway
                                                                      Birmingham B4 6NQ
                                                                      Telephone: 021-236 5000
                                             ~   f—w*/lr*r



            H M Webster Esq
            Administration and Legal Services Department                 -Our Ref: JMJ/VSC
            Sheffield City Council
            Town Hall                                                     Date:            3 May 1989
            Pinstone Street
            Sheffield
            S1 2HH




            Dear Sir

            SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB, HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD

            I believe that you contacted my Chief Superintendent Baker this morning
            in order to seek clarification about the contents of my letter to
            Mr G Mackrell, Club Secretary of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, on
            29 April 1989- Your concern was the identification of various areas
            which appeared unsafe. The statement in my letter to this effect was
            based on comments made by Dr Nicholson, Research Director, at the Health
            and Safety Executive, Services Division, Broad Lane, Sheffield, who, no
            doubt, will be able to help you more precisely.  However, I wish to
            point out that it is your responsibility and that of the Club to
            ensure that all areas of the ground are safe and neither myself nor
            Dr Nicholson can be held liable for providing you with an exhaustive
            list of potential safety problems.

            I do hope this is of assistance to you.

            Yours faithfully




                                                             B      - 4 MAY 1989 p a a
            Assistant Chief Constable                        o   O .S .M .;   i-in   j cLN S   PSO
                                                                                               CC
            (Operations)
                                                     to/hi k               (jfy       /W




                 NE X T STEPS IN THE                             fIRY




         List details of all the people involved - Health and Consumer Services,
         Building Surveyor, Administration and Legal




         Give three copies of (a) file summaries plus (b) panel reports and
         decisions, plus (c) Working Group agendas/notes and (d) Working P arty
         notes to Keeble Hawsons - Mr Gregory.




         DMB -         (a)    List all Council's responsibilities under:


                                i)   Statute and regulations

                               ii)   Circulars

                              iii)   Green Guide

                              iv)    The Septem ber 1987 Panel R eport


                       (b)   Tie up responsibilities      with    w hat    has    actually
                             happened.


                       (c)   Give a step by step sta te m e n t to
                             Introduction - Legislation - County                  Function
                             Designation - Issues, Story to date.



4.       Meeting betw een us and our B arrister next week.



3/5/89
DMB
                                   FROM RICHARD CABORN MP



                                                                                      A d m in is t r a t io n & l e g a l

                               c~/\                                                         DEPT., S H E *W > n
                                                                                           H E A D OF ASS-.Si
                                                                                   ,A      . D E P T ... , ^EAC      .
                                                                                                                         uLs.


                                    H O U S E    O F    C O M M O N S                 6
                                                                                               2 8 AP1TM9 PAA
                                         LONDON         SW1A0AA                            6 . 5 . M . I U B | ELNS psqi
                                                                                   J fi




Mr M a r k W e b s t e r
A c t i n g H e a d of D e p a r t m e n t
L e g a l and A d m i n i s t r a t i v e D e p a r t m e n t
Sheffield City Council
Surrey Street
S H E F F I E L D SI 2H H                                                        27       April      1989




Dear Mr Webster



Someone       f r o m y o ur d e p a r t m e n t telephoned             Richard's  Sheffield
office e a rl ie r this week e n q u ir i ng about                      a report being pro­
duced       about     football        hooliganism      with              contributions  f ro m
a n u m b e r of c o u n t r i e s .

I h a v e m a d e e n q u i r i e s w i t h the M i n i s t e r           for S p o r t ' s o f f i c e
at t h e D e p a r t m e n t     of the E n v i r o n m e n t       and the r e p o r t           is in
fact     going      to     be    presented       at      the     next       formal meeting           of
the     European        Convention         at    Reykjavik          on      31 M a y - 2       June  of
this      year.        This       results       frofm      the      last      meeting           of  the
Standing        Committee         of the      European Convention                   at A t h e n s in
1 9 8 8 w h e n m i n i s t e r s of m e m b e r c o u n t r i e s w e r e a s k e d to p r e p a r e
a l i s t of p o s s i b l e m e a s u r e s a g a i n s t s p e c t a t o r v i o l e n c e .

It is u n l i k e l y t h a t t h i s l i s t w i l l be p u b l i s h e d on the g e n e r a l
market,      b u t if y o u are i n t e r e s t e d I w i l l try to o b t a i n one
f r o m M r M o y n i h a n ' s o f f i c e a f t e r the m e e t i n g in R e y k j a v i k .




Yours      sincerely




SecretarytoKichardCaborn
                                                     KEEBLE HAWSON
                                                                     SOLICITORS
                                                     In c o rp o ra tin g B ra n s o n B ra m le y & Co.

A . H. GREGORY               N.   T . HAWSON                                                               OLD CATHEDRAL VICARAGE.
C. J . PRYCE                 G.   CONNELL
P. A . SEALEY                A.   J . COOMBE
K. L. W E B S TER            C.   M . M. A YR E                                                                      ST. JAMES' ROW.
M . A, P U T T

                                                                                                                               SHEFFIELD.
Consultant:
A . H. CONNELL
                                                                                                                                         S1 1XA.

              Sheffield City Council                                                                       TELEPHONE 0742-722061
              Administration and Legal Department
                                                                                                           MDX NO. 10537
              Town Hall
              SHEFFIELD                                                                                    FAX NO. 0742 - 700813

              S1  2HH                                                                                      FAX NO. 0742 - 750243


                                                                                                           26th April 1989

                                                                                                           WHEN YOU T ELEP H O N E OR CALL PLEA S E ASK FOR:
OUR REF:                                          YOUR REF:


              AHG/VS/31621                                AH/DG                                            MR GREGORY




              Dear Sir

              Hillsborough Disaster


              Thank you for letting us have a copy of the news release together
              with the series of helpful documents set out in the Index that
              you have kindly provided.

              We have taken the liberty of writing to the Secretary to the Inquiry
              to notify him of our interest although we imagine that you will
              have done likewise.

              We have spoken to Mr Richard Maxwell QC and his tentative view is
              that there is no need for him to attend the Inquiry on the opening
              day.  He is having a word direct with Mr        to confirm that
              that is a satisfactory arrangement.

              We have passed to Mr ________the papers that you have provided
              under the cover of a short Brief asking him to attend at the
              Legal and Administration Department to meet with Mr          and
              Mrs Bashforth at 10.30 am on Friday the 28th April.

              Yours faithfully




              KEEBLE HAWSON




                         THE FIRM IS REGULATED BY THE LAW SOCIETY IN THE CONDUCT OF INVESTMENT BUSINESS
The Acting Head o f the                                 AH Chief O fficers
Administration and Legal
Department
27 April 1989
KT/DG
5509



HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY

I am writing to confirm th a t the Inquiry is opening on 28th April 1989 a t 11.00
c.m . in the Council Cham ber. On th a t date the reception rooms and com m ittee
rooms 1-4 will also be in use. The Inquiry will then be adjourned for a short period
(possibly two weeks) and then re-com m ence for an unspecified period. A significant
p a rt of the public areas of the Town Hall will then be in use for the Inquiry.

I should be g ra te fu l if you could ensure th a t s ta ff, who a re not im m ediately involved
in the Inquiry through Mr P O'Neill, avoid the areas mentioned above, in p articu lar
on 28th April, whenever possible.

There will obviously be intense media in te re st and a g re a t number of people attending
the opening of the Inquiry and it is for those reasons and to ensure th a t individual
m em bers of s ta f f are riot harassed in any way th a t I have w ritten to you.
                               AT!/DCi

                                                                          r^.'-
                               ? ? -April'IAS**



T'eeble Tfawson
7 St James Row
F.heffieW
               '      '■                                     ^    -                 V 'Vv-         . "         .

Dear iSir,                                                                                 ; .             ,       ,,               ,
HILLSBOROUdS DISASTER                                                                                                           ,
                     v-: '     *   v,:-'   - ' •'>■      J                                                              -

Tc n « a ^ h crew rm                                  copies of the following docum ents^

      1)                       interim Popple well report plus index                                                        .

; 2)                           Final Popplewell report plus index

   •»3)                        Green Guide plus index
As I also mentioned; ,offlc*E6 ft<>mV.Mt Midlands politfc are commencing their
                             ■    ’ ’ - 1- o rt*'1~ "i. today.

They are goteff*to list thcl ^ocunwmts                                              * a & arid   w e   are g a n g to take copies
to ensure the files are still Complete. ;                                                    '                        c

 Yours faithfully, , / ^


- • 'I-'




  A ctingH ead of Department                                                               %
               :-r

                                    :v?--
  Enc.                -




   *> '                    .

                                                       V ''           ':" ; //i*•                ;P ’ft-       ;



           :         - w ;,         ..^                  ^       -v        .;,r ^      '    '



                                                                                                   734018
                AH/GW


                   26 April 1989


Messrs Silverman Livermore
Solicitors
11/13 Victoria StrMt
LIVERPOOL
xa 5QQ


D u r Sirs

>«• HILLSBOROOGH nUOBDY

X thank you for yonr letter of 21 April concerning the above matter,
the contents of which I note.  Can I say that I am thankful for the
courtesy shown and that X do recognise that you have no alternative
but to advise the Council of the possible liabilities which you feel
aay arise.

Z would add that with regard to the issues raised Messrs Keeble nawson.
Solicitors, of 7 St Janes' Row, Sheffield 1, will be acting on behalf
of the Council to whom a copy of your letter has been sent.

Tours faithfully




HNOC H M S TUK
Jloting Bead of Department




                                                   734018
                  AH/GW


                  26 April 1989


P Bright, CBE
Chief Constable
South Yorkshire Police
Police Headquarters
Snig Hill
SHEFFIELD
S3 SLY


Dear Mr Wright

ret    QGBSTIOHS RAISED AT THE SPECIAL SOOTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
      HKBTIWO OK PRIDAY 21 APRIL 1989

X write, at the request of Councillor Betts, to follow op two issues
which he apparently raised with you during the course of the raeotingr
one rolatos to a copy of the Police Operational Plan for the semi-final
on Saturday 17 April and the other to the break-down of the numbers
of police officers deployed on that day.

It is sty understanding that you indicated to Councillor Betts that you
could personally see no objection to bin receiving, first of all, a
copy of the Plan and secondly the above-mentioned break-down of police
nunbers, subject only to Lord Justice Taylor being asked as to whether
he deemed it appropriate for you so to do at this stage.

X would, therefore, be grateful if you could let ne know whether you
are yet in a position to let ne have the requested doc (mentation or,
alternatively, whether you have yet obtained Lord Justice Taylor*s advice
on the natter.

Yours sincerely




MARX MEBSTER
Acting Bead of Depart— nt


co     Councillor C J C Betts




                                                   734018
                25 April 1089

CONFIDENTIAL

Messrs Keeble Kawson
Solicitors
7 St James R o w
Sheffield 1

For the attention of M r Gregory

Dear Sir,

H I L L S B O R O U G H DISASTER

I refer to our meeting today with M r Murphy of Counsel which was very useful.

As agreed I enclose three copies of the following documents:-

  1)        a   bundle containing the relevant legislation

  2)        a copy of the Certificate issued under theSafety          of Sports Grounds
            Act 1975

  3)        a       copy of an article by Douglas Lock

  4)        a copy of an article from the Independentand          the furtherarticle   to
            which it refers.

I a m arranging for copies of the video you saw to be m a d e and these will be forwarded
to you as soon as possible.

If you require anything further please let m e know, otherwise w e will meet half
an hpur before the opening of the Inquiry on the 28th April 1989.

Yours faithfully,




Acting Head of Department


Encs




                                                             734018
Acting Head of Departmentt                        Nr 9 O ’Meill
Administration and Legal                          Chief Safety Adviser

24 April 1989                                     og     Mra B Bashforth
AH/GW
4018 - Mr Webster




rgmiCTLY WMQB>T. AMD




BiLLSBOBOtm   - mnn    w ith lx v z b v o o l u u m u i o i , w w b b h t 1 9 a v m il
1989

You will perhaps recall that during the coarse of the above Meeting
certain of the Liverpool representatives raised certain issues and
in fact asked for copies of certain documentation.

I now enclose, for your information and attention, a list of the
matters which they requested but I think we need to give further
thought as to whether we should in fact comply with those requests*
My inclination, at the moment, is that we should not action the
•ante unless they start to press for the information and at that
stage to discuss amongst ourselves and probably with the Council's
Insurers' Solicitors the release of the documents.

However, I think that certain of the issues they raised could be
checked upon so that we have the information to hand.
MEETING WITH LIVERPOOL DELEGATION - WEDNESDAY 19 APRIL 1989


(1)   Copy of the Operational Orders for the semi-final   last year.

(2)   Largest attendance on all ticket games.

(3)   Largest attendance at the Stadium for payment   atturnstile.

(4)   • Number of turnstiles?

(5)   How many open on the day?

Note of meeting and Attendance List.

(Lack of notices - Signposts);
         AH/DG


         20 April 1989


M r D Capper
Sheffield United Football Club
Bramall Lane
Sheffield
S2.4SU


Dear M r Capper,

Pitch Perim eter Arrangements - Sheffield United Football Club

With reference to the meeting which took place at Sheffield United Football
Club on Wednesday 19th April 1989* pursuant to Derek Dooley’s verbal request
to David Bownes on the morning of Tuesday 18th April 1989. Y o u will recall
that M r Dooley wished to ask the Council for its views on the Club's perimeter
fencing arrangements.

Y o u will recall from the meeting that in accordance with comments m a d e by
your Professional /dvisor, !7r Strange, the Officers present felt that it would
be appropriate for the pitch perimeter gates to be removed. It will be necessary
for the resulting gaps to be policed and Chief Superintendent Broomhead agreed
that this would happen.

T h e gaps in the perimeter fencing which arise as a result of the removal of the
gates must be free from any dangerous projections or other obstructions.

A s I have said, the removal of the gates is an interim measure and is subject
to further consideration of the pitch perimeter arrangements.

Y o u will also recall from the meeting that the pitch perimeter fencing could
not be removed at this juncture as it would need to be replaced by a crush barrier
standard installation. The existing white fence would not fulfil this function.
Again thiB view was endorsed by your Advisor, MrStrange.

I will be in touch with you again in due course.

Yours sincerely,




Acting Head of Department



                                                     734018
    R3719                                                                                                      Sch 9162
                                         CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEM O RA ND UM
                                                                                   Mark Webster                        r~SL
From                                                                               Admin and Legal
             Communications Co-ordinator
             Publicity Department                                                                                  •

                                                                         cc        Shirley Lanstone, CPO
Date        20 April 1989
                                                                                                    Treasury     Gc \- ^      J
Ref         SAR/JM
Tel. Ext.   5561                                                        Ref.




            H I LL S B O R O U G H A P P E A L - SAT U R D A Y S T RE E T COLLE CT I O N

            The Audit arrangements for the above collection have been agreed with
            City Treasury.

            The money will be taken by Group k with the proceeds from the car park
            and will be counted by City Treasury.

            The money will be passed over in cans unopened.
Mr JRW Sewell                                 Mr M Webster
Principal Solicitor                           A cting Head o f Department
Group B
2 0 April 1989
JRWS/DG
4016


HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - SPECIAL MEETING OF POLICE AUTHORITY
ON 21ST APRIL, 1989

I write in response to your request for some urgent notes in relation to
the special meeting of the Police Authority to be held at 10.30 a.m. on
the 21st April 1989, at the Conference Centre, Bamsley, where the only
item of business is for the chief constable to report on the Hillsborough
Stadium Tragedy. Y o u asked for advice in two areas, namely the rights
of attendance at meetings of the Police Authority and rights and obligations
in relation to questions addressed by mem b e r s of the P olice Authority to
the chief constable. I a m sensitive that                . our Police Liaison
Officer, is m u c h involved in giving support and advice to our membe rs
serving on the Police Authority and that she invariably participates in a
briefing session for members in preparation for meetings. I have held hurried
Informal discussions with         and her colleagues to m ake them aware
of the issues raised and no doubt you m a y wish to pass on m y comments
which I readily acknowledge are the product of some very hurried research.

Attendance a t M eetings o f Police Com m ittees

1.     The Police Authority is a metropolitan county police authority and
       one of the joint authorities constituted under Part IV of the Local
       Government Act 1985.

2.    The provisions of the Local Government (Access to Information) Act
      1985 expressly apply to joint authorities.

3.   Accordingly, meetings of joint authorities are open to the public
      except to the extent that they m a y be excluded in relation to
      confidential or exempt information.

4.   The agenda of the meeting to be held on the 21st April is plainly
      intended to be open to the public and there is no indication that the
     item of business is to be treated as an exempt item, and the public,
     press and local authority officers m a y all attend in accordance with
     the provisions of the Local Government (Access to Information) Act.

5.    The situation would only change in the event of a resolution being
      approved during the course of the item being discussed to exclude
      the public from the meeting by reference to the likelihood of disclosure
      of exempt information as defined in the list of statutory exemptions
      scheduled to the Act. In that event which appears unlikely the public
      and press would have to leave the meeting and any officers of the
      constituent authorities would also be required to leave unless the
      Police Committee at its discretion determined that particular parties
      should be allowed to remain in the meeting.

Questions a t the Meeting o f the Police Authority

1.   A consideration o f questions and reports at a m eeting o f the Police
     Authority needs to be considered against the background o f the
     tripartite structure of the police service under the provisions o f the
     Police A ct 1964 whereby responsibilities are shared between the
     Home Secretary, the Police Authority and the Chief Constable. This
     provides a statutory framework although many areas remain undefined
     and unclear.
The only reference in the 1964 Act to questions on police matters
is in Section 11 and relates to a different situation. It is provided
that arrangements shall be m a d e for enabling questions on the discharge
of the functions of the Police Authority to be put in the course of
the proceedings of a constituent Council by m embers of that Council
for answer by a m e m b e r of the Council w h o is also a m e m b e r of the
Police Authority. This of course is the reverse situation where the
representatives on the Police Authority are required to answer
questions rather than enabled to ask them.

Section 12 of the Act deals with the related matter of reports by
chief constables and in addition to the annual report it is provided
that the chief constable shall whenever so required by the Police
Authority submit to that Authority a report in writing on such matters
as m a y be specified in the requirement being matters connected with
the policing of the area. However, if it appears to the chief constable
that a report in compliance with any such requirement of the Police
Authority would contain information which in the public interest
ought not to be disclosed, or is not needed for the discharge of the
functions of the Police Authority, he m a y request that Authority
to refer the requirement to the Secretary of State; and in any such
case the requirement shall be of no effect unless it is confirmed by
the Secretary of State.

Questions and reports therefore need to be considered in the context
of the matters to which they relate and the chief constable in answering
questions is likely to confine himself to issues which are related to
the functions of the Police Authority and not functions which are
assigned to chief constables. This leads to a consideration of those
respective functions.

Police Authority functions are set out in Section 4 of the 1964 Act
and begin with a general duty of the Police Authority "to secure the
maintenance of an adequate and efficient police force for the area,
and to exercise for that purpose the powers conferred on a Police
Authority by this Act". There follows a list of various more specific
duties relating to such matters as the appointment of the chief
constable srnd buildings, structures and premises, vehicles, apparatus,
clothing and other equipment. 'Hie general broad duty in relation
to an adequate and efficient force is not further defined and is not
sufficiently specific to lend itself to legal enforcement. It is noted
frofh a publication by the National Council for Civic Liberties entitled
"Called to Account" that the following statement is m a d e in relation
to reports submitted by chief constables:-                     -.

       "if the police authority receives a report from its chief constable
       with which it is dissatisfied, it is given no powers to instruct
       him to change any of his operational policing policies or
       practices.”

 The conflict arises when w e turn to the functions of chief constables
 under Section 5 of the Act. This provides that the police force
 maintained for a police area shall be "under the direction and control
 of the chief constable". In furtherance of this provision and related
 case law Halsbury’s Laws of England describes the general functions
 of chief constables in the following termss-

       »it is the duty of a chief officer of police to secure the
       preservation of the Queen’s peace and the enforcement of the
       law in his ansa, and he is responsible for the disposition and
       control of his force. As respect such operational matters he
      acts on his o w n responsibility and m a y not be given instructions
     by either his police authority or a minister of the C r own”.

The following extract from the N C C L publication offers some further
insight into these functional arrangements^

     "The government believed that it was possible to draw a
     distinction between administrative/financial decisions, which
     could be m a d e by the police authority, and 'operational' decisions,
     which should be m ade by the chief constable. It wrote this
     distinction into the Act as responsibility for 'efficiency' and
     'direction and control' respectively. It was accepted that locally
     and nationally elected representatives should mak e financial
     decisions because of their responsibility to the rate/tax payers
     to spend their m o ney wisely. But there was no recognition
     in the Act that m a n y other police decisions are political and
     therefore ought also to be m a d e by elected representatives.

     The government's stated intention was to leave it to the chief
     constable's discretion h o w he enforced the law. It was hoped
     that police authorities would give their chief constables advice
     but they were given no authority to tell them what to do. This
     relationship is, as the Royal Commission on the Police had
     recommended it should be, the reverse of that between other
     local government committees and their chief officers. The
     Royal Commission devised a unique formula to place chief
     officers 'under a degree of external supervision' while 'preserving
     their impartiality's this was to give them the power to decide
     h o w to enforce the law but to m a k e them liable to give an account
     of (some of) their actions afterwards to their police authority
     and the H o m e Secretary. The formula was embodied in the
     Act and, as the H o m e Office sees its

           the system which now exists for controlling the police
           thus involves the inter-relationship of three authorities
           - the H o m e Secretary, the local police authorities and
           the chief officers of police - in a complex relationship
           which ensures that except in respect of day-to-day
           operations, no one of the three has absolute control".

An added dimension in the current context is that of the judicial
inquiry which has been called for by the H o m e Secretary. In addition
to any reservations the chief constable m a y have in answering questions
which he sees as relating to operational matters he m a y argue with
some force that it is not in the public interest to touch upon any
matters which are within the broad scope of the judicial inquiry.
I a m not clear about the precise terms or statutory context of the
judicial inquiry and therefore a m in some doubt as to what would
be seen as prejudicial to those proceedings. There is nevertheless
some strength in the argument that nothing should be said which
would in any w a y prejudice the conduct of the proceedings of the
judicial inquiry. In the context of the 1964 Act it m a y be useful to
draw attention to Section 32 which makes provision for local inquiries
and allows the Secretary of State to cause a local inquiry to be held
by a person appointed by him into any matter connected with the
policing of any area. This provision is in the broader context of the
Secretary of State's central supervision and direction of the police
service and accordingly the comments m a d e by the Secretary of State
m a y have some weight in that regard in constraining the chief constable
from answering questions on matters within the purview of the judicial
inquiry.
The shove notes are very much an initial summary o f points arising from
the questions raised and do not purport to be exhaustive as it is recognised
‘hat there are d elicate finely balanced arguments in relation to such issues
as any directions which the police authority may give in a policy context
extending beyond financial and adm inistrative directions. 1 have intentionally
concentrated my focus on the essence o f the statutory provisions. Given
the areas which m a y be regarded as touching upon operational m atters
and the arrangements for a judicial inquiry in broad terms I would expect
chief constable to confine himself largely to a prepared statement and
to be restrietively cautious in answering question* oarticulsrly when they
are raised in a public arena.
The Acting Head of Department                    An Chief Officers


20 April 1989
AH/DG
4018



H I L L S B O R O U G H DISASTER

I understand that officers are receiving requests from various sources for
information/plans relating Hillsborough Football Stadium and perhaps other sports
stadia.

M a y I remind you that no information/plans should be released to a m e m b e r of
the public unless they would normally be legally entitled to that documentation.

If any information/plans should be released, a copy the information/plans released
(on the first occasion) and details when, what and to w h o m that information is
released must be forwarded to the Acting Head of the Administration and Legal
Department immediately.

If any information/plans have already been released the Acting Head of the
Administration and Legal Department must be given the information as above.
City of Sheffield
                  M etro po litan District




             W ith the com plim ents of
                 the City Treasurer




T o w n H all,
S heffield S1    1 UL
                                                                                                            4        btr
                                                                                                                        6
                                                                                                                            Uu,
                              MUNICIPAL MUTUAL

 S h ef f i e l d Ci t y Council,
 P.O. Box 15,                                                                                        RVJ    03 89 21 73181
                                                                                      O u r r e f:
 To w n H a l l ,
                                                                                      Your ref:
 SHEFFIELD.
                                                                                      Tel Ext: 4 2
 S o ut h Y o r k s h i r e ---
                                C IT Y             TREASURY                              D a t e : 25th April   1989,
 SI 1UL                  I
                                              - 2. ...V 1939
                                                                               -r-r



                          I            rj^.. ■ .
De a r Sirs,
                                j I i I I i j i j
R e : H i l l s b o r o u g h th q a q t e r - > - —5—S—L

We confirm our d is c u s s io n of the 2lst April, when it was agreed that
Mr. A. Grego r y of Keeb l e H a wson Solicitors, Sheffield would on our joint
b e h a l f instruct M r . Rich ar d Maxwell Q.C. and Mr. Michael Murp h y of Council
to r e p r esent our interest at the f o r thcoming Public Enquiry into the
H i l l s b o r o u g h Football Sta d i u m Disaster, and also in respect of Civil Claims
w h i c h may arise against yo u in that connection.

We believe that Mr. Gre g or y has arranged that any letters of claim be sent
d i re c t to him but, we have n o w agreed with h i m that it would be p referable if
all intimations of claim made aga i n st you arising out of this incident be
fo r wa r d e d d i rect to us in order that we may allocate the appropriate sub file
n u m b e r before p a s s i n g them to K e eb l e Hawson.

This wi] 1. enable us               to i dentify each claimant against the definitive list
that we r?e h o l d in g            and to keep control of all the claims that arise.

We a gree that the d o c u me n t a ti o n that you were to prepare on general matters
r e l a t i v e to this enquiry can, of course, go direct to K e eble Hawson.

Y n n rs   f a i -hh-Pnl 1 -ir_________________




For the Company.




           Municipal M utual Insurance Limited, Park House, 57-59 Well Street, Bradford BD1 5SN
                                 Telephone: (0274) 729446 - Fax No: (0274) 306478
                                               Regional Manager: R. E. Laughton, FCII
            Registered office: 22 Old Queen Street, Westminster, London SW l H 9HW Registered number 76678 England
                                An appointed representative of the MLA Group (Member of LAUTRO).        1


                                                             ASSOCIATION OF
                                                            BRITISH INSURERS
          .SHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY

         MEETING - 21ST APRIL 1989



   n c i l l o r S i r John Layden ( in the Chair)                 , „ „ ^
  u n c i l l o r s : G Gallimore (Vice-Chairman), D A Axe, C J C B e t t s , J M Cromar,
                      DW         — R-W-Gillies, R W h itf ie ld , J Wood.
M agistrate Mejnb^fs; Mrs B R B ulliv an ^, K Goodall, E A Hancock, D E Wilburn.

186     HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM TRAGEDY
        fhe~Arthorfty~conirnenced the meeting by standing in s i l e n c e as a mark of
        r e s p e c t to th e dead and i n j u r e d .
        At th e r e q u e s t of th e Chairman, th e          Clerk and F in an cial O f f i c e r advised
        the A uth o rity of the purpose of th e               Special Meeting, p a r t i c u l a r l y
        s t r e s s i n g th e f a c t o r s which Members    ought to bear in mind so as not be
        p r e j u d ic e e i t h e r th e P o lice In quiry   or legal proceedings which had
        alread y been i n s t i t u t e d .
        The Chairman, who had been p r e s e n t a t th e match, expressed th e deep shock
        f e l t by a l l Members of the P o lic e A u th o rity , and o f f e r e d condolences to
        th e bereaved and a l l a f f e c te d by the t e r r i b l e i n c i d e n t . Recriminations
        were not h e lp f u l and would not a s s i s t the d i f f i c u l t task faced by Lord
        J u s t i c e T a y lo r. The Chairman i n v i t e d the Chief Constable to up-date the
        A uthority as to events from 3.05 p.m. on Saturday 15th A p r i l .

         The Chief Constable s t a t e d t h a t , as everyone was now aware, a major
         tragedy had occu rred with 95 dead and 140 i n j u r e d , with 5 of th e in ju re d
         s t i l l in i n t e n s i v e c a r e . The Force was r e s p o n s ib le f o r extern al
         p o l i c i n g and f o r a s s i s t i n g th e S h e f f i e l d Wednesday F ootb all Club i nslde
         of t h e ground. The Inquiry being c a r r i e d out a t h i s r e q u e s t by th e West
         Midlands P o l i c e would submit i t s evidence to th e Lord J u s t i c e Taylor
         Committee of I n q u i r y , and the South Yorkshire P o lic e would give f u l l
          inform ation and every a s s i s t a n c e . The same planning as f o r previous Semi-
         Final Matches had a p p lie d . There had been 1,111 o f f i c e r s on duty, with
          257 o f f i c e r s i n s i d e th e ground. He understood why th e tragedy had
          a t t r a c t e d so much media a t t e n t i o n , b ut much of what had been said was
          i n c o r r e c t . In d iv id ua l o f f i c e r s involved a t t h e match found themselves
          fa c in g th e p o s s i b i l i t y of a d i s a s t e r o u ts id e th e ground and took a c tio n
          which they co n sid ered a p p r o p ria te to r e so lv e th e s i t u a t i o n . Those
          o f f i c e r s had been appointed by him t o make such d e c i s i o n s , a n d h e
          accepted f u l l r e s p o n s i b i l i t y f o r the p o lic e a c ti o n connected with the
          e v e n t. He welcomed th e Inquiry which was to be h e ld , as he b elieved t h a t
          when i t was completed the a c t i o n s of th e South Yorkshire P o lic e would be
           seen in a very d i f f e r e n t l i g h t . The Chief Constable concluded h is
           sta te m en t by paying t r i b u t e to th e tremendous support and a s s i s t a n c e
           provided during and a f t e r t h i s tragedy by churchmen, t h e s t a t u t o r y and
           v o lu n tary agencies and members of th e public to t h e v i c t i m s , the f a m ilie s
           of t h e v ic tim s and t o th e p o l i c e .
          The Chairman i n v i t e d Members of th e A uthority to ask q u e s tio n s of the
          Chief C o n stab le. Members of th e A uthority qu eried a s p e c ts of the police
          planning of t h e e v e n t, of t h e o p eration al and deployment arrangements on
          th e day, of t h e number of a r r e s t s (both i n s id e and o u t s i d e the ground)
          and of arrangements made f o r th e c o u n s e llin g of o f f i c e r s involved in the
          tragedy.
           The Chief Constable answered the Members' a uestion s                     hut fei +           ,•

                                                                   “ i r s a s g                         «
       K K S SS ®- ■JfAss.'rr-cas'j!
                             3            2          •



       S S S S S S S ? s a w fta w                                                                            “

       RESOLVED:


                                                               M          . T O       i , ®       " nd0,e"ces
                a t W l l 2 , > S J 5 ? ,S d ? ! S .tad been affected * the terr1b,e t^ ed y
       2    .   f I l ^ ! ! l i - 1 S tTn o t . in any way b e in 9 intended to prejudge the
                forthcoming Inquiry or any o th e r legal proceedings, the Authority
                S
                i v z n^April
                           I m J m V L ' S , 01 ' • " W                  aSd P°1 * ce L Ia ls o n Forum o f
                                   1989 as to th e r e s p o n s i b l e and e f f i c i e n t manner in whirh
                nf +h fr H -f( k         S°Uth Yorkshire P o lice had d e a l t with th e aftermath
                tL                    ![0U9t r a 9edy » as well as confidence in the a b i l i t y of
                the o f f i c e r s who were on duty on t h a t day.                                       y
       3.
                I I l n rtth e      of th e Finance and General Purposes Committee to
                follow on immediately from t h i s meeting be recommended to make a
                donation of £ 10 , 000- to t h e Hillsborough Appeal




CHAIRMAN
The C hief Executive                                Director o f Land and
                                                    Planning
18 April 1989
AH/DG
4018



RE* HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

As I am sure you will appreciate over the la st 72 hours a great deal o f Officers*
tim e has been involved in the afterm ath o f the disaster and w ill continue to be
necessary as the investigatory process gets underway.

Accordingly, I would be obliged i f you would ensure that as is currently the situation
the services o f Mr Blount and Mr              are made freely available on demand to
a team o f O fficers working in this area, currently headed by Mark Webster.

I would be further obliged if you could reinforce an instruction already given to
s ta ff in other departments to the e ffe c t that the only two O fficers currently
authorised to speak to the press, or any other third party representative on this
issue are David Purchon and Mark Webster, so that a control o f the type and nature
o f the information being supplied by the authority can be kept.
                                                    The Chief Personnel Officer
The Chief Executive

18 April 1989
AH/DG
4018


RE: HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
I write to confirm the information which I believe has already te e n supplied to
you by your Chief Safety Adviser, Mr O 'N eill, to the e ffe c t that during the last
few days he has been heavily involved in assisting Mark Webster m
o f the Council's response to this m atter both from a safety o f sports ground viewpoint
and generally.
It is likely that there will continue to be very heavily demands upon the O fficers
already involved in this area and, therefore, I would be obliged if you could agree
to Mr O'Neill's secondment to this activity for the foreseeable future.
Mr JRW Sewell                                 Mr M Webster
Principal Solicitor                           A cting Head o f Department
Group B
20 April 1989
JRWS/DG
4016


HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - SPECIAL MEETING OP POLICE AUTHORITY
ON J1ST APRIL, 1989

I write in response to your request for some urgent notes in relation to
the special m eeting of the Police Authority to be held at 10.30 a.m. on
the 21st April 1989, at the Conference Centre, Barnsley, where the only
item o f business is for the chief constable to report on the Hillsborough
Stadium Tragedy. You asked for advice in two areas, namely the rights
of attendance at m eetings of the Police Authority and rights and obligations
in relation to questions addressed by members of the Polic e Authority to
the chief constable. I am sensitive that                   our Police Liaison
O fficer, is much involved in giving support and advice to our members
serving on the Police Authority and that she invariably participates in a
briefing session for members in preparation for m eetings. I have held hurried
informal discussions with         and her colleagues to make them aware
o f the issues raised and no doubt you may wish to pass on my comments
which I readily acknowledge are the product of some very hurried research.

Attendance a t M eetings o f Police C om m ittees

1.     The Police Authority is a metropolitan county police authority and
       one of the joint authorities constituted under Part IV of the Local
       Government Act 1985.

2.    The provisions of the Local Government (A ccess to Information) Act
      1985 expressly apply to joint authorities.

3.   Accordingly, m eetings o f joint authorities are open to the public
     except to the extent that they may be excluded in relation to
     confidential or exempt information.

4.   The agenda of the m eeting to be held on the 21st April is plainly
      Intended to be open to the public and there is no indication that the
     Item o f business is to be treated as an exem pt item , and the public,
     press and local authority officers may all attend in accordance with
     the provisions of the Local Government (A ccess to Information) A ct.

5.    The situation would only change in the event of a resolution being
      approved during the course of the item being discussed to excludc
      the public from the m eeting by reference to the likelihood of disclosure
      of exem pt information as defined in the list of statutory exemptions
      scheduled to the A ct. In that event which appears unlikely the public
      and press would have to leave the m eeting and any officers of the
      constituent authorities would also be required to leave unless the
      Police Com m ittee at Its discretion determined that particular parties
      should be allowed to remain in the m eeting.

Questions a t the Meeting o f the Police Authority

1.   A consideration o f questions and reports at a m eeting of the Police
     Authority needs to be considered against the background o f the
     tripartite structure o f the police service under the provisions o f the
     Police A ct 1964 whereby responsibilities are shared betw een the
     Home Secretary, the P olice Authority and th e C hief C onstable. This
     provides a statutory framework although many areas remain undefined
     and unclear.
                                       -   2   -



2.        The only reference In the 1964 A ct to question, on PoU w m atter,
          is in Section 11 and rela tes to a different situation. I t t o
          that arrangements shall be m a d e for enabling questions o n th e ^ c h a r g e
          of the functions o f the P olice Authority to be P * »n * • '
          the proceedings o f a constituent Council by members o f that Council
          for answer by a m e m b e r of the Council who Is ^                     °f
          Police Authority. This of course is the reverse situation whenE the
          representatives on the Police Authority are required to answer
          questions rather than enabled to ask them.

3         Section 12 of the Act deals with the related matter of reports by
          chief constables and in addition to the annual report it b projjed
          that the chief constable shall whenever so required by the Police
          Authority submit to that Authority a report in writing on such matters
          as m a y be specified in the requirement being matters
          the policing of the area. However, if it appears to the ^ f ^ n E t a b l e
          that a report in compliance with any such requirement of the Police
          Authority would contain information which ln
          ought not to be disclosed, or is not needed for the <^^^ h a r ^ of the
          functions of the Police Authority, he m a y request that Authority
           to refer the requirement to the Secretary of State* and ^ ajtyJ^c
           case the requirement shall be of no effect unless it is confirmed by
           the Secretary of State.

4.         Questions and reports therefore need to be considered in the cont®*t
           of the matters to which they relate and the chief constable in answering
           questions is likely to confine himself to issues which are relatedto
           the functions of the Police Authority and not functions which are
           a lig n e d to chief constables. This lea d , to a consideration of those
           respective functions.

    5      Police Authority functions are set out in Section 4 of the 1964 Act
           and begin with a general duty of the Police Authority to s e c ^ e t h e
           maintenance of an adequate and efficient police force for           are i
           and to exercise for that purpose the p o w e r s conferred on a Police
           Authority by this Actn. There follows as list of various m o r e specific
           duties relating to such matters a the appointment of the chler
           constable and buildings, structures and premises, vehicles, apparatus,
           clothing and other equipment. The general broad duty in relation
           to an adequate and efficient force is not further defined and is not
           sufficiently specific to lend itself to legal enforcement. It !s noted
           from a publication by the National Council for Civic Liberties entitled
           "Called to Account" that the following statement Is m a d e in relation
           to reports submitted by chief constabless-

                  "if the police authority receives a report from its chief constable
                  with which it is dissatisfied, it is tfven no powers to instruct
                  him to change any of his operational policing policies or
                  practices."

     6.     The conflict arises when w e turn to the functions of chief constables
            under Section 5 of the Act. This provides that the police^force
            maintained for a police area shall be "under the direction and control
            of the chief constable". In furtherance of this provision and related
                   law Halsbury*s Laws of England describes the general functions
            o f ch ief constables in the follow ing termst-

                   **it i* the duty o f a ch ief o fficer o f police to secure the
                   preservation o f the Queen*, peace and th e enforcem ent o f
                   law in his area, and he is responsible for the disposition anc.
                   control o f his fo rce. As resp ect roch operational mcutars ...
      acts on his own responsibility and may not be given instructions
     by either Ms police authority or a minister o f the Crown".

The following extract from the NCCL publication offers some further
insight into these functional arrangements:-

     "Hie government believed that it was possible to draw a
     distinction between adm inistrative/financial decisions, which
     could be made by the police authority, and ’operational' decisions,
     which should be made by the chief constable. It wrote this
     distinction into the Act as responsibility for ’efficiency* and
     •direction and control' respectively. It was accepted that locally
     and nationally elected representatives should make financial
     decisions because o f their responsibility to the rate/ta x payers
     to spend their money w isely. But there was no recognition
     in the Act that many other police decisions are political and
     therefore oiisrht also to be made by elected representatives.

     The government's stated intention was to leave it to the chief
     constable's discretion how he enforced the law. It was hoped
     that police authorities would give their chief constables advice
     but they were given no authority to te ll them what to do. This
     relationship is, as the Royal Commission on the Police had
     recommended it should be, the reverse o f that between other
     local g o v e r n m e n t com m ittees and their chief officers. The
     Royal Commission devised a unique formula to place chief
     officers ‘under a degree o f external supervision* while *preserving
     their impartiality*: this was to give them the power to decide
     how to enforce the law but to make them liable to give an account
     o f (some of) their actions afterwards to their police authority
     and the Home Secretary. The formula was embodied in the
     A ct and, as the Home O ffice sees it:

           the system which now exists for controlling the police
           thus Involves the Inter-relationship o f three authorities
           - the Home Secretary, the local police authorities and
           the chief officers o f police - in a complex relationship
           which ensures that excep t in respect o f day-to-day
           operations, no one o f the three has absolute control".

An added dimension in the current context is that o f the judicial
inquiry which has been called for by the Home Secretary. In addition
to any reservations the ch ief constable may have in answering questions
which he sees as relating to operational m atters he may argue with
some force that it is not in the public interest to touch upon any
m atters which are within the broad scope o f the Judicial inquiry.
I am not clear about the precise terms or statutory context o f the
judicial inquiry and therefore am in some doubt as to what would
be seen as prejudicial to those proceedings. There Is nevertheless
some strength in the argument that nothing should be said which
would in any way prejudice the conduct of the proceedings of the
judicial Inquiry, in the context o f the 1964 A ct it may be useful to
draw attention to Section 32 which makes provision for local inquiries
 and allows the Secretary of State to cause a local Inquiry to be held
by a person appointed by him into any m atter connected with the
 policing of any area. This provision is in the broader context o f the
 Secretary o f State's central supervision and direction o f the police
 service and accordingly the comments made by the Secretary o f State
 may have some weight in that regard In constraining the ch ief constable
 from answering questions on m atters within the purview o f the judicial
 inquiry.
The above notes are very much an initial summary o f points arising from
the questions raised and do not purport to be exhaustive as it is recognised
that there are delicate finely balanced arguments in relation to such issues
as any directions which the police authority may give in a policy context
extending beyond financial and administrative directions. I have intentionally
concentrated my focus on the essence o f the statutory provisions. Given
the areas which may be regarded as touching upon operational m atters
and the arrangements for a judicial inquiry in broad terms I would expect
chief constable to confine him self largely to a prepared statem ent and
to be restrictively cautious in answering questions particularly when they
are raised in a public arena.
H jku S B Q R O U G H O i S f l S i F. R _! f l C c £ 5 S                               TO        C O u N C /A s . iN P O R n f t T / . O / s / .
S R iS F / N G - N O T fe              . .        __________________________                                                     ___________


•jP lc in fM n ^         o p p l » c = . o > n o r ^ S c r v c d <dk<scy S j o r j - S                                        ........       ....

Tow n o^d C o l a T i P l e x o r s                           \              flc-'h- I^ *7 i       S<s.c: V-io n _3                              ..
Tow n        c rx A C o L ^ n V r ^               P lc n n 1                    G’e , n e - r c i _ O e Y e \ o p o a < s . n b_ O l X l e . r ~ L

1 ^8 8        f lr h c ls .        Z 7 ____

.DuV-^                cl_     \ocic=J p'i c r \ o j                          ciul^on                                      o ..                  .. .

 p\cr%r>ir»<^ ~                           i          . Ke.pV* >n W v o                        p c .r Y 'S         wt fK o n      1   ocd<s. X
Po.'“ ^r i           “ c i p p l >c c ^ h o          0   3        .......-




 P c j-t-" -U.       — c^ p l i c c-H ar> 5                        c^-c=A        d k s o i S i O P > S > ._ .
I^^CU-lgJC=»i.g-.                                 »<=. m S p e c h O H                       ClV- cJl 1 l V / - A ^ n r ^ \q —
H /c d ris >                     0 0          n i^ V * ho               -V—*—            Q o p » < 2 .3                                  ________


2 ) 6 uj-i<dkirv^ n g j ^ u i c J H o A                      O s . r * V i ^ \ C l C L V S . S __

B u j l A <=\ *        flc V * ^ 8 I f             .S e c V io a                5 ^ i ___ ____ ________                      __________
                      Cftpprov/exrX \nap«s,c.V-or5 oV c . ' )                                          Ra^udcJ-iooS. HS-5.
fc^u4cJHor>                  -2^

IvO ccJ           c i j L - £ > > - c ) r n u n d e r*“ o _ c i ) t e < S c z . - p                                   c_ r<2 ^ \S »V ^ r“"*._
D ^ naV-iosS                 c/xd             os.r-Vig^ci<=Jk^s, .iS£>t-^2jd                                                     1


f a ^ w i C - H o P i S - M u S ' r 'DC- i rvcJcS.^^cd . ftV cn_l <=Jh*JLci_                                           f~ p u b \ l O .
‘                        0       <=-Vr cs-U        ^ c s o n c b la ,                             rs      b u J f- n o    n ^ V n V -_ > o .

VcrJrxQ- c o p \e < 3


3) i-o c c J Gn^ve.rnrne.rvV' C flc c c S S                                                   l        rr-rv^y-i o r O ftcV .             S 5.
C n e .v V _ s e . c V ) C D A     \0 0       Q    !< 3 G c J i        .Q r Q v e (n m e o t''.                   H   I* t '7.2L_-____

                                                    wc^S fv^e- SuJo^e.c.V og
Ctf3.ro..rrn\\*iTe.e-v FT^e-rv_ c4 \                                 c ^ c i - ^ ^ r ^ o t>u>»cdl          pcjpe.^S
CA/Cxic)0\e.                                  i a s p e o H o n                    ^ o r          ^poj-         ^e.cXS        ^ o m
        -    c i c_Jt2_.               1 V-ve_      d o CV%ro> rT<s.c2—                  m    g> ,
                                                                                                 <*=•-V-) n c ^          ___________
h). S c ^ V e . ^ o §       Spor^-S                                   l^"7o .      .    __________________



N o , p f o V i S i o r v § o C ~ ^ ‘- J - ^ o i L c z , j n s p a c . \ ^ o n _ o ^ - C e r + i ^ o d r ^ - 0
or ^aro            ptJo\io. reSVer.._
                                    ___
                                      ___
                                        ___
                                          ___
                                            ___
                                              ___
                                                ___
                                                  ___
                                                    ___
                                                      ___
                                                        _
fNo^e.      rv-K_^ o o r r n ' Y ^ ^ r ^ V '            ___ __________________          ____            ___

\ c m lo^or-rv-icjcdl rFT<=Jt-... .iTvs.._ c a r w g » c c > e . . w c -t ) - \
     C o .m n V ^ i r \ i cj 7 c7 . '. o»q p r o t)le m _ y -Q . _laO._=,_____
