                                                                           A2S?/l/5
1o$ /&)
O
                                           P,(JS     ( o ^ o T O L e o J


          CtoUuJOZ   H , U S & ^ A * i   0 6 * m *   0>-<*JO»«W       <    W


                          t'Vrf     iffl




o




O




O
         HILLSBOROUG ft DISASTER CO-ORDINATING GROUP


              M eeting held on Thursday 20th April, 1989




PRESENT:         Messrs M W ebster, D Bownes and
                 (A dm inistration and Legal D epartm ent)
                 Mr P O 'Neill
                 (Personnel D epartm ent)
                 M essrs D Purchon and
                 (Environment      H ealth  and    Consumer    Services
                 Departm ent)
                 Ms S Lanstone and Mr P D ent
                 (Publicity D epartm ent)
                 Mr K Blount
                 (D epartm ent o f Land and Planning)
                 Mr           H
                 (Fam ily and Com munity S ervices Departm ent)


Item 1     TERMS OF REFERENCE OF CO-ORDINATING GROUP                      ACTION
           It was agreed that the Co-ordinating Group would have
           wide terms of reference to provide an up-to-date exchange
           of information on matters relating to the Hillsborough
           disaster, including media relations, the investigation
           situation and deployment, implications for other stadia
           within the City, the venue for the Inquiry to he conducted-
           by Lord Justice Taylor and the liaison with Inquiry
           personnel, the briefing of Members and Officers, licensing     All Members
           documentation, and issues relating to the Inquest- on
           individual log of information and action taken.
Item 2      MEDIA RELATIONS

            Media relations will form an increasingly important aspect
            of the Authority's actions in response to the disaster.,
            It was agreed that all responses to media enquiries for       All Members
            information would be drafted in the form of a press release
            or statement, and must be cleared by Mark Webster
            and David Purchon, prior to release (normally through
            the Press Office).

            Mr P O'Neill to be the spokesperson on all operational
            issues.
            Shirley Lanstone to be the spokesperson on issues relating
            to the Appeal.

            A memorandum to be sent from the Chief Executive's
            office to all appropriate officers containing details of      Mr P O'Neill
            these arrangements.
Item 3      CURRENT   INVESTIGATIONS          AND     LIAISON    WITH
            PERSONNEL

            Concern was expressed regarding the confusion which
            had arisen in connection with the request for a full site
            plan of the Hillsborough stadium showing all relevant
            details, including barriers, improvements, amendments
            etc., as at 15th April 1989.
                              -   2


                                                                        ACTION

         It was recognised that Lord Justice Taylor had now ordered
         that all the Council's investigators should withdraw from
         the site, but it was still considered essential that the
         plan be prepared as soon as possible.                          Mr K Blount

         Arrangements to be made for liaison with Inquiry personnel
         and West Midlands Police to establish level and nature
         of assistance required.                                         Mr P O'Neill

         List of bereaved families and occupations to be prepared        Mr
         for Rod Sewell.                                                 Mr

Item 4   IMPLICATION FOR OTHER STADIA

         Inspection has taken place at Bramall Lane Stadium              Mr D Purchon
         on 19th April 1989. Perimeter fence to remain, but              Mr P O'Neill
         safety gates to be removed. Sheffield United to be              Mr P Dent
         informed.

         West end terrace at Hillsborough Stadium to remain
         closed at least until the end of the season.

         Task teams established for Bramall Lane, Hillsborough
         and Owlerton Stadia.                                            Mr

         David Purchon to be fully informed of the comparisons
         between the requirements of the 'Green Code' and the            Mr K Blount
         specification of the new Don Valley Stadium.
Item 5   VENUE FOR INQUIRY

         Possible use of Council Chambers with other rooms as            Ms S Lanstone
         required, plus office equipment, telephones etc.                Mr P O'Neill

Item 6   MEMBER AND OFFICER BRIEFINGS

         All Member and Officer briefings to be carried out by
         Mark Webster in consultation with DAvid Purchon, Pat            All Members
         O'Neill and David Bownes, as appropriate.

         All reports to programme committees on this issue to
         be submitted first to Policy Committee.                         All Members

Item 7   LICENSING DOCUMENTATION

         The need was emphasised for a thorough, efficient and
         professional presentation of all licensing documentation.       Mr D Bownes
         Work on the preparation of this documentation to                Ms S Lanstone
         commence immediately by David Bownes to include
         index with cross references, precis and summaries together
         with detailed information and plans. Shirley Lanstone
         to advise and assist regarding the presentation of the
         documentation package.

         Liz Bashforth will be requested to assist with the review       Ms E Bashforth
         and presentation of all legal work including on-site issues.

         Mark Webster to pursue issues relating to the need to           Mr M Webster
         brief Counsel on aspects of the disaster.
                                                                            ACTION

    Item 8    INQUEST

              The Coroner's investigations have ceased at present
              on the instruction of Lard Justice Taylor and will probably
              not resume until after the Inquiry has closed.*
    Item 9    OTHER ISSUES

              Local Authority to assist Sheffield Wednesdy Football
              Club with cleaning of the Hillsborough gymnasium.
    Item 10   FUTURE MEETINGS

              Meetings to be held initially on alternative          days    Ms
              commencing Friday 21st April at 9.00 a.m.

    ^Consideration to be given on whether same venue facilities as for
    Inquiry should be used.




)
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER CO-ORDINATING GRODP



Meeting held 24 April 1989


Present;     Messrs M Webster, D Bownes, B Creasey and               Ms
             E Bashforth and Ms |____________ (Administration and Legal
             Department); Mr P O'Neill (Personnel Department)? Mr
             P Dent and Ms               (Publicity Department); Mr D
             Purchon (Health and Consumer Services) and Messrs G
             Levers and K Blount (Department of Land and Planning)




                                                                          ACTION

(1)   Inqruiry Arrangements

      It was confirmed that the Inquiry by Lord Justice Taylor would
      commence on Friday 28 April in the Town Hall.     It is thought,
      however, that the Inquiry will not begin the hearing of evidence
      from witnesses for several weeks.

      The Inquiry will occupy accommodation in the Reception Rooms,       Mr P O'Neill
      the Council Chamber, Committee Rooms Nos 1 to 4, and the Ante
      Room.  Dp to 30 telephone lines are to be provided in Committee
      Room No 2 with a secure telephone line and FAX machine to
      be provided for Lord Justice Taylor in the Ante Room.    Further
      consideration to be given regarding the layout of the'Council
      Chamber and the provision of closed circuit television.       Mr
                |(Department of Land and Planning) has been identified
      as the contact officer within his Department on issues relating
      to accommodation.

(2)   Operational Issues

      Bramall Lane Stadium

      David Purchon identified several areas which require further
      investigation following his visit to the Bramall Lane Stadium
      at the Weekend.   These issues to be taken into account during
      the formal inspection of the Stadium.     It was also agreed Mr D Bownes
      that a letter be sent to Sheffield United to obtain feedback
      on the arrangements for the removal of the gates in the
      perimeter fencing at the Stadium.

      Owlerton Stadium

      David Purchon identified areas of concern at the Owlerton
      Stadium which must be considered during a formal inspection Mr D Bownes
      in the near future.

      It was stressed that the inspection arrangements in respect
      of stadia in the City must be undertaken on a thoroughly
      professional but low-key basis.
      Hillsborough Stadium

      It was stated that the first priority as respects the inspection
      of stadia, must be the arrangements for the football match
      at Hillsborough Stadium between Sheffield Wednesday and West
      Ham United on Saturday 29 April.

      It was agreed that Pat O'Neill would make preliminary contact
      with South Yorkshire Police to clarify whether the match would
      proceed and, on the receipt of confirmation of the event   being Mr P O'Neill
      held, a meeting be arranged as soon as possible with all
      interested parties at the Stadium on Tuesday 25 April to agree
      the detailed arrangements for the match.

(3)   Licensing Documentation

      It was reported that the licensing documentation file in respect
      of the Hillsborough Stadium would be ready by tomorrow.

      It was agreed that similar files be established for the       other Mr D Bownes
      stadia in the City.

(4)   New Developments/Other Issues

      (a)   Pat O'Neill to contact the Fire Service regarding access      Mr P O'Neill
            to any videos of the incident which are made available
            by the BBC.

      (b)   The Municipal Mutual Insurance Company have appointed
            Keeble, Hawson   (Solicitors) to act on their behalf
            in respect of the incident.

                The Group was given a clear instruction that they must    All Members
                not, in any circumstances, discuss the nature of the
                events relating to the incident with any person outside
                the Group without first obtaining clearance through
                the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department.

      (c)   The Group were requested to supply Liz Bashforth with         All Members
            the names of all officers, both past and present, who
            had been involved with matters relating to the Safety
            of Sports Grounds Act since the designation of the
            Stadia in the City.

(5)   Future Meetings

      It was agreed that future meetings of this Co-ordinating Group
      be held on alternate days,     at 8.30 am in the Head of
      Administration and Legal Department's office, commencing on
      Wednesday 26 April.




24 April 1989
GW
                HILIiSBOROOGH DISASTER CO-ORDINATING GRODP


                Meeting held on Wednesday 26 April 1989


Present;    Messrs M Webster, D Bownes,               Ms E Bashforth
            and Ms             (Administration and Legal Department);
            Mr   D   Purchon  (Environmental   Health   and  Consumer
            Services); Mr P O'Neill      (Personnel Department); Mr
            __________ (Family and Community Services Department);
            Mr K Blount (Department of Land and Planning); Mr
            P Dent and Ms I        (Publicity Department).




                                                                        ACTION
(1)   MINUTES

      The Minutes of the meeting of the Group held on 24th April
      were received with the comment that, regarding the Bramall
      Lane Stadium, the letter requesting feedback on the decision
      to remove the gates in the perimeter fence was to be sent
      to the South Yorkshire Police and not to Sheffield United
      FC.

(2)   PRESS STATEMENTS

      It was reported that following meetings with the South
      Yorkshire Police, it had been agreed that, in view of the
      current situation at Hillsborough, the home matches with
      West Ham United on Saturday 29 April and Bordeaux on Tuesday
      2 May were to be cancelled.    This decision had already been
      report in the press.    It was pointed out that the decision
      did not necessarily apply to reserve matches where much
      smaller crowds were expected.

      Details were also reported of the arrangements for the removal
      and disposal of wreaths and tributes at the Stadium.

(3)   INSPECTION ARRANGEMENTS

      Bramall Lane Stadium

      Inspection of the Bramall Lane Stadium will take place on
      Thursday 27 April.    Arrangements are to be made for all
      the Council's Officers involved to attend at the Stadium          All Members
      at the same time and such Officers should liaise after their
      inspections to ensure that a composite list of work required
      is   prepared  for   submission  to  the  Club.    Individual
      Officers/departments should refrain from conducting separate
      negotiations with the Club.

      Officers were requested to inform David Bownes of the names
      of  those   persons  who  should be  designated  "Authorised      Mr D Bownes
      Officers" in this matter.
Owlerton Stadium

The inspection of Owlerton Stadium will take place on Thursday
4 May.   David Bownes was requested to clarify the current        Mr D Bownes
position regarding the lease of the Stadium.

INQUIRY UPDATE

It was confirmed that the Inquiry would commence on Friday
28 April at 11.00 am.   It was not yet known when the Inquiry
would begin the hearing of evidence but it was hoped that
the Town Hall accommodation would remain available for normal
meetings (except on Friday 28 April) until the end of May.
It was pointed out that the Conference Room was not required
for the Inquiry.

Consideration was given to the question     of the free 'phone
line for persons wishing to comment         on the events at
Hillsborough.    Attention was also drawn    to the "hot line"
installed by the Family and Community       Services Department
to provide counselling and advice to         persons distressed
by the disaster.

It was agreed that details of the two telephone numbers
should be given publicity but that the two telephone lines
and their respective purposes should remain clearly separate
and independent from each other.      Attention was drawn to
the importance of telephone enquirers being correctly advised
as to which line/service they required and Phil Dent was          Mr P Dent
required to investigate how this might best be arranged.

LICENSING DOCUMENTATION

It was   reported that the preparation of the licensing
documentation was progressing smoothly and would be completed
shortly.

A plan of the Hillsborough Stadium as at 15 April would
be  completed   today  and  numbered  copies would be made
available.  It was agreed that a copy of the plan be forwarded    Mr P O'Neill
to the Home Office, and that they be reminded that the Council
was preparing a scale model of the Stadium which could be
used at the Inquiry if required.

NEW DEVELOPMENTS/OTHER ISSUES

  (i) The Fire Service have confirmed that the BBC have
      offered to make available video tapes of the disaster       Mr P O'Neill
      and Pat O'Neill was requested to clarify whether the
      Council will be granted access to view the tapes.

 (ii) Family and Community Services Department to liaise          Mr
      with                Occupational Health) regarding the      Mr
      provision of counselling/care services for bereaved         and
      families who may attend the Inquiry.                        Mrs
                                        - 3 -




       (iii) ID cards    to be   prepared for those officers         with   Mr P O'Neill
             responsibilities relating to the Inquiry.                      and Mr P Dent

        (iv)    Memoranda are to be issued (A) instructing all   non-
               essential personnel to avoid, wherever possible, the
               area of     the Reception Rooms, Council Chamber    and      Mr M Webster
               Committee Rooms for the duration of the Inquiry and
               (B)   notifying   Chief   Officers of   the need   for
               departmental meeting rooms to be made available for
               meetings  of   the Council's committees/sub-committees
               during the period of the Inquiry.

         (v)    Mr P O'Neill to     clarify with the Home   Office    the   Mr P O'Neill
               financial arrangements for the Inquiry.

       (vi) It was reported that details of the St John's Ambulance
            Service provision at the Hillsborough Stadium on 15
            April had been published in "The Star" on 25 April.

      (vii) The Memorial Service at Liverpool will be attended
            by a civic delegation from Sheffield, together with
            representatives from Bochum in West Germany.

(7)   NEXT MEETING

      The next meeting of the Group will be held in the Head of
      Administration and Legal Department's office at 8.30 am
      on Friday 28 april.




26 April 1989
GW
                 HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER CO-ORDINATING GROUP

                             Meeting held 28th April 1989


PRESENT:          Messrs M Webster, D Bownes, B Creasey,               and Mrs E
                  Bashforth (Administration and Legal Department)
                  Mr D Purchon (Environmental Health and Consumer Services)
                  Mr P Dent and Ms           (Publicity Department)
                  Mr P O’Neill (Personnel Department)
                  Mr K Blount (Department of Land and Planning)
                  Messrs J Pilling and             (Family and Community Services
                  Department)



Item 1     MINUTES                                                           ACTION

           The minutes of the meeting of the Group held on 26th
           April were received and arising therefrom the Group
           noted:-

           (a)   that arrangements were in hand to provide any
                  necessary counselling for bereaved families who
                  may attend the Inquiry;

           (b)   negotiations were currently proceeding regarding
                 the period of the lease to be granted at the Owlerton
                 Stadium; and

           (c)   the West Midlands Police had indicated that they
                  would prepare their own plans in respect of the
                  Hillsborough Stadium, but would be pleased to
                 make use of the Council's model of the Stadium.

Item 2     INSPECTION ARRANGEMENTS
           Bramall Lane Stadium

           The Group were informed of matters which had arisen
           during the inspection of the Bramall Lane Stadium on
           27th April 1989. It was agreed that a letter would be
           sent to Sheffield United Football Club setting out clearly
           the City Council's position in relation to future action
           in the circumstances.                                             Mr M WebsteW
                                                                             Mr D Bownes
           Hillsborough Stadium

         It was reported that, with the exception of the West
         end terrace, it might well be possible to re-open the
         Hillsborough Stadium to the public in time for the match
         with Norwich City Football Club on 9th May, providing
         that the prescribed safety work had been carried out
         to the satisfaction of the City Council.
                                 -   2   -




                                                                       ACTION




Item 3   INQUIRY UPDATE

         It was understood that the Inquiry would commence the
         hearing of evidence on 15th May 1989, although this
         date had yet to be officially confirmed.

         Regarding the allocation of Committee Rooms, it was
         reported that the Treasury solicitors had been allocated
         Committee Room No 1 whilst the press would be in
         Committee Room No 2. Committee Room No 4 was
         now to be made available for the Inquiry Secretariat.

         It was considered necessary to clarify the position
         regarding the possible clash with the arrangements for
         the Annual meeting of the City Council on 17th May,          Mr P O'Neill
         as soon as possible.

         It was also agreed to pursue as a m atter of urgency,
         the receipt of a 'Letter of Authorisation' from the Home     Mr P O'NeiL
         Office.
Item 4   LICENSING DOCUMENTATION

         The Group were informed that the West Midlands Police
         had requested receipt of the files relating to the issue
         by 4.00 p.m. today. It was anticipated that the Police
         investigation would not only look into the facts of the
         case, but would attem pt to examine attitudes towards
         safety at sports grounds and individual Departments
         may be requested to provide information.
Item 5   NEW DEVELOPMENTS

         (a)   Liverpool Council have requested permission to
               bring another delegation to Sheffield for a briefing
               and to visit the Hillsborough Stadium. This request
               was viewed with some caution by the Group at
               the present time.

         (b)   Following discussions between Mr D Purchon and
               Consultants from the Sheffield Health Authority,
               the Consultants are to provide the City Council
               with information on 'disaster packs' which may
               be of use in potential emergency situations.
         (c)   No decision to be taken at present regarding the
               venue for the resumed Inquest although the Memorial
               Hall was considered a possible venue.

Item 6   DATE OF NEXT MEETING

         The next meeting of the Group will be held in the Head
         of Administration and Legal Department's office at 8.30
         a.m. on Wednesday 3rd May 1989.
            HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER CO-ORDINATING GROUP

                    Meeting held 3 May 1989


Present;     Messrs M Webster, D Bownes,I        land R Sewell
             (Administration and Legal Department); Mr K
             Blount (Department of Land and Planning); Mr
                          (Family  and   Community    Services
             Department); Mr D Purchon (Health and Consumer
             Services) and Mr P O'Neill (Personnel Department)




                                                                 ACTION

(1)   MINUTES

      The Minutes of the meeting of the Group held on 28
      April were received and arising therefrom the Group
      noted

      (a)    the arrangements which had been made for     the
             Inquiry to begin hearing evidence on 15      May
             in the Council Chamber; and

      (b)    the problems which these arrangements presented
             regarding the venue for the Annual Meeting
             of the City Council on 17 May.

(2)   INSPECTION ARRANGEMENTS

      Bramall Lane Stadium

      The Group were notified of correspondence which had
      been received    from Sheffield United FC following
      the   inspection    of the    Bramall   Lane  Stadium.
      Consideration was given to the terms of a measured
      response to the points raised in the correspondence        Mr M Webster and
      which would form the basis of a reply to be submitted      Mr D Bownes
      to Sheffield United within the next 24 hours.

      Hillsborough Stadium

      The Group was informed that the West Midlands Police
      had notified Sheffield Wednesday FC that they had
      no objection to the resumption of football at the
      Hillsborough Stadium on the understanding that the
      West   End   Terrace   remained   closed and   certain
      unspecified safety measures were carried out.     This
      notification had not been conveyed directly to the
      Local Authority although the Club were now looking
      to make arrangements to hold the match with West
      Ham United on 9 May. Furthermore, the Club had also
      requested   the  Works Department   to undertake   the
      necessary remedial work on their behalf in view of
      the shortage of time available.
The  Group   expressed  considerable  concern   at   the
circumstances outlined and it was agreed that:-

(a)   the Works Department should not  undertake any
      safety or remedial repair work at the stadium
      in view of the Council's role     as Licensing       Mr M Webster and
      Authority   for the Stadium, and  the Director       Mr K Blount
      of Works be advised forthwith;

(b)   the Club be informed that the provision of           Mr M Webster,
      the    required   safety  work   remains   the       Mr R Sewell as
      responsibility of the Club and their appointed       Mr D Bownes
      private contractors;

(c)   arrangements be made to contact the West Midlands
      Police over the next 24 hours to clarify the         Mr M Webster
      circumstances under which football may resume
      at the Stadium so far as they are concerned;

(d)   arrangements be made over the next 24 hours
      to identify any outstanding safety issues at         Mr K Blount
      the Stadium and the time-scale for the remedial
      work required; and

(e)   a further inspection of the ground be carried        Mr D Bownes
      out on completion of the required safety work.

NEXT MEETING

It was agreed that the next meeting of the Group
be held in the Head of Administration and Legal
Department's office at 8.30 am on Wednesday 10 May
1989.
             HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER CO-ORDINATING GROUP

               Meeting held on Wednesday 10 May 1989


Present         Messrs  M Webster, D Bownes and ________ and Ms
                           J ( Administration and Legal Department);
                Mr D Purchon (Health and Consumer Services);
                Mr               (Family and Community Services);
                Mr P O'Neill (Personnel Department); Mr P Dent
                and Ms ___________ (Publicity Department);       and
                Messrs G Levers and K Blount (Department of
                Land and Planning)




                                                                          ACTION


(   1)    MINUTES

          The Minutes of the meeting of the       Group   held   on   3
          May 1989 were received and noted.

( 2 )     INSPECTION ARRANGEMENTS

          Bramall Lane Stadium

          The   Group  noted   the   current  position   and the
          developments which were taking place in connection
          with the inspection of the Bramall Lane Stadium.

          Hillsborough Stadium

          The Group noted the arrangements which had been made
          to enable 'First Division' football matches to resume
          at the Hillsborough Stadium on 9 May.     It was stated
          that a charge would be made in respect of certain               Mr
          work carried out by the Authority in this matter.                    ---------

          Attention was also drawn to recent speculation within
          the press regarding potential problems which might
          arise on Saturday 13 May due to the anticipated influx
          of many fans from Middlesborough, without tickets
          for the match.

          It was agreed to enquire what arrangements the South            Mr P O'Neill
          Yorkshire Police were making to deal with this problem.

          INQUIRY UPDATE

          It was reported that Lord Justice Taylor had extended
          his thanks to the City Council for their co-operation
          and assistance in the arrangements for the Inquiry
          to commence on 15 May.
Widespread press coverage was anticipated, particularly
during the first few days of the Inquiry although
it might well be possible to release certain elements
of    the accommodation 'earmarked' for   the Inquiry,
including a part of the Reception Suite, if and when
the level of demand becomes clear.

It    was also reported that the Coroner had expressed
the desire for similar arrangements to be provided
for the resumed Inquest.     This was viewed with some
caution by the Group at       the present time, pending
clarification of the implications, particularly with
regard to finance and accommodation.

FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS OF INQUIRY

It    was reported that the   Home Office had agreed to
meet all reasonable costs     arising from the Inquiry
by Lord Justice Taylor.

As costs were being incurred by a number of departments
throughout the Authority, both in respect of the
Inquiry and the wider implications arising from the
disaster, it was agreed that an approach be made               _______
to the City Treasury to establish a structure to          Mr
collect and evaluate all the financial data and cost           -------
implications to the Authority, with a view to the
preparation of an appropriate submission to the Home
Office and, if necessary, a report to the Policy
Committee in due course.

With this in mind, officers were reminded of the
need to record details of any action taken and costs      All Members
incurred in connection with the disaster.

LICENSING DOCUMENTATION

It was reported that a meeting would be held this
day with Counsel to consider the Authority's position
as respects the Inquiry.      It was suggested that,
if possible, the Authority should aim to put forward
positive recommendations to the Inquiry.    Attention
was also drawn to the rigid nature of the Authority's
powers in the area of safety/licensing and it was
considered that a greater degree of flexibility might
well be recommended as a way forward.

REPORTS TO POLICY COMMITTEE

The Group were reminded of the need for all reports
relating   to aspects   of the Hillsborough Disaster
to be submitted to the Policy Committee via Mr M
Webster.   It was stated that a formal report on the
disaster   would be prepared by Mr D Purchon for          Mr D Purchon
submission to the Committee as soon as possible.
        Discussions were to be held with the Leader and/or       Mr   Webster
        Deputy Leader to obtain their views on the method
        of dealing with the financial/staffing issues arising
        from the disaster.

(7)     OTHER ISSUES

        It was noted that, at the request of the West Midlands
        Police, a copy of the Council's Scheme for Major
        Peacetime Emergencies had been forwarded to their
        Inquiry Team.   Interest had also been shown regarding
        the actions taken by the Council immediately following
        the disaster, although no request for a formal report
        on this action had yet been received.

(8)     FUTURE MEETINGS

        It was agreed that future meetings of the Working
        Group be held on an ad-hoc basis as and when required.




10 May 1989
GW
              5th May, 1909


Lord Jus vice Taylor's.Enquiry Team,
West Midlands Police,         ^
Furnival tlouse,
Sheffield,
31 4QP.


For the attention of Inspector Burrows


Dear Sirs.,

City, of Sheffield - Scheme for Major Peacetime ^roer&enoies

X-rafter to your'recent telephone conversation with my office and am please*!
to enclose a copy of die "City Council’s Scheme for' Major Peacetime Emergenoi#»t
as requested*

As you will be aware, the Gouncilfls functions and responsibilities are
not primarily designed to provide .an emergency rescue service and its Emergency
Plan is supplementary oO che Police Scheme for major disasters.

In 'the case of the.Hillsborough 'disaster* .the Local Authority broadcast
an appeal'fortrained Social Workers to attend'.'the incident and it.'.mam;
in this area of care, comfort and. counselling of the bereaved that the     ■
Local Authority's services were primarily directed following the incident*
Further details of the action tafcsen oy the Council’a officers can be provided
toy ‘che officers concerned, if required*

With reference w> your query regarding specific emergency plans, 1 can
confirm-that ’the role of toe Authority does not require the preparation
of a specific plan for a major emergency within the Hillsborough1Stadium.

Yours faithfully,




Acting Head of Department




Enclosure



                                                 734007
                                                          Hr,
   R3719                                                                             Sch 9 1 6 0
                                C IT Y OF SHEFFIELD — M E M O R A N D U M

From        Chief Executive                           To     See Circulation Below

                                        ''
Date        9 May 1989
Ref.        AH/GW
Tel. Ext.   4018 - Mr Webster                         Ref.




            re: JUDICIAL INQUIRY - FRIDAY 28 APRIL and MONDAY 15 MAY

            I thought it important that I write and pass on the compliments
            received, primarily from the Treasury Solicitor but also from others
            involved in the initial day of the Inquiry the 28th April, regarding
            the administrative arrangements made for that day as can be seen
            from the attached copy letter from Mr Whalley of the Home Office.

            In particular, I would like to express my thanks to all those who
            worked so hard to ensure that the arrangements went off smoothly
            and efficiently and to thank them for their initial effort and their
            continued help in the future.

            Clearly, in a communication of this sort, it is perhaps wrong to
            single out individuals in view of the team effort that went on but
            nevertheless I feel that the work of the Administration Group and
            the Building Survey Group in the Estates Division of Land and Planning
            deserve attention, as do the efforts of the Licensing Section within
            the Administration and Legal Department, Mr              of the same
            Department, Ms          and Tony Flannagan of Cleansing and of course
            the efforts of Pat O'Neill and                in terms of overall co­
            ordination and liaison.

            Whilst quite obviously we would all have hoped that the arrangements
            would have been required for a happier purpose, I nevertheless repeat
            my thanks and appreciation and those of the Leader for the efforts
            put in so far and in the future.




            Circulation;

            Director of Land and Planning
            Chief Personnel Officer
            Director of Cleansing Services
            Acting Head of Administration and Legal

            cc    Councillor C J C Betts, Leader
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH                  The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                               50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                               London SW1H 9AT
                                               01-273 2577/3602/2370


Ian Podmore Esq
Chief Executive
Sheffield City Council
Town Hall
SHEFFIELD
                                                               ^~ M ay 1989


                                           O r jm S S iS T A N T
                                       PEPT.   I    HEAD




                         )
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER INQUIRY


I write in confirmation of our telephone conversation on 19 April
and my visit to Sheffield on 20 April to discuss with your staff
arrangements for the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry.
Lord Justice Taylor is extremely grateful to the City Council for
making the facilities of the Town Hall available to him for his
Inquiry, and has asked me to write to you to express his
gratitude. He was particularly grateful for all the excellent
arrangements made for the preliminary hearing on 28 April.
May I add'my personal thanks for the assistance of Mr Pat
O'Neill, Mrs             and their colleagues, who have been
quite outstanding in the help and support they have already given
to me and my staff.




                                                   R M WHALLEY
           R 3719                                                                           Sch 9 1 6 0
                                  C IT Y OF SHEFFIELD — M E M O R A N D U M

    From                                                To            Mark Webster, Acting Head
                    Police Liaison Officer                            of Admin. & Legal Dept.,
                                                                      C.C. Frances Woodhead,
    Date            24th July,   1989                                 Admin. & L e g a l ,
    Ref.                                                          i               I
    Tel. Ext.       5971   -                            Ref.          Admin.   & Legal



                    I have recently been in d i sc us si on s wit h the Archdeacon for Sheffield,
                    Stephen Lowe, who as you may know was very involved in the
                    Hillsborough disaster and in co- or di na ti ng the ch urches support in the
                    fol low-up to it.. He asked wheth er the City Council had plans to do
                    any kind of review of the emergency disa st e r operations, and if so,
                    whether it would be possible to draw in some of the views fr o m o u t ­
                    side or ga n is at io ns such as the church who, he believes, have a great
                    deal to offer in terms of practical s o l u t i o n s .and wa y s forward.   The
                    same I am sure is true for many of the voluntary o r g a n i s a t i o n s also
                    involved.

                    I said I would pass on to you this request and ask yo u to con si de r
                    how the views of outside bodies might be fed into any City Council
\    ')             processes.




                    HJB




o
A/El
              from SHEFFIELD COUNCIL
                                                                21st April 1989


           HILLSBOROUGH      "DON'T TAKE YOUR PAIN OUT ON OTHERS" CALL


 Sheffield's Director of Social Services, Neil Kay, has joined those calling

 for an   end to Public expressions of accusation and blame of the

 Hillsborough disaster.




 Many people in the city are suffering from severe emotional shock, he says,

 and one of the common reactions to this condition is bitterness and an

 overwhelming sense of anger.




 Mr Kay adds:     "Such anger is often targeted on some individual or group and

 is even more likely if people themselves feel unfairly criticised.




 "Unfortunately, when people are in shock they may target people who don't

 deserve their blame and anger, making judgements on rumour and partial

 information."




 His advice     is:   "Don't bottle it up.    By all means share your   anger with

 family and     friends, if they can take    it, or seek counselling.But please      stop

 the public     accusations and wait for the public enquiry to establishthe facts.




 "People as     shocked and distressed as    you are getting hurt."




                      Issued by Sheffield City Council, Press Office.

     For further information contact Press Officer Sue Davis,(0742)^ 734052.

Working fora better City
                                                                                            R1736
NE Irrom SHEFFIELD COUNCIL
                                                                                    21 April 1989


  PIPER ALPHA WIDOW DONATES TO HILLSBOROUGH VICTIMS




  Less than a week a f t e r the t r a g i c events a t Hillsborough Stadium, over
  £660,000 has c l e a r e d through the accounts in L i ve r poo l, S h e f f i e l d and
  Nottingham f o r the Hilssborough D i s a s t e r Appeal.                  Over £1 m i l l i o n more has
  been pledged.


  S h e f f i e l d ' s Lord Mayor , C o unci llo r P h y l l i s Smith, who has been deeply moved
  by the tragedy and the s i n c e r e e x p r e s s i o n s o f sympathy re c e iv e d with d on at ion s,
  has c a n c e l l e d her planned v i s i t to S h e f f i e l d ' s twin town of Bochum in West
  Germany ne xt week.            I n s t e a d , the Deputy Mayor o f Bochum w il l be b ri n g i n g a
  cheque f o r £16,000 to p r e s e n t to the Lord Mayor in S h e f f i e l d nex t Saturday
  (29 A p r i l ) .     He i s expected to accompany a c i v i c p a r ty from S h e f f i e l d to the
  memorial s e r v i c e a t L i v e r p o o l ' s Anglican Cathedral a t 11.00 the same day.


  The Appeal con tin ue s to r e c e i v e don ation s a t t a c h e d to h e a r t - r e n d i n g l e t t e r s
  such as

  "This i s j u s t a token payment towards t h e fund, hoping i t w il l help
  somebody,           (from P ip e r Alpha Widow and c h i l d r e n ) . "


 ^ L i v e r p o o l fan who>was a t Heysel has s e n t h a l f h is dole money                  and    two inmates
  o f H M Prison s "have s e n t donations on o f f i c i a T dockets*. •



                                                                       /more overpage




Working for a better City
                                            *                                                                         R1736
A spokesperson f o r the T r u st e e s o f the Hillsbo roug h D i s a s t e r Appeal s a i d t h i s
af te r n o o n (F riday)
"The Appeal w il l be g r e a t l y a s s i s t e d i f th e banks a c c e p t donations and
d i s p l a y the Appeal p o s t e r , as the Bu ild in g S o c i e t i e s a r e c u r r e n t l y doing, a t
thei r branches".


                  Is su e d by S h e f f i e l d City Council Press Offi ce
For f u r t h e r in fo r m a ti o n c o n t a c t Chief P u b l i c i t y O f f i c e r S h i r l e y Lanstone
                                 telephone (0742) 734755
NEWS
  from SHEFFIELD COUNCIL
                                                             21st April 1989

               HILLSBOROUGH - SYMPATHY AND DONATIONS FLOOD IN

   Expressions of sympathy and donations to the appeal fund are pouring

   into the Town Hall in Sheffield, following the Hillsborough Disaster.




   The Hillsborough Disaster Appeal, launched by the Civic Leaders

   of Sheffield, Liverpool aid Nottingham on Sunday (16th April), now

   stands at £461,163, with many thousands of pounds worth of cheques

   still clearing and many hundreds of thousands more pledged.



   Over 5.000 people have queued to sign the Book of Remembrance at

   the Town Hall, Sheffield, since it was opened on Monday (17th April).

   Signatories already include HRH the Duke of Kent; the Mayors of

   Doncaster, Barnsley and Rotherham; both Sheffield United and Sheffield

   Wednesday football teams; Mayor Ma Yanli of Anshan, Sheffield's

   twin town-in China, who is currently visiting the city; the Lord

    Lieutenant and the High Sheriff of South Yorkshire: and Football

   Association Chairman Bert Millichip.




    Mail is also flooding in with cheques and letters* arriving by the

    sackful, many of the messages and donations anonymous.     Contributions

    have been received from "A 84 year old granny", "A Geordie Man   u

    fan living in Corby", "A Leeds pensioner" "A shocked Halifax Rugby

    League Fan", "A Very sad and sincere Tottenham supporter", "A

    Liverpool supporter from North Wales" and a woman from Glasgow who


Working for a better City
                                                                               R1736
writes:   "I remember Ibrox.    I am enclosing £5 twards the fund, not

much, as I am a widow myself, I know what it's like."




Chief Publicity Officer Shirley Lanstone, co-ordinating the Appeal

from the Sheffield end, said: "The response has been overwhelming.

Staff in my Department and cashiers in the City Treasury have been

working flat out organising publicity, collections and offers of help.




Donations to the Hillsborough Disaster Appeal can be made at any bank

or building society, to account No 50000005, sorting code 08-90-75,

or the Lord Mayor, Town Hall, Sheffield SI 2HH




            Issued by Sheffield City Council Press Office

           Further information from Syje Davis Press Officer

                               (0742) 734052
NE\
           from SHEFFIELD COUNCIL
                                                            19 April 1989


                                   PRESS RELEASE

                      NICARAGUAN PRESIDENT SENDS CONDOLENCES


  President Ortega has sent a message to the Prime Minister expressing his
  "profound consternation" about the tragedy that took place at Hillsborough
  Stadium last Saturday.

  Nicaragua's Ambassador, Sr Francisco d'Escoto, has informed Sheffield City Council
  that the Nicaraguan leader telephoned him personally at 5.30 pm on Saturday
  to seek further information after hearing initial reports of the disaster.

  Then, on Monday, he sent the sincere condolences of the Nicaraguan people and
  Government and asked her to transmit their sentiments to the families of the
  victims.

  Sheffield is twinned with Esteli in Nicaragua, and the Ambassador is due to
  visit the city on Friday and.Saturday for events to mark the first anniversary
  of the signing of a formal twinning agreement.

  During his visit, he will sign the Lord Mayor's book of condolences and present
  a copy of President Ortega's letter.

  Proceeds from the anniversary events are now to be shared between the
  Hillsborough Disaster Appeal and the Lord Mayor's Esteli Appeal.

  The Ambassador said today "a friend in need is a friend indeed". He expressed
  his appreciation of the support the people of Sheffield had given to Esteli
  and to the Nicaraguan Hurricane Appeal. And he said that there was "a deep
  inter-relationship of solidarity" between the people of both countries.

  THE AMBASSADOR WILL SIGN THE BOOK OF REMEMBRANCE AT MIDDAY ON FRIDAY 21 ST APRIL




  Further details about the visit are available from Steve Howell 735195 or
  David Granville 734060.




Working for a better City
                                                                                     R1736
Sheff lefd City Libraries, Surrey Street, S h effield S1 1XZ                                T elep ho ne: ( 0 7 4 2 ) 7 3 4 7 5 0

                                                                 ^■aLocatGdyernmentlnformationSecvice^^




                                          ^Palace’s memorial^
                                           decision defended
                                                                                          T)T     1 1 ■?
                                                               By Nigel Bunyan
                                           THE Lord Lieutenant ofMer-                                     p.f
                                                                                 PrinceCharles,who isvisiting
                                         |seyside, Wing Commander             Anfield as part of a long-
                                         IKenneth Stoddart, yesterday         planned visit to Merseyside,
                                         ■defended Buckingham Palace          will meet club officials, players
                                         {over its decision to send the       and social workers helping
                                         |Duke of Kent to Saturday’s          thoseaffectedby thedisaster.
                                          memorial service for victims          Wing Commander Stoddart
                                          ofthe Hillsboroughdisaster.         said: “The Duke of Kent was
                                            Responding tocriticismthata       the obvious person to come,
                                         -imore'senior member, of the         becausehe istheone member of
                                         jRoyal Family should have            the Royal Family with any real
       hits£ l1
              / 2m                       Iattended the service in Liver­
                                          pool’s Anglican Cathedral, he
                                                                              knowledgeoffootball.
                                                                                "Furthermore, he is bringing
                                                                              the Duchess, who is a very
          By Jane Tadman                  saidtheDuke ofKent, thepresi­
                                          dent of the Football Associa­       thoughtful and caring person.
                                          tion,was ideallysuited.             She will be a great comfort and
       MONEY is still pouring into                                            supporttothebereaved.”
           (be Hillsborough Disaster        He also disclosed that the
          Appeal Fund as people pull      Prince of Wales had been seek­        He said he regretted the out­
          out all the stops to raise      ing to arrange a visit to Liver­    cry which had followed the
          cash.                           pool Football Club before the      announcemen’t concerning
     T he fun d t o t a l from            furore on Merseyside over the       Royal representation at the
        , Sheffield, Nottingham aod       absence of a senior Royal. This    memorial service.
          Liverpool stands at more        is scheduled to take place next       “The Queen has given a lotof
         than £l>/£m— and that            Wednesday.                         time,alotofvisits,toLiverpool.
         does not include the vast                                           Itcouldneverhave been aslight
         amounts o f money raised                                            from her, because she does so
         from events held over the                                           much forus.Itisnot normal for
         weekend.                                                            hertoattendsuchservices.”
     Buckets full o f cash are still                                            Wing Commander Stoddart,
         ^ 6 “l« rly appearing at                                            who has the task of organising
        Sheffield Town Hall, and                                             Prince Charles’s visit, said he
        staff say they have been                                             knew “a few days ago” that
      , taken aback by the phe­                                              Buckingham Palace was trying
        nomenal response from the                                            to reorganise his day. “Royal
        public. • ,       .                                                  diariesaresofullittakesquitea
     Anyone who wants to contri­                                             lot of time to sort these things
        bute to the fund can send                                            out.”
        c he que s t o the H i l l s ­                                       • The Anfield anthem “You’ll
        borough Disaster Appeal,                                             Never Walk Alone” was played
               Mayor, Town Hall,                                             in a North Staffordshire church
        Sheffield,to the Co-opera­                                           yesterday as one of the youn­
        tive Bank in West Street,                                            gest victimsoftheHillsborough
       o f any bank or building
       society.
                                                                             disasterwas buried.
                                                                                Liverpool fanatic Paul Mur­
      IFundraising events: p 7 ..                                            ray who was 14 three days
                                                                             before the tragedy died on the
                                                                             Hillsborough terrace where he
                                                                             had been taken by his father
                                                                             Tony of Harcourt Road, Meir,
                                                                             Stoke on Trent, as a birthday
                                                                             treat.Mr Murray was being sev­
                                                                             erelybruisedinthecrush.
                                                                               Yesterday Liverpool players
                                                                             Gary Gillespie and Barry Veni­
                                                                             son were among a congregation
                                                                             of 350 at the Holy Trinity
                                                                             Church in Meir and among
                                                                             dozens ofwreaths was one from
                                                                             theclub.
                                                                             • The Hillsborough Disaster
                                                                             Fund has now received more
                                                                             than£2millionindonations.
                                                                                Editorial Comment—P22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       'JtU’Or Pst'dT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 T H E S T A R , Wednesday, Apri! 2ft, f W 9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      11




             Why wm had to reflect th
             horror o f Hillsborough
 ON Saturday. April 15, a sem H lnal of the FA Cup w as to
 b e staged at Hillsborough, Sheffield, and 54.000 sp ed a -
 tors went to watch.
                                                                                             11 ** douKhil It anyone who has commented on Hllls-
                                                                                          borough has deliberately se t out to tie. Alt tboee who
                                                                                          hevespofcenaboutH llisboroughhavedonesolelllngthe                    By MICHAEL CORNER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        unfolded it rapidly becam e clear that it w as up to the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        authoritative newspapor of the area to give its readers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        the facta and to do it a s quickly a s possible.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         people stop, think and work out ways to avoid such a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         disaster happening again they will have served a useful
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         purpose.
 : Instead of a happy afternoon’s sp ort the day ended                                    truth a s they se e N or giving an honestly held opinion.
 With 95 spectators dead, nearly 200 Injured and m ore                                       They may be wrong — but they still believe they are                 Editor of The Star                                        That normally m eans tonight or the next day. But this
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        w as • Saturday afte rnoon — and so the decision waa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            But that Is not the only reason for printing them.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            The alternative — to carefufty edit and select so a s to
 than 30 of those in intensive care. Six w e stilt In Intensive                           toUInQ the truth. Inquiry reports may show their view s to
 «are.                                                                                    be wrong — and there will still be som e who continue      to    even H w e disagree with som e of what Is said. That Is “ » n t o ^ c e a ^ .ecial Sunday edition In a way no
                                                                                                                                                           what a newspaper should do.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         remove any photographs that may cause offence Is not
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         only Impossible (what offends one may not another and
    Those are the start. Indisputable facts of the Hills-                                 **>"«*« they *n rlsM. no maner what the tacts show,                                                                              No on e e ls e has a s many staff on the ground in
                                                                                                                                                              But w e also have to answ er the criticism s levelled                                                                      s o on) but it also producea a sanitised view of the world
 borough FootbeU Disaster.                                                                  Among the many words written about Hillsborough                                                                             Sheffield a s w e do, no one e ls e has as many staff who        fhat tries to make even tragedies Uka this one more
    Millions of words have been wrttlen about the disaster                                ^      been thow contained In me hundreds of leCorsThe          against The Star — and It Is also right that w e allow thre in the community In and around Sheffield a s we do.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         “acceptable.**
 and mlUtons m ore are ye! to com e a s inquiries get going                               5tar       ''c w v e d sm ce the disaster,                      people to maka thoee criticism s public by printing their No one e ls e could know the people and their feelings
                                                                                                                                                          letters.                                                                                                                          It is not acceptable, it ts an obscenity that anything IQre
 and eventually report Hundreds of photographs have                                         Broadly, they fad into three categories: thanks to the                                                                      better than w e could. No one e ls e could do for us what it     this could happen. 11our photographs bum their way Into
 been taken — and they, together with the words, have                                     P®°P*® Sheffield from the Liverpool tans for the help               Thereare two mein criticisms: first the u se of so-called w as our )ob to do.                                             the minds of people who s e e them, let us hope they bum
 been se en round the world.                                                              many people gave; criticism of The Star tor It# reporting       ‘‘horrific’*photographs, and M cond the Idea that by pro-        How well w e did it Is up toothers to W o e .                 their way Into their hearts too.
  ■ The photographs, mach more than the words, brought                                                    *"d " FT"*™1                                    dudn g a special edttton on Sunday, April 16, w e were
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            So that when the Im ages of Hillsborough are recalled,
 Dome to people the horror of the tragedy.                                                what they saw and know and m which people m ate                 “cashing In’*on the tragedy.                                                 Heartfeltsympathy                                they are recalled In the full knowledge of the horror that
    Photographs always have done. Remember Vietnam?                                                      « t o - l - « - » H d now b e done.                 The second crttdsm Is the easier to deal with.                Last week Channel 4's new progrsmme on the Press,             happened, recalled In such a way a s to bring a calm and
 Remember the Congo? Oemember Northern Ireland?                                                             M a T Y C llo U S t r i b u t e                  One of the factors of econom ic life la that for a local Hard News — usually critical of newspapers — said: **ln           a reverence for those who suffered.
 Ramamber Hungerford? Ramambar Lockarble?                                                                             «___                       ^        evening new tpeper Just over two-tMrft of our Ireome S h effield , w h ere the tragedy occurred . The Star
 Remember Kegworth?                                                                         Today The Star produces these lour e»tra p a g es In the                                                                                                                                        Without those Images, In a sanitised worid, ft wilt be
                                                                                                                                                          com es from advertising and fust less then one-third from produced a Sunday Special— a day on which they never                too easy to forgel too soon and to feel too cosy because
  _  . _____ *  _                        „                                        ..      paper to give s s many people a s possible out of those         the selling price of the paper. An economic price for The normally publish. It w as dally Journalism at its b e st”
                                                                    f?ca P?**             who wrote letters the chance to have their say.                 Star without advertising would be more than 60p per                                                                           the events did not really happen a s horrifically a s they
ed ies and disasters, what Is called to mind most Is a vivid                                Wm                                         1____ .                                                                            How tastefully w e did it Is a lso for others to Judge, and   did.
memory of a photograph.                                                                                                       otters, especially          copy.                                                         that is where the question of u se of photographs com es            These are the reasons that our Saturday night Green
  Capturing the event* of a m om w l in tim e has alw ays                                       .    w iftnriA i                *" ..                        The sp ed a l edMon we produced on April 16 carried no in.                                                                 *Un had to show what w as happening at Hillsborough,
been the )ob of photographic Journalism — and it does it                                                                                                  advertising. H did not make money; it co st The Star            The Pr e ss Council has already announced an Inquiry          why we produced a special edition on Sunday and why
In a more factual way than words ever can.                                                J*®**?,,,              * ^ 5 * ® * She"*®,d  9*"                m oney to do K.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        into photographic co verage by newspapers and we will           w e have gone on dally from there unfolding what w e
        ,m                                  ^ _ . .                       . .        ._   much help and kindness and the people of Liverpool                 But w e had to do ft For mors than 100 years The Star b e submitting our evidence to them. Part of that evidence           have been able to leant of what went on.
  Words are written and se kl by human beings who                                         who. In the midst of tragedy, have taken the tim e to           h a s b een the major source of Information to Its com­ will be this special supplem ent
suffer the normal human frailties such a s bias, m iscon-                                 txoresa their thanks.                                           munity — and It still Is.                                                                                                         We have heartfelt sympathy for the bereaved, we hope
ception xand
           u 4 misunderstanding.
               m l e i i n r l wj a t w -i t l . i l A
                                                     A photograph
                                                       » ! . . » « . . . « li freezes A
                                                                                      a     “
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          There la no question thet the events at Hillsborough          the injured fully recover, we hope readers now under*
moment and p ^ d u ces an Image that is i record of what                                               genera! category we print .s e le c t io n of         Our fob Is to present the new s ae soon a s w e can and wore horrific. Our photographs reflected that- They                stand a little better why w e feel w e had to do what w e did
w as happening.
wad  hapoenina.                                                                           totters because people have the right to their view s —         a s accurately a s we can. As the disaster of Hlttsborough depicted the event) a s they were — and If they maka               — and w e pray nothing like this ever happens again.




 Stooping to                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         m
 the level                                                                                          SUNDAY
                                                                                                    EDITION
                                                                                                                                                ITS TOUR

 off com ics
 S I N C E m oving t o Sheffield             tra gedy. T h e relatives visit­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            tfoirOTctaams
 five yea rs ag o . I have bceo a            in g Sheffield th at S unday
 re ade r o f T n e Star.                    m ay have seen these pictures
                                             disp lay ing the suffering and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  I                       I M U S T express my disgust w he n I hea rd a n adve rt o n
•_ Whi lst n o t always ag ree­                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           a t the picture s s hown in the R a d i o Hallam advertising a
in g w ith th e sen tim en ts                final m o m e n ts o f those lost.                                                                                                                                                                                                          G r e e n ‘U n o n S a t u r d a y S ta r special publ ication o n
 expressed in the paper. I                       D id a n yon e stop to c o n ­                                                                                                                                                                                                          A pril 15. a n d the pic tur es S unday, showing yet aga in
h a v e at le ast c o m e t o c o n -        si d e r t h e p a in a n d su ff e ring                                                                                                                                                                                                    rele ased t o the general Press these dre adful pictures. ”
siderittohearancrthatdid this
n o i s t o o p t o th e l e v e ls o f the
                                                   e o u U i n f i l l . A t U'cre                        mvm.                                                                                                                                                                           throuch Sheffield                        If *teemod to me it was
                                             y o u t o o i n t e r e s t e d in                                                                                                                                                                                                          Newspapers.                          p o r t r a y i n g th i s d r e a d f u l
 tabloid comics.                             maxim isin g a revenue-earn­                                                                                                                                                                                                                    I apprec iate that jo u rn a l ­ t ra g e d y a s so m e k i n d o f
   It was with great sadne ss                ing o p portunity.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ists a n d newspapers have a ghoulish souvenir special.
th at 1 cam e acro ss your                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              d u ty to get in fo rm ation to           S h a m e o n the S ta r for
spccial publication o n the                      A t th e very least. I suggest
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        the public, a nd I k now a pic­ reac hing the true dep th s o f
H illsboro ugh disaster.                     the reven ue fr om this publi­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        tu re can express a thousand the the gutter Press.
                                             catio n be do n ate d t o the                                                                                                                                                                                                              w ords, b u t t o publish the
   Yes. re p o rt the facts, the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 T o use the o ffe n d in g
                                             appeal fund, an d th a t c o n ­                                                                                                                                                                                                           picture o f the dea d cr ushed ph o to g ra p h s as a p ar t o f
tra gic e v e n t s , t h e m irac le
escapes. But did the suffer­                 sidera tio n be given t o a d o p t-                                                                                                                                                                                                       up against the fcncing even logo. 'H i l l s b o ro u g h F o o t ­
ing o f the people o f my                    i n g a m o re h um ane attitude                                                                                                                                                                                                           bef ore the dead had been ball D i s a s t e r ’ in M o n d a y
hom e city h av e to be so                   to p i c t u r e p u b l i c a t i o n in                                                                                                                                                                                                  identified and their families
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Mientii*ca an d t ; in r tannii-s                 ' •'   '' «L‘'     J,i               •/
             It m ay he th at some o f the       M ar k J Fowies
                                                                                                Trauma                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             h . d j ^ i i ^ i i surely
          p eople shown have lost their B am sb ro o k C o tia e e D ike
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         cM U dl d m S t F 0 S S S d                                                                               Isolated
          Jjv c s a s a r e s u lt o f t h i s Hill. Harley, S Yorkshire.
                                                                                                 o f th e                             W E are a r c npupils
                                                                                                                                                      n n t k rot ff U
                                                                                                                                                                     W/ iscwond
                                                                                                                                                                        i f ^ u i # ^ ^ com pre­                                   1.
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ta k in g p h o to g r a p h s w hile peo p je
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       A i, *         . . .                ° r re sp ect f o r those
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    . A N I c o u l d d o w a s >oune peopic w h o died so
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        In m y
        Tactless and                                                                                                                  hensive school and w ould like to                                were obvjou.sly in gre at pain.                          yo u saw one o f y o u r relations badly                                                           imagir>c a p3rcnt s h o rr o r a t hornhcaiiy.
                                                                                                helpers                               e x p ress o u r feelings to w a r d s the
                                                                                                                                                                                                          It w ould be a good idea if all the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                in jured o r dead?.                                                                                seeing t h o r loved ones splat-     M rs A
                                                                                             T H E tragedy o f Hills­
                                                                                             bo rough w as h o rrific
                                                                                                                                      is s u e o f T h e S ta r p u b l i s h e d o n
                                                                                                                                      S unday, A p n l 16.                                            m oney m ade o u t o f this special edi*
                                                                                                                                                                                                      lion is given to the c ha rity set u p to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Y o u only d i d i his fo r the m oney.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 This was w rong Y ou tell people vou
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            grief                  l « d across a new spaper.         c        b\ J f V o a 2 .’
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      I fcit even m o re revulsion G rcnosidc, ShcfTjeld.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 d id this to show ho w b j d the whole                        A S a Sheffield resident


       :in poor taste                                                                              » e all feel great
                                                                                             sym pathy for tbe rela­
                                                                                             tives and families o f the
                                                                                             bereaved.
                                                                                                  The newspapers, par­
                                                                                                                                        W e were disgusted an d extrcm elv
                                                                                                                                     upset with the coverage o f the tragic
                                                                                                                                     H illsborough disaster.
                                                                                                                                        T h e p h o to g ra p h s in this edition
                                                                                                                                    were very distressing fo r us. g o o d ­
                                                                                                                                                                                                      h c.p the bereaved families.
                                                                                                                                                                                                         S a ra h C am pbell 14. D v l e s Hall
                                                                                                                                                                                                      K o a d . H i l l s b o r o u g h . S h e f f ie l d .
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Lynne H opkinsoo 14. Emma AUisoo
                                                                                                                                                                                                      14. S a ra h B um s 15.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 thing w as b u t people alread y knew
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                from the news a n d radio.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    T hey would n o t be 3ble to slo p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                y o u taking pictures tf they were
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               w ho w itn e sse d th e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               s ce n es o f h o rr o r ao d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               s u ffe rin g a t H ills -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              b o r o o g b , I w r i t e to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              express my disgust at
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                injured. Y o u ; b e h a v io u r w as u n fo r­
                                                                                              ticularly the photogra­               ness only know s how the fam ilies o f                                                                                                                                                    th e in s e n s itiv e an d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               givable. I am 15 a n d a pupil a t Wise-
                  .special edition splaltering details o f th e event is                      phers, could have been a                                                                                                                                                                                                        callous m anner in which
                                                                                                                                    the tragic victims m ust hve felt seeing                                                                                   w o o d com prehensive. If I feel this
                H "" I ° " , hc ,raf    in o rd c r 10 Kl1 new spapers and                   little m ore sensitive and             th e distorted faces o f their loved                              I A M w riting to tell y o u I disagree                                                                                 tb e w h o le e v e n t h a s
         iorces th e families a n d relatives t o relive Ihcir experience.                                                                                                                                                                                     b a d . ho w d o y o u think g row n-ups
                                                                                             less scnsatiooal a t this              o n es plastered all over a new spaper.                           with the pape rs yo u prinjcd. T h e pic­                                                                               b e e n t r e a t e d by tb e
                                                                                             terrible time.                                                                                                                                                    w ould feel. Please, if possible, pub­
                             ° f restraint “ ould h av e been refreshing.                                                                                                                             tu re s which show ed lots o f dying                     lish this letter to sh o w h o w I feel.                       media.
                                                                                                                                        W e find it very h ard to believe that
        .P ii?          S ta r joins o th er sensation seclcrs and displays                      It saddens m e that                                                                                  people, o r p e o p le w ho were injured                                                                                  W henever a disaster             I R A N G you ab o u t my                     in g th e tr a g e d y at
                                                                                                                                    p h o to g ra p h ers w ere u n thoughtfully                      w ere horrific. H o w w ould y o u feci if                   N icola W ard, W isew ood school
      ■ Ita it?             P0° r US1C‘ 0 r ‘s lh,s w h a' j o ^ n a l i s m is ill          the police g et such con­                                                                                                                   - v . .1              K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               R u rai
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ra l L ane. Sheffield.                                  occurs the ‘responsible*             views on y o u r p rinting a                  H illsborough.
                                                                                            ti n u a l c r i t i c i s m . N o                                                                                                                                                                                              m edia seems hell-bent              S t a / o n th e S u n d a y a n d                 This seems to m e incred­
        • C aro l C ooke, Delves A venue. H acken tb o rp e. Sheffield.                     praise a t all o r thought                                                                                                                                                                                                      on c o n d u c tin g a              a b o u t thc tern b le pictures


                                                                                                                                                 Suffering th at should
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ib ly insensitive , re p u lsiv e
                                                                                            for the youog m eo «nd                                                                                                                                                                                                          witchhunt io order to               s h o w n in all n e w s p a p e r s ,        a n d obsccne a n d can only
                                                                                            women who bad to no-                                                                                                                                                                                                            biaroe one individual.              in cluding yours.                             satisfy the ghoulish ap p e­
                                                                                            tangle the carnage and                                                                                                                                                                                                              T he police did a tre­                                                        tites o f th e m enially ois-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    A l l th o s e c h i l d r e n a n d
        T H E front p age of the G reen ’U n o n A pril IS w asdisgrace-                   who tried desperately to                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           turbe d people w h o like to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           m en d o u s jo b . T h is           p e o p ic in those p icture s h ad


                                                                                                                                                 not have been shown
        ful. disgusting an d unre srec table: I w as distressed t o hear                   breathe life back toto                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             visit scenes o f disaster.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           should he a tim e when               m o th e rs , fa th e rs, g r a n d ­
        o f I h e tra g e d y a s my unefe a n d cousin, aged seven, were at               lifeless bodies.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           w e a r e a ll p u llin g            pare n ts . an d families. H o w                  I ca n n o t im agine w ho you
        H illsborough. Y o u r picture will h av e upset m any fn e n d s                       I write as a m other o f                                                                                                                                                                                                   together to help each
      . a n d families o f the supporters.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      w o uld thc people w ho took                 expect to buy w hat am o u n ts
                                                                                           a young policeman who                                                                                                                                                                                                          o ther, sharing experi­              th o s e pictures have felt if it              to a souvenir, o r y o u r p u r­
          M icbclie H icks, Knowles C rescent. D eepcar, Sheffield.                        was deeply sh a k e s by                !es|Es  ^ m II m
                                                                                                                                   lest strongly
                                                                                                                                                  m ust
                                                                                                                                                    U?aKw rite ito
                                                                                                                                                       b o! nu t.IC.the
                                                                                                                                                                        p ro - m
                                                                                                                                                                      0 pT0"    m c a nn dd mm.v
                                                                                                                                                                        pic- fo cr a0Ver
                                                                                                                                                                                              v fa m ilv
                                                                                                                                                                                              30 fam
                                                                                                                                                                                                  v e aily
                                                                                                                                                                                                           h a v ffH n n e
                                                                                                                                                                                                        r i h av e d o n e      s u r e b y o t h e r c itiz e n s o f                                                    ences, and grieving.                 h a d bee n th e ir c h ild re n              pose in publishing it. Per­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             a b o u t th e d isaster a n d how
                                                                                           the whole event. The                    lu re yo u published on th e                    ,°             ^           r                 Sheffield.                                                                                                                     being crushcd to d ea th .                    haps thc only way yo u can
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             it h a p p e n e d , b u t n o t by               It is a very private
                                                                                          im b a la n c e a n d th e               fro n t page o f the G r e e n 'U n                 J J * ™              o r sp o rt,                                                                                                                                                                                     b e g in to j u s t i f y it is by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  M rs Lju d P eotney, A nvil                having pictures like these.                  t i m e , t o o , w h e n tb e           A ll t h e p i c t u r e s w o u ld
                                                                                          grocod attendants must                   r o llo w in g th e a p p a llin g                           fa? S bul.tspare a                                                                                                                                                                                           d o n atin g all proceeds to a n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               C r e s c e n t, E c c le s fie ld                                                         •  g o n y o f fa m ilie s           have m ade thc people and
  -I “,
      aSdisP Jsllid V“ J e a m T he S ta r h ad published a S unday
   picture special o n the H illsborough tragedy. It is the sort o f
                                                                                          a ls o be su ffe rin g tb e              tragedy a t H illsborough                   ■ h o “ ght fo r the fam ilies atid             Sheffield.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                M rs Linda George, Qucn-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            tin D r iv e , B ra d w a y                   should not be subject to             fam ilies go th ro u g h m ore                3 p p c a ] fend.
                                                                                          afterm ath o f                unbe­
                                                                                                                                   f D o n ’t you realise that the '“ I T S T ’’ ' ' , r                              ,                                                     Sheffield.                                    m e d ia s c r it i o y an d         g n ef.                                           M rs Lesley Kew, Sandy-
                                                                                          lievable h orror.
       2STK?sS“cipcc'rma                              na,i0"aldai|yp^ii                        M rs P Fr o»t %
                                                                                                                                   faoes o f the thre e people io                A.? De M,o o r e 0 V fe a n d                                                                                                           » b e re we can all respect                W h y d id y o u f in d it               g3tc R o3d. Sheffield.
                                                                                                                                   th a t picture a re som eone’s S ° I e r                      t w o S h c f f i c ld                                                                                                  each o th er's need for                n e c e s s a r y t o p u b lis h T h c
      in 1110? ' }h. ' COpi? w m h r£ c ly unso,<t-            i f you d id cash          B rindiffe Edge O c b c,                 s o n s , b ro th e rs , o r frie n d s SLc<ULe5.d i y * u P P ° " c r s ) , I M U S T w rite to say h o w I                                                                          s y m p a th e tic                    S ta r o n the S unday? W as it
      r J     tJ             1     raoney will b e d o n a te d to th e appe al
      fund. I h o p e yo u will apologise to the families o f ^ h e
                                                                                          Sheffield.                               a n d to sec the suffering w rit-                O val, R etford,                     feel a b o u t t h e n e w s p a p e r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           T H E R E c a n never b e any
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           reason o o r excuse fo r the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         QDderctanding.                        t o m a k e m ore m oney o u t ol                I L O O K forw ard every S3 t-
                                                                                                                                   ten on their faces is tn the                                                          c overage o f the d isaster a t                                                                      As a w om an who                 o t h e r p e o p l e ’s g r i e f a n d
      b erea v ed a nd injured fo r this sick act.                                                                                m o s t appalling taste.                                                                                                                 callous pictures p o rtra y e d in                                                                                                   urday aftern o o n t o m y copy
                                                                                        I A M utterly disgusted a t                                                                                                      H illsborough. S o m e o f th e                   s o m e ta b lo id new spapers.               a tte n d e d th e m a tc h           suffering.
         J a n e t f i x , Peveril R o a d , Sheffield.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        o f the G re e n ‘U n a n d usual­
                                                                                        the w ay yo u presented the                   A fte r seeing th e S u n d ay t v ,hc u a t<» n f th*                            p h o t o ^ a P ^ s »n M o n d a y 's              Surely there exists a code o f               *looe, I f e d isolated in                   W h y h a s n 't o n e n e w s ­ ly keep it as a reference item
                                                                                       fro n t p a g e o f the G reen *Un         . apers, I m ust a d m it you a re a t H ill& h n r n u o fiI                      K j ^ P c r s I fo u n d very upset-                 c o n d u c t a n d a n e th ic a l           ray crie£, and would be                  p a p e r h a d the g u ts to say u ntil thc following S a tu r.
                                                                                       (A pril 15). T h e people in               n o t th e only p a p e r to p rin t di«a»*»f>ii \                                                  I think it w as q uite              o bligation (even w ithin thc                 f^ad i f anyone e b e in a              w here the local blam e lies.                  day . T h e copy o f S atu rd 3 y
                                                                                       th a t p h o to g ra p h m ay very         t h e fa ce s o f T f i e s e t r a g ic f h l i s i S m i M J i 2 2 . rc s s in * ^ n e « s s a r y to p n n t th?m .                  o b d u r a t e m e d ia ) w h e reb y        sim ilar position wocld
      I A M w riting to say h ow disgusted I w as at v o u r snecial                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   g et in tooch with m e so                    I f it were n o t fo r hooli- A pril 15 was im mediately
                                                                                       well not be w ith us now. If              y o u n g s t e r s . B u t ssoommee decided
                                                                                                                                                                           d « i d ^ io  to n»K
                                                                                                                                                                                              p u 1bit lh^ T s ^ a l        1 ^wJa?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  c hhed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e d the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           thc T V co  v e r-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    cover-                t h e f e e l i n g o f b e r e a vv eecd’                                             ranism over th e years, th c dispatched to th e dusibin!
      E d *      C? ! l!° n ° " f,hc h o m ' lc H illsborough d isaster ?              y o u have to p ro d u c e such           S u n d ay p ap e rs revel in th e S unday edition                                     age a t the w eekend a n d I a m                  m o t h e r s , f a t h e r s , s is te rs ,  that « e can positively
                                                                                                                                 s e n s a ti o n a l, w h e r e a s th e       v * , . . . . . . ..                    u Psel by thc disaster. I fe d                                                                 help each o ther through                 i cnees w ould n o t have been                     I found the choice o ff ro n t
                                                                                       pictures to sell y o u r paper,                                                                                                                                                   b r o th e r s , re la tiv e s and
   incident fo r m oney-m aking purposes. D o you rcallv thinV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         these     aad times, ra th e r           needed a n d s o m an y lives page pho to g ra p h s lack ing in
                                                                                      it s ab o u t time y o u packed            G n * r U n h as alw ays been                         ’ J1'3' d,d. 1 r,nd 11 dls- vc7 «>Ty fo r the relatives                           fr ie n d s a re s in c e re ly
                                                                                                                                 n o ted for its g o o d , honest l !                                                          fn en d s o r the p eople                                                               th ao exooeratiog o u r­                 w o u l d n o t h a v e b e e n sensitivity.                                          p
  S S J m v m " 1 10 *“ dead- dym S a n d injured people with                         in. I shall be w riting to the                                                                                                                                                     considered.                                                                            d estroyed.
                                                                                      n ational new spapers ab o u t             s p o rts re p o rts .                   g a i n o u t o r the d e a hs o r the t h a t died, a n d th e o n £ i i , ) l                                                              selves by plac in g tbe                                                                    O t h e r n e w s p a p e r s h av e
                                                    1 ,o r ~    ^             •»                                                                                                                                                                                              C a n we ho p e fo r a degree                                                         M rs J F eek , E lle rto n p u b lis h e d p h o to g ra p h s
                                                                                      th e sam e thing.                              So please d o n 't j o in the                                              lh ? I?                    H ow d o you                                                                blam e elsewhere.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         o f m o d eratio n , com passion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ja n e V essey, 3 52                 R o a d . F tr th P ark . Sheffield. r e l a t i n g t o t h i s t r a g e d y
                               aSCd ,6 ’ T ° “ ' y             R o a d . D o r i.     . P ,K * N y » E lm          R oad,                                                                                                                                                a n d s y m p ath y from those in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       W alkley Bank Koad,                                                                   which are equally a s d is­
                                                                                      M exborough.                                                                                                                                                                       charge?
                                                                                                                                 fan s w ho b u y y o u r p apci\ a s                                                S                                          u «                                                    R i*din, Sheffield.                                     SO                            t r e s s i n g . b u t t h a t is n o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             J W THsfcy, C a r t H ouses                                                                                                     excuse.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         M ayfield R o a d . Sheffield                                                         I N t h e a f t e r m a t h o f th e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             . T his type o f s h o ck -h o rto r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               tra g ed y a t H illsborough. I jo u rn a lism is considered by
  I F E E L v ery disappointed in y o u r han d lin g o f the Hills­                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           w o uld like to ask w hy it was m o s t people to be unjusti*
  b o ro u g h disaster. Y o u r S u n d a y e d ition was discustine.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ncces&ary to take a n d print f i e d a n d u n n e c e s s a r y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          U P T O 5 0 fa n s d ie d this a f te rn o o n in                                   p h o to g ra p h s o f the victim s especially in a very readable*
  E n q u ire r                   ° f lhc W ° rki a n d ,hc ^ t i o n t i                                                                                                                                                                           i      i                                                                                                  m such close-up detail a s o n s p o rts new spaper such a s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         d r a m a t i c c ro w d s ce n es a t H i i l s b o r o o g h s
     Y o u r allocation o f space to Irvine P a tric k 's secondhand                                                                                                                                                                                                     c o p s e m i-fin a l b e tw e e n L iverpool a n d                                  the fr o n t page o f the G re e n tn e G reen ‘Un.



                                                                                                                             i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              X ’n.
  o pinions, a n d th e headline tre atm en t o f police officer's                                                                                                                                                                                                       N o ttin g h a m F o re s t.                                                                                                           D W right, O rch id W ay.
- wives ts q u ite disgusting. Y ou have caused Intense distress
  a m o n g t h e bereaved in M erseyside.

       J a c k M cB an e , C o n d u it R o a d . Sheffield.
                                                                                                         Ji                                                                                                                                                              _ The hon-ific incidents happened ju s t minutes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         into the match which had attracted a capaaiy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         crowd. It is believed hundred of fans without
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         tickets pained e n try to the Leppinps Lane end
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   W a s it necessary t o b rin g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              o u t a S u n d a y e d ition o f T h e Sheffield.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             S ta r w h ich consisted a g a in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             o f h o rrific p h o to g ra p h s?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A o s to o . n e a r


                                                                                                     S a tu r d a y . A pfN 1 5 .1 9 8 9                                                           N o 3 1 .7 6 1                                                        where the majority of the Liverpool fans were                                            I fin d such exam ples an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             i n s e n s itiv e a n d u n s y m p a ­ I D O n o t norm ally w rite to




                                                                                                                                           P HBRBflRa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             t h e tic e x p l o i t a t i o n o f tb e pape rs, but I m ust clear my
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             s uffering o f o th e r s in the ^ n d a s to th e re ason y o u

         Indelible image                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     n a m e o f new s a n d new s­ published a special edition
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             p a p e r profits.                            o f T h e S ta r o n S u n d a y .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           A p ril 16. filled with pictures
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ! w o n d e r w hat crite ria, if o f the H illsborough tragedy.
       PF                                    professional and now
       f t teacher and C hristum i t M vrtle S p rin ts ichooL I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            an y . new spaper p h o to g ra ­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            phers a d h e re to. I f it h a d                 T h e only reason I could
                              picn,re •vou “ cold-bloodedly p o r­
       trayed o ver (lie front page o f the G reen I n .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    been th e ir loved ones* faces think o f fo r y o u r p rinting it
       M y anger was not due to the cause o f the incident but                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              o n t h e p h o to g ra p h s show ing was s o th at the proceeds
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            such s uffering and fe a r h ow c o u l d g o t o t h e L o r d
  I                    “ “ “ fy wi* *1“ p arents, families and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              w o u ld th ey fed?.                          M a y o r’s F und. I really h o p e
  I friends o f die young people being crushed.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           this is t h e reason.




                                                                                                                                           USB0R0UG1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               •I c a n n o t r e c a l l s u c h
       J ’ O f y “ * *“ * « M in t l « fatalities, tben a s . e l l as                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     d eta ile d p h o to s o f the suf-               M t s L Cam bell, S h a rra rd
  I         aCT?s u ,1 ° ? ° f <he death o fth e irlo v e d ooes, you have
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           fe rin g a n d dying being p rin t­ R o a d , Sheffield.
       irifll           - t h e ^ miods ^       ^ t i o o s th at m a , be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ed in o t h e r disasters.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                I o n ly h ope t h a t fu tu re
                  PT   you h ,V t added 10             *>f your readers;                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   p h o to g ra p h s will respect a ! W IS H to express m y sad-
                       your C0D,P“ S*0° for U»ese fellow buisu                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            st/>ntltlt'A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            e n s itiv e aflp p r o anc h «.  t o t.th e n e s s a n d d i s g u s t a t y o u r
      rS P S li        - e r e « P «rf m a ! m o t tl* m , bow wo<ild                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     feelings o f others.
      ) 0 U Teel seeing the agony and rear 0 0 y o u r child’s race?                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     decision to publish th e front
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               R e * J P a r k B A , T h e p a g e pho to g ra p h o f those
 I m i b f U L f ^ W‘!r 9 f 15,00 * " S°*n2 ,0 » l l papers and
 I m ake basioess o u t o f hum an tragedy r ^ n I hone n u n v
                                                                                                    1          I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          M a n s e . S p a V iew P la c e , y o u n g Liverpool fans fight­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sheffield.                                      ing fo r their lives. T o use the
   nwwr readers . i l l certainly turn a » a y from reading vour
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    v a l u e o f a p h o to g ra p h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         o f these terrified fans simply
         P a u l D olby, S t M a ry 's Close. Ecelesfield. ShcfTidd.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     to s e ll n e w s p a p e r s w as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1 W A S shocked a n d h o r r i­ inexcusable.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         fie d t o h e a r y o u r r a d i o                M rs E A C ra w fo rd ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ad v e rtisem en t fo r a special O a k d e l l . D r o n f i e l d .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         e d ition o f T h e S ta r follow- Sheffield.
 ■\ 2 THCST*H. Wtinnia?. *fril H- W>




                                                                                                                                                                                               ,V .           '                                           P L E A S E m ay I th ro u g h y o u r n ew spaper, t h a n k all the           T H A N K y o u Sheffield;,
M A Y I th ro u g h y o u r news­        I H O P E y o u p ass o n this m essage o f th a n k s t o thc people                                                                                                                                         w onderful p eople o f Sheffield fo r th e ir kindness, e o n c e m ,          fo r y o u r c a n n g an d gener*;
p a p e r t h a n k th e people o f      w h o live n ea r y o u r H illsb o ro u g h S ta d iu m fr o m all the                                                                                                                                       bereavem ent notices an d lovely floral tributes to th e p eople               o s ity y o u s h o w e d t o thet
Sheffield w h o o pene d their           p eo p le to G r e a t S an key, P e n k e tn a n d L iverpool.                                                                                                                                               o f Liverpool d uring o u r dev a statin g a n d u n h ap p y time.            L F C fans after the devastate
ho m es t o th e shocked fa n s ,            I f it w a s n 't fo r th e ir k ind h e lp in letting o s use their                                                                                                                                         I a m n o o n e in high office, j u s t a wife a n d m um w h o feels       ing tragedy a t H illsborough,
last S a tu rd a y a n d let them*       telephones a n d d rin k th e ir tea* th o u s an d s m o re L iverpool                                                                                                                                       better fo r know ing, th o u g h n o t personally, the p eo p le o f           T h a n k you fo r the use o f
use th e ir telephones, their            fa n s ' p are n ts w ould have suffered in w aiting fo r hours.                                                                                                                                              Sheffield w ho deserve a big b o u q u e t them selves fo r their              y o u r hom es a n d th e life-line
ac tio n w a s ap p rec ia ted by                                                                                                                                                                                                                      s how o f kindness.                                                            p h o n e c a l ls y o u l e t o u r
                                             W e will never k n o w y o u r n am e s b u t w e wil n ever forget
m y d a u g h te r a n d h e r friends                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                people m ak e t o their hom es
a n d b y w e w h o w a ite d            you. O u r d o o rs a r c o p e n a n d w h e th e r y o u a r e in Sheffield                                                                                                            ■S'                 . G o d bless each a n d everyone.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      in Liverpool. It saved a lot
anx io u sly a t h om e. W e were        o r L iverpool m ay y o u never w a lk alone,                                                                                                                                                                    Brenda G ostafsoo, S o u th M ea d e. G re e n P ark , M aghull.            o f people a lot o f anquish
the lucky ones.                          w T h a n k you.                                                1             ’                                                                                                                                  M A Y I o n b eh a lf o f all Liverpool s upporters as k y o u to           a n a tears w aiting a n d pray-
   J e a n C a ld e r b a n k , R ain*       M i n J C lark e , (o n e o f th o u s a n d s o f grateful fans)*                                                             .   ••                                ,..v    - .                          pass on o u r w arm est th an k s t o all t h e s ta ff a t the N o rth e rn   ing th at o u r loved ones were
b o w D r iv e . M e ltin g *            M applew ell C rescent, G r e a t S an key. N r W a m n g to n ,                                                                                                                                              G eneral. R oyal H atlam shire h o spitals an d the peo p le o f               alive an d co m in g h om e. <   :
L iverpool.                              C heshire.                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sheffield fo r their kindness a n d consideration show n to us                     T h a n k y o u to yoM f
                                         I C A N o nly m arvel a t th e help a n d efforts offered b y those                                                                741 Q u e e n s d * i v e                                                  in o u r h o u r o f need.                                                     d evoted d o cto rs a n d nurses,
                                         fa n s w h o m an a g ed to b re ak free from th e ch a o s a n d                                                                                                                                                T h e w a rm th an d friendliness show n to u s d u rin g the               police. S t J o h n s A m bulance
     J U S T a few lines t o s how
o u r g ra titu d e fo r y o u r         express ad m ira tio n fo r th o s e w h o desperately t n e d to help                                                                                                                                        terrible eve nt o f S atu rd a y A p n l 15 will rem ain w ith us              Brigade, a n d all w ho helped
h o s p ita lity a n d gen e ro sity
                                         w ith resuscitation, h e a rt m assage, a n d s tretc h er bearing.                                                            .-livespooL^                                     -^                            forever.                                                                   '   those u n fo rtu n a te beloved
o n t h a t tr a g ic d a y , tb e           People w ho io th e p a s t h av e b ee n s tere otyped a s hooli-                                                                                                                                           O n c e again o u r th a n k s t o all concerned.                           f a n s w h o d ie d o r w e re
p h o n e calls w ere w o rtb as         g a n s sh o n e th ro u g h w ith h e a rts o f gold. S inuliarly th e                                                                                                                                                                                                                      injured.                    * i
                                         s u p p o rt team s o f police, fire b rig a d e m edics, d o c to rs, social                                                                                                                                    A T hom as, B ranch C h a irm a n . 315 East Liverpool
m u c h a s w inning th e c u p to                                                                                                                                                                                                                     B ranch. C O H S E .                                                               In o u r city's grie f which is
o u r loved o n e 's b ac k h om e.      w o rk e rs a n d hospital stafTs deserve o u r h eartfelt g ratitude.                                                                                                                                                                                                                       s o great a t this tim e I 'j u s t



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Relief of
     W e h a v e h e a r d s i m il a r      I*m su re I speak fo r m a n y L iverpool fans w hen I th an k                                                                                                                                                                                                                           h a d to write this th a n k you
                                         th e F o re s t fans f o r th e ir co-operation* a n d th e people of                                                                                                                                                                                                                        to you good p eople, yo u will
s t o r i e s o f o t h e r S heffield
people. W e w o uld like to
t a k e t h i s o p p o r t u n i t y to
                                         Sheffield especially fo r th e ir co n c ern a n d invaluable help.
                                             Sim oo L . Liverpool fan (a d d ress supplied).                                                       zoztoe coob people                                                                                                                                                                 never be forgotten. T h a n k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      y o u S h effie ld . G o d Bless



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       phone calls
t h a n k th e m , including the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      y o u all.
o ld lad y next d o o r. F ro m all
Liverpudlians.
     T h a n k s o n b eh a lf o f Steve
L a fk io . T om m y H a v ery .
                                         Stunned by                                                                                                Of stieffteib ztixak,
                                                                                                                                                                                       fts*'     tj-       - Pi      '•   '-I :


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     I W O U L D L ike to send m y sincere th an k s to som e very
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         M rs Ju n e T b o n p s« o «
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      S to w e th e y     R o ad .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      S o u th d a n e . K irk b y .


                                         thehorroir
M ik e Q u i o a , K e v in                                                                                                                                                                                                                          k ind p eople o f Sheffield.                                                     Merseryside.
M u rp h e y . Tom m y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   F irst 1 would like to t h a n k the very k ind gentlem an w h o
M c O rth n e y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      let m y teenage son into his hom e s o he could use th e p hone.
     S teve L a rk ia . R edshank                                                                                                                                                                                                                    T h a n k 'y o u s o m uch, y o u will never know th e relief th a t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     p h o n e call bro u g h t to us all a t h o m e w atching the d isaster             M A Y 1. on b e h a lf o f all
A v e n u e , W i n s f o r d « M A Y I thro u g h y o u r p a p e r t h a n k the Sheffield people for
C heshire.                               th e ir help and kin d n ess a fte r th e h o rr o rs o f last S aturday.
                                                                                                                                                   y o u fotC y o u * , c x n e                                                                      o n TV. -                                                                         M e r s e y s id e rs * e s p e c i a l l y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Un fortunately we d id n o t k n o w y o u r n am e o r a d d ress o r       s u p p o r t e r s o f L iv e r p o o l
                                         W e w ere walking ro u n d s tu n n ed w hen a lady stan d in g a t
O N b e h a lf o f m y h u sb an d I h e r fro n t g ate invited u s in to use h e r p h o n e s o we could get              v                        ''■:■-■ ■  ';■>* :?V‘                  ■*                                                      I would h av e thanke d you personally.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       F o otba ll C lu b , th a n k you
w ould like to th a n k the m a n in to u ch w ith relatives- In a s ta te o f shock I d id n o t notice
                                                                                                                                                                   tY•
                                                                                                                                                                     '*•*i*jr.»-' !)'■>,'£'.   ''                                                        Also I m ust th an k th e k ind ladies th a t opened u p their
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      fo r y o u r unfailing su p p o rt
w h o ca m e o u t o f a c a r show* the n am e o f the ro a d o r h e r h ouse n u m b e r b u t m ay I say
 ro o m by Sheffield's g ro u n d th a n k -y o u to her.
 and gave my h u sb an d ,                   T h is w as only the first o f m an y offers o f help we received
 f r i e n d s a n d m a n y m o r e in the next few h ours.
                                                                                                                                               a.n£>concern xowtAbs                                                                                  hom es f o r p eople to h ave cups o f tea.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         T h a n k yo u a n d G o d Bless yo u all.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         M rs B Hodsoo, 32 Pheasant W o o d D rive. T hornton*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      b o th o n the day o f the H ills­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      b o r o u g h d i s a s te r a n d th e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      d ay s since. W e c o u ld never
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      h av e e o p e d w it h o u t y o u r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      endless cups o f tea . offers o f
 Liverpool fans th e use o f                                                                                                                                                                                                                         C levelevs. Lancs.
                                             T h a n k -y o u Sheffield, y o u a re lovely people. I h ope next                                                                                                                                           M A Y I th ro u g h y o u r p a p e r t h a n k the residents o f           lifts a n d th e use o f y o u r
 p h o n e s a n d w o uld not take

                                                                                                                                               zhe LivezpooL fxas m £
                                                                                        you; will be allow
                                                                                                       ”     edJ ‘to                                                                                                                                                                                                                  telpehones a n d th e numer*
 an y m oney. H e a ls o offered s e a s o n — I D C3rds p e r m ittin g                                                                                                                                                                             O u g h tib n d c e , w h o allowed m y son t o p h o n e h o m e after
                                         c o m e a n d s t a n d o n t h e K o p w ith u s a t th e Liverpool a n d                                                                                                                                   S atu rd a y ’s Hillsborough tragedy. W e a re one o f thc fo rtu ­             ous offers o f h elp y o u self­
 them b ra n d y . T h e n when
 my h u s b a n d co u ld n 't find Sheffield W ednesday fixture. Y o u will be m ost welcome.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              «■'$    nate families a n d their kindness helped to lessen o u r worry.                lessly p ro v id e d t o p e o p le
 o n e o f h is f r ie n d s h e             M r L e a Bradley, R eeds L a ne, M o re to n , M erseyside.            ^  F*                                                                                                                  •r'rH;•
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            vj.-.jnv      T he kindness o f the people o f Y orkshire to all fans o f                 w h o w ere stu n n ed by the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      events o f S atu rd a y A pril 15.
kno ck e d o n a lady's d o o r                                                                                                                                                                                                                       t ,F C will always be rem em bered.
                                         M A Y I ta k e th is o p p o rtu n ity o f expressing m y g ra titu d e to -lii/?                                                                                                                                                                                                             1989, a d a y few people will
a n d to as k i f h e could use                                                                                                                                                                                                                           M r and M rs J W illiam s, P ark b rid g e R o ad , P reo to o ,            ever forget.

                                                                                                                                                                   Btess
                                         th e people o f Sheffield fo r th e ir helpfulness a n d under*
h e r p h o n e to ea tl th e                                                                                                                                                                                                                         B irkenhead.
                                         stan d in g o n the s ad d ay o f A pril 15 a t H illsborough foot*                                                                                                                                                                                                                              W e in L iverpool, a n d I
ho sp ital                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                I W O U L D Like to tak e this o p p o rtu n ity to th a n k the
                                         ball s tad iu m , especially t h e people o f D arw in a n d O verton                                                                                                                                                                                                                        am sure I speak fo r th o u ­
     She said **of co u rse” . ! R o a d w ith their offers o f d rin k s a n d use o f phones.                                                                                                                                                      p eople o f Sheffield fo r their help, kindness a n d concern                    san d s o f football fans every*
d o n 't k n o w h e r n am e b u t                                                                                                  • v             .   ...   -    -   ^       -:lr     J     r.; , , ,                      - ’   %   ■            after t h e tra gedy a t H illsborough.                                          where, h ope t h a t o u t o f the
                                             Y o u rs m ournfully.
th a n k you. T b e friend did                                                                                                                                                                                                                            I w ould particularly like to t h a n k t h e m anageress o f a             tra gedy com es a new begin­
tu r n u p safe. F riends a n d              M r P W a rin g , S cafell C lo s e , E a s th a m , W ir ra l,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     dress s h o p close to the ground. She to o k m e in to her shop,                ning — o n e o f friendship
p eople in L iverpool w h o !            M  erseyside.
n a v e s p o k e n to s a i d th e M A Y I express gra tefu l th an k s to those w arm -hearted                                                         ; K €n K u seea & f m k y                                                               -   s at m e d o w n and gave m e a c u p o f tea as I w as in a very
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     distressed state.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      a n a tru e spo rtsm an sh ip a n d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      th a t never again will w e wit*
p e o p l e o f S h e ff ie ld w e re p eople a t H illsborough w h o o pene d their h o m es to fo o t­                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ness the events w hen lives
m arvellous.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             This show o f kindness w as typical o f every single
                                         ball s upporters t o o ffer hospitality an d enco u ra g ed tele­                                                                                                                                                                                                                            w ere so needlessly wasted-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sheffield person I met.
     S o o n c e aga in a very big p h o n e calls to anx io u s relatives. The»r generous action,                           \ x ? e u ^ ti€V€g>                                       atooe                                                             I f e v e r ) have cause to visit Sheffield again, I wii p o p into              G o d Bless y o u all.
th a n k you.                            co m in g from those w h o frequently e ndu re invasion o f their
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     th a t dress sh o p to th an k th at k in d lady properly.
     $ a o d r a and T ed C lover, n eig h b o u rh o o d by s u p p o rters, m erits high c om m enda tion.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            A n d rew K a y , P c n v c t
P e n d e n n is S t, A n fie ld .           R N ig b tio g a lc , H o lm e C lo s e . W o o d b o r o u g h .                                                                                                                                           W ith th a n k s to the oeoole o f Sheffield                     %•»         R o a d , W a lto n V illa g e .
L iverpool.                              N o ttin g h a m .                                                                                                                                                                                              Keith Leahy, Q ueens Drive. W a lto n . Liverpool.                           Liverpool




   I T .1 nou, fo u r years since m y w .ft a n d I m ad e fn e n d s             C O U L D yo.j r !ease convey my th o u g h ts a n d thanks to
                                                                                                                                                    w e;did inot walk alone
w t h C o l , n an d Lynn S oulshy. a couple from your fine city                the people o f v o u r city, for the ktrafness they s h o o e d
M yself a fanatic Liverpool fan. m y wife an fcvertonsan an d                   tow ards m e a n d o t W f tv/rno^ l t . r u - w w ih^                                                                                                                                      'X4'
     IT K no w four years since m y wife a n d I m ade fn e n d s                C O U L D you please convey my thoughts a n d thanks to
 with C olin an d Lynn S oulsby. a couple from y our fine city.               the f*op!e o f your cily. for the kindness ihey showed
 M yself a fanatic Liverpool fan. m y wife an E vertom an and
 o u r friends W ednesday supporter*.
                                                                              tow ards m e an d o th er Liverpool Ians a tle r thc tragedy.
                                                                              People were outside their houses, an d telling us l o use their
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    I
     W e stay w eekends when o u r team s m eet, as well as o th er           phones to phone hom e as o u r fam ilies w ould be worried
 occasions. In o u r times in Sheffield we have m et w ith n o th ­           ab o u t us.
 ing but kindness an d friendship.                                               I and some friends travelled hy mini*bus a n d when we
     So it ca m e as d o surprise lo sec the reaction o f your                w ere on the ro a d , a w om an stepped out in f r o n t o f the bus.
 people afte r the tragedy o n S atu rd a y . They open e d iheir             telling us to use h e r phone. I t was extremely k ind a n d very
 do o rs fo r people to come an use the p h o n e, they offered tea           m oving.
 if it w as needed, b u t roost o f all they opened their hearts.                O th er things I have heard are people p u ttin g Liverpudli*
     O u r friends live in the W adsley area, so I to o k o u r               an s u p in their houses overnight an d a m an w ho drove
 ‘c h a ra cter' filled mini*bus t o th c R ose & C ro w n (T op              som ebody hom e because his c a r broke down.
 H ouse) a s I*ve grow n quite fond o f that watering hole.                      I cannot th an k you e n o u g h , stro n g b o n d s h av e been •
     T he w ay we were received by o u r h o sts Colin a n d C arole          linked between Liverpool a n d Sheffield.
 W esihead w as a delight. I h o p e a n d am sure the feeling was               Your* Id g ratitude.
 m utual. T h e ir help an d ihe help o f o u r friends after the                W illiam 0 ‘C onoor. B urm an R o a d . G a rs to n . Liverpool.
 tra gedy w as very m uch appreciated a o d needed.
     M y wife an d I will be back before long. We pass Hills­
 b o ro u g h oo o u r w ay t o W adsley. W e shall sto p there ao d
 n o d o u b t w e will sbed a few tears.
     T h e p a in o f losing friends is a paio h a r d to co p e with.
                                                                              $i Friendly city
                                                                              M A Y I. on behalf o f m any Liverpool fans, express sincere                            I
 Y o u the p eople o f Sheffield played a m agnificent p a r t on             th a n k s t o the H illsborough families, fo r the help given to                       1
 S atu rd a y by easing tbe feeling o f isolation with your help.             the fans after S a t u r d a y s tragedy that claim ed s o m an y                       J
     T h a n k you from tbe b o tto m o f o u r hearts. C o d Bless           young lives.                                                                            $
 you all. See you soon.                                                           F o r v arious reasons m y h u sb an d a n d tw o sons d id n o t
     J o h n and Collette C larke, N o r w o o d A venue, U th e r la n d .   g o to H illsborough — fo r th a t I th a n k G o d However,
 Liverpool.                                                                   m a n y o f o u r fn e n d s a n d colleagues did- T h o se w ho
                                                                              re tu rn ed alt tell o f the hospitality show n to t h em , b y local
                                                                              fam ilies w h o opened u p their hom es l o them .
         I W IS H lo express m y h ea rtfe lt th a n k s to th e people o f       They m ade them tea a n d allowed them lo p h o n e hom e 10
     Sheffield fo r all their kindness an d concern show n lo m e             rc assu re c o n c e rn e d fa m ilie s ih a t they w e re s a f e .I n o n e c a s e
     a n d m y fellow s upporters afte r th e tragic incident a t             t h a t I h eard of, o n e fam ily allowed an entire coa ch lo ad of
     H illsborough.                                                           fa n s t o p h o n e hom e.
         M v eiehl-vear-old so n . m yself a n d m an y o th e r? w ere           M an y fans lo o k nam es a n d addresses o f their helpers
     allow ed in to y o u r hom es to use every facility w e needed lo        a n d will w nte their ow n personal t h a n k s ^ t h e r s . o l n ^ u d y
     h e ln c a lm a n d com fort u s a n d also hy being allowed t o use     in a s u t e o f shock, m ay have o verlooked such niceties. O n

     r                                      our“                ,0i a u r e , 1 1 50muchforyour

       T h a n k you.                                                 M r s M M cH o rii (There b u t fo r the G race o f C o d . . . " ) .                                TRIBUTES from Liverpool ancf Everion fans on the gates of Anfield,                                                                   Tlie poem below right was written by Miranda Parkinson of Warrington
       M r P D id u o o . Swallow C lose. Sim onsw ood. K irk b y , U s|e h o lm e R o ,X \ V e s t D erby, Liverpool.
     M erseyside.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PLEASC                        heirt;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       jfa     felt thanks t o the people o f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sheffield after their raagnift*


                                          Express&Echo-Shit*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               c e n t o ffe r* o f h elp « ad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               hospitality.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   O n e cud) lad y le t » y hot*
                                                                                                                                                                           I H A D t o w rit to t h a n * all        P L E A S E allo w m e, th ro u g h the pages o f y o u r new spaper,                 c a n p u t the heartache behind us. Be patient w ith us a n d b aod and hfc fnends m e h e r
                                                                                                                                                                           th e lo v e ly p e o p le o f             to t i k e the o p p o rtu n ity owf o e h a l.f o f the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           v M erseyside
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .     . b ra------
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              nch          know
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ----- ., i h- a t in - cy cry rn        s h e a rt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           u in Liverpool there will tetopbooe to le t os know they
                                                                                                                                                                           Sheffield fox their w a rm th ,           o f this A ssociation t o express o u r g ra titu d e to the people o l               forever be a piece o f H illsborough                                                w ere safe.
                                                                                                                                                                           k in d n e ss a n d h e lp a fte r        Sheffield fo r the help a n d co m fo rt they extended to foot*                            G o d Bless you all fo r loving a n d cAnng. W e will n o t                        T he only thing 1 know Is
                                                                                                                                                                           S atu rd a y ’s football gam e.           ball s u p p o rters fro m M erseyside w h o fo u n d themselves                      forget.                                                                              the lady coocereed lived n ear
                                                                                                                                                                               W o rd s c a n n o t adequately       ca u g_ hitt uUD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    p iIBs th e tra g ic cv e ats w hich o cc u rre d a t Hills*                ^       g iitie d g e , S tocksbridge Village, Liverpool.                       the ground and is a Sheffield
                                                                                                                                                                           express the th an k s fans a n d          b o ro u g h la s t S atu rd a y .                                                                                                                                         W ednesday supporter. Per*
                    C ity t e e n a g e r s u r v i v e s s o c c e r t r a g e d y                                                                                        fa m ilie s a l i k e feel t o th c
                                                                                                                                                                           p e o p l e o f S h e ff ie ld w h o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         M a n y o f o u r m em b ers w e re pre sen t * t th e m a tc h a n d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     re tu rn ed t o re p o rt t h a t the o rd in a ry peo p le o f Sheffield —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                M Y h u sb an d w as a t th e fateful m atch. H e w atched help- h#ps ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ____ r__f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           less a n d frustrated as he saw p eople die, these feelings have       _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     rem em ber the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        fjQ , f r o n \W a rrin g to n
                                                                                                                                                                           opened their hom es to help               in p artic u lar those w h o live near the g ro u n d iis e lf-*• did a               u r a ^ i i i o depression, noth in g seem ed to help.                               jf (be does this Is a special
                                                                                                                                                                           people, an d w ho in the d ays            fantastic a m o u n t to ease the p ain b y . fo r exam ple, allowing                      1 w a s also deeply up set b y ihe tra gedy a n d fo r the peo p le thank yon for yoa.
                                                                                                                                                                           since h av e show n nothing               d istrau g h t fa n s in to th e ir h o m es t o use the p h o n e o r for a          o f L iverpool b u t slowly ov er the week I t o o becam e                               G o d Bless the peopi* «
                                                                                                                                                                           b u t k in d n e ss and                   co m fo rtin g c u p o f tea.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           depressed.                                                                           Sheffield.
                                                                                                                                                                           com passion.                                  A s y o u r re ad e rs will o f course be a w are , ih e suffering                     T h e bickering show n b y the m edia becam e t o o m u ch , I                             Jo*n Smith, Maa-
                                                                                                                                                                               I w as o n e o f th e lucky           these events h av e ca used here o n M erseyside h a s been                            felt as i f the w hole w orld w as against ihe people o l Chester R o ad , W arrington.
                                                                                        -•V '                                                                         I    ones, b o th m y b ro th e rs             im m ense. T h e k in d a c tio n s o f ihe p eople o f Sheffield have,                S heffield, and that i here w a s n 't an y o n e p ort ra ying ho w i he                          « 15 written by my
                                                                                                                                                                      I    ca m e hom e u n h u rt, b u t the        however, served to m ake i t th a t little b it easier to bear.                        o rd in a ry person in the street felt, therefore n o one knew . d #Ujb t e r . aged 17.
                                                                                                                                                                       v   w aiting until w e h eard th at               Nigel G ra n t, S ecretary. T h e F o o tb a ll S u p p o rte rs A ssoci­
                                                                                                                                                                           they were safe is som ething I                                                                                                       T h e n m y h u sb an d received a small no ie fro m a n                                 U “ . n £ H e ro w .       i.J. .

                                                                                                                                                                    i
                                                                                                                                                                      !    ho p e never to h |v e to go
                                                                                                                                                                           th ro u g h again,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     atio n (M erseyside B ranc h).                                                         aq u a in ta n ce o f his. I cried. H e seem ed less depressed. I feel Every man for hhnseU!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            t h a t everyone should share it a n d th en they will k n o w t h a t                     uot he.

                                                                                                                                                                  | I
                                                                                                                                                                     j         1 w ould especially like to
                                                                                                                                                                           t h a n k M r T B am es for d r i v - .             Thanks from 1                        • a            •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            as a city th a t w e are n o t “ w alking alo n e”
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Mrs J C F ord. M o o rth o rp e W a y . Sheffield
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 What, aod leave him to die?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               • » ; / ? . : # N e , that u s t be.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Look after y o o s e i i .
                                                                                                                                                                    I      ing m y b ro th e r !*n a n d his
                                                                                                                                                                            fn e n d Eddie hom e to Liver­
                                                                                                                                                                           p o o l. a n d th e people in the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        a mnthpr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               I I 1 U              U     1 V          I          ■   ■>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     T h e n o te saidiEric a n d F am ily T he re i!; a sm all vase in H e is able,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           v o u r parce l, which is a sm all to k en , to show yo u t h a t * e Tbey i r e » t .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     f e n thinking a b o u t y o u all week. O u r h ea rts g o o u t J u m p aod 111 ca tch you,
                                                                                                                                                                           sw eet sh o p n e a r to th e             T O the people o f H illsb o ro u g h . Sheffield, from a m o th e r io                t o y o u a n d all people concerned. I k n o w w e d i d n 't k n o w H is (e ars h e f ° r t « .                      .
                                                                                                                                                                           g ro u n d w h o cam e o u t in to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     L iv e rp o o l*                 •         r                                           e a ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            M   k u uo th
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       u i ed r personally, b u t in o u r h ea rts we a r e fn e n d s a n d A m i j o r i t y . ^ j i l e M reach
                                                                                                                                                                            the street t o ask them i f they                                              a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        T o c onve y o p r g ra titu d e fo r th e m o s t overw he m ing                             •          d o flh a U
                                                                                                                                                                           w a nte d t o p h o n e ho m e t o let                                                                                                                                                                                B a t it*s th e n .
                                                                                                                                                                            u s k n o w th e y were safe.            kindness sh o w n t o s o m a n y o f o u r peo p le d u n n g th e tragie                                    yourselves,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     event* o f t h i s p a s t w eek.                                                          - -                3 -       - -
                                                                                                                                                                               T h e re h av e b e e s a le t o f                                                                                                P hilippa and H a ro ld ; Stoke*on*Tfent a n d th e P o tte ries                       rveigliboaj\elp thee.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        A t som e tim e in o u r lives m ost o f u s h a v e experienced
                                                                                                                                                                            tea rs shed h ere in t h e p a s t                                                                                              P eople.                                                                             R est 1b peace d w s e w b p died*
                                                                                     wmiiesionQ.-he added,                                                                  fe w d a y s , a n d n o d o u b t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     g rie f in o n e fo rm o r a n o th e r, b u t n ev e r before have the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                F o r th e fe a r la th e ir e y e s .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     »~np1e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     f* ° P le oo ff U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Liverpool
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       v e rp o o l suffered such
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             w e a im m ense s o rro w as I
                                                                                                                                                                            there'll be: m ore f o r a lo n e                                                                                              I W O U L D like, th ro u g h y o u r p a p e r t o express m y heart*               They a re gone.
                                                                                                                                                                            tim e to com  o m e,
                                                                                                                                                                                              e, b u t I th in k     nave w itnessed a n d felt personally.
                                                                                    c e a Wy M * . , ^                         w uM nol s t . [                            th a t th e re   w i l l K ba w a r m                 It U tru e to * ay   t l i a t a l m o s t e family
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              v e ry fa m ily   someone felt gratitude and lhants L9.                                                    o°f Yet    not far.
                                                                                        i^ougntManalust <wh9t .. .     re,lV *>'"0 I                                                                                                                                                                       gave help a n d s u p p o r t t o o u r s u p p o r t e r s                       T h e i r U *ea, ■
                                                                                    hO'-“ ~e had wmeSL             r*eaM >»•'»» I                                          s p o t/o r         th e p e o p le o f             » h o » a s p re sen t a t th e s u d m m U st week         ,               L 'd 'd a v s Espcc'ully to th e lad y o f C ow pers L ane w ho                      S o many would have give.
                                                                                                                                                                           S h e f f i e l d .i n. e-----------
                                                                                                                                                                                                            v e ry      T o d a y m y sisters a n d m yseir vtstted one fn e n d w h o lost                ad « y •               / n d lhc us£ 0 fvh c r p h o n c . W o r d s ea n n o t
                                            the S*',am*ot
                                                       ii«thek"°»*                     1eannot thank them                                       /                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               N o questions t u s s l e d
                                       tu       Queues        puNtc,               ca u se l knew my                          a s WOff'ed      i                           M e r s e y s id e r's h e a r t fr o m h e r t w o sons.                                                                       describe the feeling o f relief t o h e a r K evin’s voice a n d                     N o answers.
                                                                                   •wetopoim»rm S S 2 * efl-artd1wasI                                                      now o n .                       .    ,        H e r praise o f y o u r w onderful c om pa ssion a n d sym pathy                 k ^ ' ^ he w as safe.                                                                   O u r t h o u g h t s a r e w ith
                                                                                                                                                                              O nce a g a in m an y th an k s. •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   . t a h e r an d h e r fa m ily, w as o nly surpassed by h e r courage in                        k y o u a n d G o d Bless.                                                  those » b o m ourn. B a t thaak
                                                                                                                                                                               'm e t N ash (a very grate* facing u p t o this terrible loss.                                                                                                                                                   god th a t i«y d a d 's hom e and
                                                                                his praise fo r them . I w as b o rn in Sheffield a n d lived the                                E v e rtc n ia n ). M a rk e t                                                                                                     Josephioe A W oods, G u ilsted R o a d . N o r ris G re e n .
r.    I W O U L D esteem it a great fa vour if yo u w ould print this                                                                                                                                                    Y o u will, n o d o u b t receive m a n y m o re letters from o u r                                                                                                    safe.
 "    item a b o u t P aul Beer which a p p e ared in m the Exeter
                                                            E xe te rEExpress
                                                                       xpre ss  * r 50 years.
                                                                                fo     years,                                                                                 ,y. S io c k b n d g e V illage,                                                                                              L iverpool.                    .                  v*.     ..v^t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     beloved city w h e n th e tea rs h av e sto p p ed flowing, a n d we
      a n d E cho, b e c a u s e ! think Sheffield p eople should k n o w o f , , M rs M M aisU n d . C o rd erv R o a d , St T h o m a s , Exeter.                        L iverpool
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               wyv*M2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 T H E S T A R , W tiln ttJ a x . A p ril y>. 1989
                                                                                                                        am y




  Treat
                                                                                                                                     ,1
                                                                      Lfeys
                                                                     m0£:
f'>>

IUS
                                C/'-5*II,':?p.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Final
                                                                                             '                                                                                                                                                                          j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            going
                                                         e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ahead?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            E V E R Y O N E w as stu n n ed a n d saddened a t th e horrific
   F R O M t h e g r e a t s a d n e s s a n d a n g e r t h a t m y w ife                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  events a t H illsborough o n S atu rd a y . B u t w ha t happ e n ed to
   a n d I fe lt a s w e w a l k e d f r o m L c p p i n g s L a n e a t f o u r                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            o n e to t o f suggestions seen in the p ap e rs — t h c C u p F inal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            b e s crapped this year?
   o ’c l o c k , w e m u s t n o w a d d b e w i l d e r m e n t . I t s e e m s
   th a t a n u m b e r o f p e o p ic a r e d o in g th e ir b e st to                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         N o w it is to g o ah e ad . A football m atch a n d especially a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            C u p F inal is m eant to b e enjoyed. H o w c an players poss­
   d e f l e c t c r itic is m . F a c t o r s h a v e b e e n b r o u g h t i n t o t h c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ibly enjoy a g am e w ith events o f last S atu rd a y hovering
   a rg u m e n ts w h ic h a re to ta lly irre le v a n t.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 o v e r them ?
       11 is clear to all a n d all to o cle ar to th o se w h o were there                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     S o the idea is: Seating. H o w c an it b e certain even w ith
   o n S atu rd a y t h a t tb e fences killed 95 innocent fans.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            t h a t th e re w o n 't b e a disaster? A lot o f fans prefer to s tan d .
   R em em ber t h a t these fences w ere erected to co n tro l tb e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        P erim eter fences have c o m e d o w n , b u t these were erected
   fans, n o th o u g h t w as given to th e ir safety. H ow ever, th e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     to s to p s u p p o rters invading the pitches. T he re will still be
   initial p roblem w hich c a used the situ atio n m u s t b e set a t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    's u p p o rte rs invading the pitch, a s has happ e n ed in the past.
   thc d o o r o f th e o rga nisa tion o f th e 800 S o u th Y orkshire
   Police.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      W h y hasn’t England ca u g h t o n to the idea o f N im es in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            F rance. T h e ir fences, as seen o n T V , o p e n autom atically in
       I find it s o h a r d to w rite this letter. M y m e m o ry h o ld s                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 c a se o f a n em ergency a t th e to u ch o f a b u tto n , thereby
   n oth in g b u t t h a t S aturda y aftern o o n , m y t h o u g h t s a r e c o n ­                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     preventing a n y kind o f d isaster a n d d e a th as hap p e n ed a t
   cerned w ith little else, I sit a n d weep fo r lost friends, m y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            H illsborough la s t Saturday?
   wife sits by the fire a n d weeps alm o st c o n s ta n tly . It h as h a d
   a p ro found effect o n us bo tn . G u ilt is th e w o n t thing. E ach                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      H a v in g said th a t, w e th a n k G o d fo r the lives o f those
   thing we d o , even having a m eal, we a re beset by guilt,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              s u p p o rters w ho died a n d th o se w ho survived a n d a r e in
   because there a re m a n y w ho we saw die w h o ca n n o t d o                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          hospital. M ay it never ever h ap p e n again. G o d Bless all th e
   these sim ple things w e all tak e fo r gra n ted .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      bereaved families. W e will n o t forget them .
       I w as there, I k n o w w hat I saw . I kn o w w here the fa ult                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         M iss Shirley W atsoo, N o rfo lk P ark . Sheffield.
   lies, b u t I k n o w there will be a dissipation o f blam e a n d I
   know where the blam e will be passed to. I f it h a d n t been
   fo r thc Liverpool ’anim als’ m a n y m o re w o uld have died,
   they will say.
        U ntil fans a re tre ated w ith d ignity a n d lo oked u p o n as
    peopic w h o need t o be considered w hen safety is th o u g h t
    of, th e police will alw ays view us as th e enem y, p eople to be
                                                                                                            ears for my home city
                                                                                             A S a life lo n g S h e ff ie ld e r u n til th r e e
                                                                                                                                                        o f stadia to seating only — the dism antling                      # refusal to listen t o reason;                   lies, and fo r those who m ay have been res*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               o o s ib le . F o r t h a t tb e a c c id e n t eo o ld
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           JfuSG flnOGT)6R (QeDneSDftY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4i ilitiiillM U<l At                  W»4...4.r


    controlled a s o n e w ould co n tro l cattle.
        M a r ty n C W r ig h t, H ig h fie ld C o tta g e s . T e rrin g to n ,             m o n th s a g o , a n d en o rm o u sly p ro u d
                                                                                                                                                        o f tbe Kop would ra in th e atm osphere o f the
                                                                                                                                                        gam e. T his o s s t surely now be seen to be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           # determ ination to have what h as been
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Aeni+A th»m.                                        f appen, G od m ay give tb e victim s eternal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             life, aod fo r families where life w as saved in
    Y ork.                                                                 ______            o f m y c ity , its f a c ilitie s a n d its s p o rt*     o o t only acceptable b a t Inevitable, and the


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Still a long
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            I can assure yoo t h a t all right thiolung      G od’s grace.
                                                                                             in g h is to ry , I c rie d w h ils t w a tc h in g        possibility th a t this wfl] result in sm aller
                                                                                                                                                        crowds be aaeo a s desirable ra th e r th an as a                people o f S o o ta Africa and particularly            T he C hristians o f Bochum a re greeting
                                                                                             t h e te l e v i s i o n n e w s . T o s e e s u c h a                                                                      s ports loving ones, have their thoughts with       tbe people o f Sheffield with the words: “ The
                                                                                                                                                        d i s a d v a n ta g e . S a f e t y a o d s a n i t y m u s t
                                                                                             te r rib le tra g e d y h a p p e n in g a t a p la c e    prevaiL                                                          your aQ today.                                      grace o f O u r L ord Jesus C hrist be with your
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             alL**


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           way to go
                                                                                             w h i c h I r e c o g n i s e s o w e ll , a n d h a v e       I cried for those injured aod kiDed, and                        H ave courage, have faith, teach your
                                                                                                                                                        fo r their families. And I cried fo r Sheffield,                 yocng ones to jodge when they cannot                    W ilheim IV irklem ann, S uperintendent,
                                                                                             a lw a y s a s s o c ia te d w ith en jo y m e n t,
                                                                                                                                                        th a t this worst o f all sportiog tragedies                     receive what they w ant and to ta r n back,         E v a o g e lisc h e r K irc h e o s k re is , B o ch n m ,
                                                                                             w a s h e a rtb re a k in g .                                                                                               then they will be able to try another day, and      W est Germ any.
                                                                                                                                                        should happen in m y city. T he W ednesday
                                                                                                 From what I understand, and I am s ure I               r o a r h a s always been h eard from m y home,                  wm! All tbe best.


       Late arrivals
                                                                                             will be corrected if I am m istaken, Che sam e                                                                                 R u p e rt G F T o m s. G a rd e n S tr e e t,                                                                 T H E several tho u san d W ednesday fans filing in to the
                                                                                                                                                        throogh good aod bad seasons. T h a t this
                                                                                             tw o team s played in tbe F A C up semi-final
                                                                                             last y ea r a t Hillsborough. A t th a t time the
                                                                                             police were praised fo r their handling o f the
                                                                                                                                                        should be transform ed into scream s of te rro r
                                                                                                                                                        m ust oever be allowed to happen agaio —
                                                                                                                                                        anyw here.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         P la m ste ad , 7800 C ap e , S o uth A frica.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Wrong place                                                   Baseball G r o u n d o n S atu rd a y were s o m b re a n d pre*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           occupied.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              T h e bou q u est o f flowers in the g o a lm outh were testa*
       I A M ju s t a Sheffield housew ife w ho is v ery upset w ith the
       events a t H illsborough. M y h ea rt goes o u t to all th o se w h o
       were injured a n d to the ones w h o lost their loves ones.
                                                                                             crowd. I t now would be totally unfair to
                                                                                             blame them for tbe events o f S aturday, April
                                                                                              15 w h e n t h e y h a d a d o p t e d t b e s a m e
                                                                                                                                                            Ja y n e K f A shton, P a r k Lane Towers,
                                                                                                                                                        B oom erang S tree t, Sydney, Australia.                         ( A M a yonog m ao and in 1987 I visited
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             wrong time                                                    m en t th a t this was n o o rd in a ry m atch.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              T h e n from am ongst o u r ra nks som e 20 o r 30 yo u th s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           begans t o d an c e and sway, to ta u n t th e o pposition an d io
           I would like to also m en tio n S u p t R o g e r M arshall an d                  ‘successful* tactics.                                                                                                       Liverpool and Sheffield. T he people o f these      I A M truly sorry to read, an d , see o o the                 sing their obsccne chants. T h e ir offensive b ehaviour w as in
       p roba bly o n e o r tw o others w ho m u s t be goiog th ro u g h                                                                                                                                                cities (and it is the ta m e all through Britain)   television about the terrible catastrophe that                n o w ay d im inished by the arrest o f o n e o f their m em bers.
                                                                                                F o r well over ten years tbe objective o f the
       hell a t th e m o m en t, d u e to beiog m a d e scapegoats f o r w h a t
       happened.
           1 d o feci th o u g h th a t th e fans w ho ca used this crush
                                                                                             policing o f British soccer m atchcs has been
                                                                                             the prevention o f hooliganism and violence,
                                                                                             a n objective which has largely been achieved
                                                                                                                                                        Discipline                                                       a r e wooderfaL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ( was absolutely horrified when I read
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         a bout the stadium disaster In Sheffield.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         T oronto’s three newspapers had lengthy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             happened to those sports fans a t your soccer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             stadium recently.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                I sincerely hope th a t all o f tbe injured
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             persons will recover, and back to good
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              M eanw hile, back o n the pitch, the floral tributes were
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           joined by a lone toilet roll, a n event eagerly recorded by thc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           w aiting press cam eras.
       should look a t their o w n back doors.
           T he ones th at suffered were the ones w h o were a t th e
       g ro u n d in plenty o f tim e t o get a co m fo rta b le place to
       u j i c h the m atch.
                                                                                             in Sheffield, where there has been very little
                                                                                             crowd trouble.
                                                                                               T hc personal safety o f individuals attend-
                                                                                                                                                        Is lacking                                                       stores aod pictures o f the borTor. I could
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         have started to cry.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             I wish to express m y sym pathy to all the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             h ealth. A s for the unlucky ooes who were
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             crashed aod died in the tneUea, what can one
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             s ay but P ray and Remember them . Because
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              i t seems t h a t we still have a long w ay to go.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              M a r tin G ordon (Ju st A n o th e r W ednesday), U llsw ater
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           R o a d . H a n d fo rth , W ilm slow. Cheshire.
                                                                                             inq matchcs has been pushed far into the                   IT w as with mach dism ay th at we saw foot-                     rclati>es o f thc stadium victims.                  they were a t the wroni? place a t tbe wrong
           If .-lU ihc fin's hud a!!oue<i t i n e i n ^ c a d o f r r a l i n ? a li<t                      in »►>;« Mft/imrf tn rt/v-ll *ifh                                                                                                                                hr,, r~i !>«*•»                    TV*-,
      sh o u ld l o o k a t their o^ d ba ck d o o r s.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           t                       u.;>i u n <11 t u t l a j u r v u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              wa:i:r>g press cameras.

                                                                                                                                                            Is lacking
                                                                       in Sheffield, where there h as been very little                                                                                                       T oronto’s three newspapers had lengthy                          persons will recover, and back to good
         Thc ones t h a t suffered were the ones w ho were a t the crowd trouble.                                                                                                                                            slores aod pictures o f the horror. 1 could                      health. As for the unlucky oocs wbo were                           It seem s th a t wc still have a Io n s w3y to £°*
      ground in plenty o f time to get a co m fortable place to                                                                                                                                                              bave s tarte d to cry.                                           crashed aad died in the meUea, what can ooe
                                                                          Thc personal safety o f individuals attend­                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            M a r tin G ordon ( J u it A n o th er W ednesday), Ullswater
      watch the m atch.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       say but P ra y and R em em ber them. Because
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1 wish t o e xpress m y sym pathy to all the                                                                                  R o a d . H a n d fo rth . W ilm slow. Cheshire.
         If all thc fans had allowed time instead o f m aking a last ing m atches has been pushed fa r into tbe                                             IT w as with much dism ay th at we saw foot*                     relatives o f the stadium victims.                               they were a t the wrong place a t the wrong
                                                                       background in this attem pt to deal with the
      m inute dash after calling a t p u b s, m aybe the tragedy would                                                                                      ag e oo o u r T V screens o f the tragic events a t                                                                               tim e. G o d B est aod Bless T hem .
      not have happened.
                                                                       crowd. M ost loyal supporters have become
                                                                       used to being herded Like ca ttle through the
         A s things were, o ne w ay or a n o th e r som eone was going streets o f various cities, segregated when
      to get h u rt. If the gate had n o t been opened, it w ould have they got into the ground, and have not
                                                                                                                                                            v our soccer stadium a t Hillsborough.
                                                                                                                                                               T he re seems to be a num ber o f reasons for
                                                                                                                                                            this disaster — the sm aller a r e a being
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                D o u g la s M ille r . R tv e r le a D r iv e ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E tobico k e, O n tario , C ana da.                                 W a lte r F a rra r. H a ll a n d a l e , F lo r id a ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              USA,                                                             Put safety first
      possibly been ju s t a s b ad outside due to this w ay they were o b j« ie d since this m eant that they and their                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       N O T w ishing t o p o u r oil o n troubled w aters, b u t it is high
      crushing to get in for the kick-off.
         M re C K ay, L y tto n Drive, P ars o n C ross, Sheffield.
                                                                       families could watch a football m atch in
                                                                       relative peace.
                                                                                                                                                            reserved to Liverpool supporters, the police
                                                                                                                                                            o p e n in g th e g a te , t b e v a s t u n e x p e c te d
                                                                                                                                                            crowds th a t pressed against the outside
                                                                                                                                                            fences.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sharing                                                          A T first I listened with dism ay to radio
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              re ports o f the tragic disaster a t Hills­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              tim e the tru th was told regarding thc lack o f safety a t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              o c c a s io n s s im ilia r t o th e s e m i'fin a l. A t r a g e d y w a s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              expccied by m any older su p p o rters a t the L eppings L ane


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             sorrow
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              side, w hen to o m any cram m ed in io t o o small a n area

      Fairness plea
                                                                                              Together with thc barriers erected within                                                                                                                                                       b o ro u g h , th e n w a tc b ed w ith in creasin g
                                                                                           grounds aod the introduction o f all-ticket                         It would appear th a t the police bad no                                                                                       shock the T V coverage, but the real h o rro r                  ro u n d kick-off time.
                                                                                           m atches, it was believed this w as necessary                   alternative but to open the gates — they                                                                                           o f the appalling tragedy w as brought h o o e                      I w as a victim when I went alo n g to sec m y nam esake
                                                                                           — the right thing to do in the circumstances.                   would have been pushed over eventually,                                                                                            to m e on the M ooday m orning with a picture                   (E v c rto n ) play Sheffield W ednesday m a quarter-final. I
    A S a s outhern lad y w ho lived in Sheffield fo r six years a                         T h a t all these m easure would combine to                     probably with g re ater loss o f Ufe. D o not be                 T H I S I S an e x tra c t o f th e U tter sent to                in o u r daily M elbourne p aper.                               h a d t o w a it until half-tim e to m o p m y b ro w a n d have a
    while ag o a n d h as tw o m arried d au g h te rs in the city, m y                    c rea te a death t ra p could and should have                   to o h ard oo yo ar policemen o r y o u r police                 R upert N orris, secretary o f ih e Sheffield                         I think all those in authority who could                    ciggy — being forced to face north-w est, tra p p ed w ith b o th
    heartfelt th o u g h ts a re w ith the victims o f the m atch, a n d                   bee foreseen but woold never have been coo*                     chief — the disaster w as on the c a rd s any*                   C ouncil o f C hurches.from B ochum 's church                     have h ad the slightest p a rt in causing the                   h an d s, sh o u ld er high. All I could sec i f l cricked m y neck t o
    also very m u ch with the Sheffield police, football officials                         side red while tbe emphasis was oo how to                       way — because o f tbe lack o f discipline o f                    Uoder.                                                            horrible m istake, should t a k e a loeg, hard                  th e right w as a co m c r fiag a n d o n e goal p ost. T h a t w as
    an d the people.                                                                       deal with a crowd ra th er th an bow to tre a t                 ordinary people today.                                           W E have noticed tbe g re at sorrow which has                     look a t w hat happened an d say '"Never                        bac k in th c e arly Fifties. N o fences I hen. a n d n o t s o m any
       I a m pleased to say th a t w hen I lived in Sheffield I w ent                      a n individual                                                     T h e b ottom line Is:                                        overcome the people o f Sheffield by the big                      a g a in ” .                                                    d ru n k e n lager louts, hustling hooligans an d th e like, either!
    to W ednesday's g ro u n d a n d saw g o o d clean sp o rt, ru n                          M o st o f the football supporters known to                     O lac k o f d k ejpljnf tOd                                   accident In the football aren a o f yoor town.                        M rs C Gibson, M t D a n d e m o g R oad,                       A s fo r the police, th o u g h they som etim es ap p e a r to bully
    efficiently by t h e police,                                                           m e have always objected to the modifieatioo                    aroocg the m asses;                                                W e pra y fo r the victims and their fam>*                      Kilaytb, V ictoria, A ustralia.                                 a n d p u sh us a ro u n d , it's usually for o u r own g ood. T h e y do
   , T h e people o f Sheffield a r e th e greatest.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          a g o o d j o b in very trying circum stances.
       G o d bless y o u all. I sincerely h o p e fairness will avail in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          F o o tb a ll will never be th e sam e, we a re told (tha nk G o d
    this m atter w ith tbe police a n d officials.
       P a t Ripley, B roadm e ad, C allin g to n , C ornw all,                            Traffic jams                                                                                                                                                                 I am sickened                                                                         fo r th a t). S afety a n d com fort o f c ustom ers — long overdue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              — m u s t c o m e first*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  D Evert oo, Sheffield L a n e T o p . Sheffield (address

      Mixed memories                                                                       I M U S T express m y s y m pathy w ith th e H illsborough
                                                                                           tragedy, b u t w onder i f a n y o n e h as considered o n e o f the
                                                                                                                                                                                                    HLLSBOROUGH „
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        I A M n o t a fo o tb a ll fan a n d a m never likely to be one. I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        th in k the ex o rb ita n t price paid by team s fo r a m a n to kick a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              supplied).


     I H A V E been a Sheffield W ednesday su p p o rter fo r m an y
     years, a n d H illsborough football g ro u n d h olds m an y
                                                                                           s tadium 's m ajo r flaws? It is very difficult to get to.
                                                                                               Always there are traffic ja m s from the city ce ntre all the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  i     h all in to a net, a n d the h u g s a n d kisses th a t follow o n the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        field a re disgusting.                                                                 Ground flaw
                                                                                                                                                                                  SHEFFELD CW^
     happ y m em ories fo r m e.                                                           w a y there an d it is very difficult to try to go a ro u n d .                                                                                                                  In the future, m ak e all team s p u t safety o f the g ro u n d
        It h as been a dreadful blow t o m e th a t such a n aw ful                            T o the n orth-w est the Rivclin Valley blocks y o u in, a n d                                                                                                           before ou tra g eo u s tra n sfer fees. If they fail to com ply, oust                  S H E F F I E L D W ednesday have a very impressive football
                                                                                           th e one alternative to th e east a ro u n d Shirecliffe ju s t jo in s                                                                                                      th em o u t o f the leagues.                                                           g ro u n d , b u t I have noiiccd m an y flaws from m y visits.
     tragedy, entailing such a heavy loss o f life should take place
         nea r to hom e.
                                                                                           in w ith all the n o rth o f the city traffic.                                             L VERPOOli                                                                            A lot o f players have b ro u g h t the g am e in to disrepute, so                     T h e turnstile s are to o few an d to o slow. Big crow ds have
        In co m m o n w ith a lo t o f p eople in this C ity, m y th o u g h ts
     a re with the people w ho have lo s t friends a n d relatives, a n d
                                                                                               H illsborough C o rn e r is congested all d ay, a n d every day,
                                                                                           a n d Penistonc R o a d is n o t a lot im proved, even w ith the                        NOTTINGHAM , .                                                                       start the c lean-up o f hooliganism o n the field.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            I f the s em i.final m u s t be replayed, w hy n o t o n a c o m ­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               to w ait in unorganised crushes j u s t to get »n. W ith small
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               children o r w om en o r elderly p eople it is im possible to even
                                                                                           ex tra lanes.                                                                                                                                                                pletely central g ro u n d , free o f spectators.                                      re ac h these turnstiles in the last 45 m inutes before kick ofT.
     we can only n o p e t h a t a situation like th is will never o ccur
     again.                                                                                    A s a result, fans a rriv e late fo r every m atch , o n e o f th e                                                                                                          It w ould be ea sy th en to see the reaction o f hoo lig an s to                       I have frequently w ailed a i b o th ends, b u t there are
                                                                                           causes o f the tro u b le o n S aturday.                                                                                                                                     com pletely locked doors.                                                              never p ro p e r queues. Ju st lots o f pushing a n d shoving, the
        I would like t o c ongratulate T h e S ta r new spaper o n the
     excellent reporting o f this u n h a p p y event.                                        A H igginbottoo (address supplied).                                                                                                                                           O h yes, th e team s w o uld c o m plain "lo s s o f m o n e y " b u t             biggest ro u g h e st druR ks m ak in g sure no o n e stops them .
        David J S inclair, F ircro ft A venue, S outhey G reen,                                                                                                                                  BaufceftBuacoicjsracra>                                                it w ould p ro v e the limits to w hich so m e peo p le will e o — I                      A t H illsborough the police are to blam e fo r m ak in g the
     Sheffield.
                                                                                           Seating for all                                                                             MaktttequetpeifiUfcib. ■                                                         haste n to a d d t h a t I a m n o t speaking o f all fo o tb a ll fans.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            I a m a w a r w idow , b u t 1 a m sickened b y th e so-called
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               m a tte r w orse. O utside the K o p they use their big horses t o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               pu sh eve ry o n e ofT the ro a d o n to the already overcrow ded

     Sheffielder’s guilt                                                                  D U R I N G the enquiries in to the heart-rending tra g ed y a t
                                                                                          H illsborough, m an y conflicting reports, statem e n ts an d
                                                                                          even condem nations will b e put forw ard — but in m y m ind
                                                                                                                                                                                    ..
                                                                                                                                                                                       H l U S S S e w f l H D S flS T B f? f t P P E f * .

                                                                                                                                                                                                    e |.« -X
                                                                                                                                                                                                    fQQOOOCi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        " b e tte r world'* o u r m en died for. I f y o u pu b lish ed m y full
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        address. I w o uld m o s t p ro b a b ly g e t m y w indow s broken.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            M r s D oris B utler. Sheffield (full ad d ress supplied).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               pavem ent. Q ueues have n o cha nce o f being allow ed to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               form because o f thc police s quashing everyone u p all the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               tim e. R ea lly it is surprising there h as not been a disaster
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               before n o w . M a n y times I have nearly been cru sh ed by
     S IN C E th e e norm ity o f th e tra gedy em erged, I personally
     hava felt guilty t h a t it hap p e n ed in m y city an d th a t I                   tnere is m ost definitely one thing th a t m ust be d o n e.                                at                                                                                                                                                                       th o u g h tle ss polieem en h erding (he crow ds like anim als. By
     should h ave d o n e som ething t o help.                                               All spectators m ust be seated!                              v" *                                                                                                                                                                                                 tre a tin g o rd in a ry people this w ay. the police force them to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               behav e like m obs. T h a t is w h at h a p p e n ed ihat S atu rd a y .
        B ut I a m n o t a d o c to r o r a nurse, o r a social w orker o r a
     police officer o r a s am bulance atte n d a n t, I a m a m o th e r
     w ho c a n n o t begin t o co m prehend w h a t those families in
     Liverpool m ust be feeling.
                                                                                              It is no good the elu b s saying they c a n n o t affo rd it —
                                                                                          they can a n d they m u st, especially (he m a jo r ones like those
                                                                                          in Sheffield, L iverpool. M anchester, a n d Leeds.                                      ’ <* •< ' r r r %                                          v ir ,n .                 Bound to happen                                                                           C N eedham , R ocher C lose. G renoside. Sheffield.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               New beginning
                                                                                             T h e ones th at m ay be exem pt could be the sm aller clu b s                                                                                                                   I T H IN K           tt is t o o ea rly t o be w ritin g a b o u t th e things
        I feel so d esperately s o n y ,                                                  th a t ca n prove th a t their standing spec tators h a v e am ple                                           .         .                              <(                           t h a t went w ro n g a t th e H illsborough d is a s te r last S atu r­
                                                                                          room fo r c om fort a n d for safety,                                                                                                                                              d ay . But I feel v ery strongly a b o u t th e w a y tbe police a n d
        N o w t h e q u estions m ust be answ ered. T e a r do w n those
     c ig e t — a fter all, n o b o d y ever died from a p itch invasion.                    W illy Littlewood, R ich m o n d A venue. Sheffield 13.
                                                                                                                                                                                                           HttMkqSU                                                          m edical stafT h av e seem ed t o b e a r th e responsibility o f
        M   rs M W
        I»»l»        elsh, bExeter
                  OTCttU,    A C K I Drive,
                                      LSilVC, Sheffield
                                              O U ClilCiU 3.
                                                          J-                                          •             J*                           4                            _ ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             m o s t o f it o n T V a n d b y t h e papers.                                     T H E H illsborough events h av e h ad a num b in g efTect
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  H illsb o ro u g h h a s h eld sem i-flnal gam es for a s long a s I am o n g s t t h e people o f Sheffield, w h o h av e in the past
     O w l’s d read
              •T w A                 w A A                                          SH
                                                                                     SH
                                                                                        Praise for police Stop pointing
                                                                                        EE F F IE LL
                                                                                               F IE   D DPolice
                                                                                                          Policea rc
                                                                                                                  a rcverv
                                                                                                                       veryf ogood
                                                                                                                               o d a ta ct ocnotrolling
                                                                                                                                                 n trollingrmcro   w dt s. ITITmiict
                                                                                                                                                                 u-H              m u sV  bea amictakr
                                                                                                                                                                                        t**     m ista k e to<>w»nt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  p o inat afino^r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               fingera ta m  v r o n e a n d say it
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          t any
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             c an rem em ber, surely th a t tells its o w n story. N e arly every stro n g ly a r g u ed th at w e have tw o o f th e finest football
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              team in th e c o u n try likes to p lay their sem i-final h ere b u t sta d iu m s in Britain.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              this tim e it w ent w rong. A n d in m y h o n est o p in io n , i t w as              W e c a n n o w q u estion this p oint.
                                                                                     W hen Billy G ra h a m ca m e to B ram all L ane, the crow ds w as their fa u lt th a t the tragedy o f H illsb o ro u g h o cc u rre d .                                                b o und to h a p p e n any w h ere an d a t an y tim e, th e w a y th at              O u r g ro u n d s are ageing a n d n o o n e seems to be consider­
    I A M a life-long W ednesday su p p o rte r a n d naturally am w ere enorm ous a n d coa che s w ere co m in g in fro m o th e r
    stunn ed by th e tra gic events w hich occ u rre d a t H ills­ tow ns.                                                                                                      I f w e a re going to po in t fingers, th e n h o w o n e a r th are fo o tb a ll h a s g o n e o v e r the last 20 y ears.                                                     in g u p g ra d in g the s ta d iu m s fo r sp ec tato r co m fo rts a s the
                                                                                                                                                                             L iverpool. Sheffield a n d N o ttin g h a m go in g t o ce m ent                                    I think all conc erned d id a m arvellous j o b u n d e r the o th e r E u ro p e a n s have done,
    b o rough last S atu rd a y .
                                                                                         T h e police h a d everything u n d e r co n tro l a n d the c r o u d s relationships o f friendship?                                                                             circum stances a n d I h ope w hoever lo o k s tr.to the d isaster                       I w a n t t o see a new beginning in football s ta rt here in
        I a m dreading going t o th e nex t h o m e m atch b u t I m ust w ere well behaved.                                                                                                                                                                                 will a t th e end o f th e d a y give them all the praise a n d Sheffield, w here the old g ra n d s ta d iu m idols have died.
    go in o rd e r to c o m e t o term s w ith th e aw ful turm oil o f                                                                                                         T  h e  tragedy    w  as    d u e to   a  lo t  o f problem     s.  O   u r  c o a d o
                                                                                         Let us praise them in their difficult w ork.                                        lences go to L iverpool, n o t accusing fingers.                                                respect they all deserve.
I . em otions I am experiencing now . L iving so fa r from the                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1 call o n C live Betts ^ nd his fellow councillors to develop
                                                                                         G Sanderson, T h o rp e H o u s e Rise. Sheffield 8.                                   P R eaaey, E skdale C lose. H illsborough,                                         •■»?■£         J ShimweQ, S tovin D rive, N e w D a m a ll E state. Sheffield. the S tu d e n ts G a m e s stad iu m as a n all-sealer s p ec tato r ori­
    g roun d I felt re m ote from the w hole disaster, alone, an d yet
    so near to it. I desperately w a n te d to d o som ething to help,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e n ta te d o n e , a n d the best in B ritain b o th fo r co m fo rt a n d
    instead I s a t im m obile an d n u m b , disbelieving.                             W V                                                          m                                                   ^           f                      9                                                        m                                                          safety wise, a n d to design it fo r fo o tb a ll use.



     stVvStino*         *                                                             mMy  Y deepest heartfelt sym
    1 W A S i t N o r th a m p to n fo r Sheffield U n i t e d s victory g o e s o u t to t h e f a m ilie s a n d
                                                                                                                       ^ I stopped being a steward
                                                                                                                        s y mpathy
                                                                                                                              pathy            II suspect t bh ai t thtb e real re
                                                                                                                                          fo r the c ru s h last S atu rd a y th at
                                                                                                                                                                                   reason
                                                                                                                                                                                       ason          H i l l s b o r o u g h i s t h e s as faef sets t        L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L eet’s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   t's hh oo np ee th
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   th ee in n m rv m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          inquiry   getsi toto _ _ _ _ _
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    T h e y s h o u ld then call o n U nited a n d W ednesday to sell
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                their g ro u n d s fo r considerable p ro fits to be used to develop
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                th e respective team s, a n d to re n t o r c o le a s e the new
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                AtterchfTe stad iu m from the council.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    L e t u s lea d B ritain in to the 21st c e ntury, b o th o n a n d ofT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                t h e field.
                                                                                                                                                                                                 g r o u n d in th e c o u n try , b a r n o n e, th e b o tto m o f w h a t h a p p e n ed and
    when t h e new s a m e o f the tragedy, a n d th e m o o d o f j o i              fr iends o f the innocent victim s o f              c a u s ed s o m a n y in n o ce n t people            w h e n used b y decent, n o rm a l, law u n e a r t h s th c t r u t h — . h u r t f u l                                                                          J o h n Liveridge, D o e R o y d C rescen t, P a rs o n C ross.
    a n d celebation c ha nged to o n e o f shock.                                    th e tragedy a t H illsborough last                 t o d ie w as d u e to these t^ p es o f               a b i d i n g c itiz e n s . I t s p r e v i o u s th o u g h i t m ight be to s o m e . I t is I H O P E y o u d o n ' t m i n d m e Sheffield..
        It is a b u n d a n tly clear t h a t the perim eter fences m ust             S  atu rd a y .                                     d ru   n k e n  y o b s turn  in g  u p   a t  th e    r e c o  r d   o f  h o l d i n g   s e m i-f in a ls      tim e fo r a c tio n . W e a re fed u p o f w riting this letter. I w as a stew a rd
                                                                                                                                          g ro u n d a t 10 m in u te s to kick ofT
    com e dow n. In G o d s n am e I beg a ll fo o tb a ll gro u n d s to                 U n til recently, I w as a stew ard
    rem ove them . D o n o t wail fo r official approval. The lime a t H illsborough s o I feel m ore
    to get is now .                                                                   qualified than m ost to pass c o m ­
                                                                                                                                          tim e w ith o u t tickets a n d a tte m p t­
                                                                                                                                          in g to force th e ir w ay in. H a ving
                                                                                                                                                                                                 sp ea k s for itself in term s o f o rg a n ­ listening to politicians, v arious a t th e sem i-final a n d because of
                                                                                                                                                                                                 isation a n d sense o f occasion b u t authorities. G o v e rn m en t D e p a rt­ w h a t I saw a n d h a d t o d o , it will
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ho w c a n y o u legislate fo r 2,300 m e n ts etc, all blam ing e verybody b e w ith m e th e re s t o f m y life.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Frontline journalism
       Jat>« M w r t . e h . C a m p b e l l D r iv e , H e r r i n e i h o r p e .   m en t An last S atu rd a y ’* tragic               then sehieved llieir aim they d ru n k e n m o ro n s tu rn in g u p with e ls e w hen th e y should jo i n f o rc e s                                                                                               M A Y I rr.ake th is small trib u te t o y o u a n d all th e s t a ff o f
                                                                                      e v e n ts. I gave u p tb e j o b o f               w o uld have to ta l disregard for                    j u s t m inute s to g o t o kick o f f if to s o rt o u t this mess.                                               i goi six d e a d o u t a n d som e T h e S l a r f o r p u l l i n g t o g e t h e r s u c h a c o m p r e h e n s i v e a n d
    R otherham .                                                    *         v
                                                                                      stew ard because o f the b ehaviour                 a n y o n e else a n d would s tam pede                they decide to push a n d shove all                                                                            injured a n d I w a s try ing to help g ra p h ic a c c o u n t o f the H illsborough disaster. I c a n well

     Ban on travel                                                                    o f the so-called fans. I lost c o u n t
                                                                                      o f the num ber o f lim es I w as sub­
                                                                                     j e c te d t o v e rb a l a n d p h y s ic a l
                                                                                                                                          th e ir w ay o n t o th c terracing with
                                                                                                                                          such tragic consequences.
                                                                                                                                               T his is th e scene, week in. w-*ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                 a t once — there is n o way y o u can                         S o m e thing m ust be d o n e , fo r th em the best w a y 1 co u ld . I j u s t ap p re c ia te th e difficulties a n d s train which re porters an d
                                                                                                                                                                                                 h old them back — hence the t h i s c a n n o t a n d m u s t n o t b e h o p e to G o d I d o n o t h av e to d o p h o t o g ra p h e rs faced o n the S atu rd a y a n d S unday. But
                                                                                                                                                                                                 p r o b l e m s l a s t S a t u r d a y . T h i s allow ed to h appe n again.                                  any th in g like t h a t ag a in . N o w I th ey ac cu rately represented the facts, the h o rr o r a n d the
     I T H I N K fans should be ban n e d from travelling w ithout a ab u se by d ru n k e n m o ro n s with                                                                                                                                                                                                    a m co m in g *        's w ith it.            e m o tio n s o f this dreadful event. It w as fro n t line j o u rn a l­
     ticket t o a n all ticket m atch. T h e crush outside the gates                                                                      o u t a n d it is a m iracle tha                  % tra g ed y nearly h ap p e n ed last year
                                                                                      th e ir loutish, disgusting, aggress­                                                                     a n d ho w th e police m anaged to                             Sickened S upporter and Form er                                                                 ism a t its very best.
    m ust have includes h un d re d s o f fa n s w ith o u t tickets.                                                                     n  o t  happ   e n ed  m uch   m  ore
                                                                                      i v e 4*stiek t w o fi n g e r s u p to             m a n y o th e r g ro u n d s u p a n u          n    a ve   rt   the   d isaster      th e n  —    L  ord       S  te w ard   (na     m e a  n d ad d re s s sup­        T   RoebiK..       j n o v a n   R o a d ,     M alcolm W atsoo, G reen d a le N ew s, G reen d a le S hopping
        M rs J A T r k k e t t, W orrall R o ad , H igh G reen, Sheffield. A u th o rity ” attitude.                                      th e country,                                         o nly know s.                                               plied).                                             P ars o n C ross, Sheffield.                   C en tre , D ronfield.
  1 0       CX        T H E S T A R , W ednesday, A p r il 2 6 . 19 S 9                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            I***


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               YOWL LETTERS
     Time to                                                                                                                                                                          Policemen have
     go big
 T H E r c c e n t d e b a t e i n jec tio n s to such a pro p o sa l
 T h e S t a r a b o u t t h e p o s s i - m Sheffield a r e obviously
 b i l i t y o f a n e w s t a d i u m P a thetic -
 f o r th e S tu d e n t G a m e s          I b e t B i r m in g h a m a r e
 b e i n g u t i l i s e d b y s o m e to d u s t d o w n .p ro -
 S h e f f i e l d U n i t e d a s a p ^ a b f o r a second natio n al

 p r o d u c e d " c r if ic is n w “ o f         W h y d o w e n o t b ra t them
                                                                                                                                                                                      feelings as well
                                                                                                                                                                                       M A Y w e firstly b e g in b y o ffe rin g o u r
                                                                                                                                                                                       stn c c re s y m p a th y t o th e b e re a v e d , w e
                                                                                                                                                                                       to o h a v e o v e r t h e y e a rs lo st s o m e o n e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  b ro th e r a n d sister-in-law in th e M a n ­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  c h e ster a ir disaster.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          W E a re sick a n d tired o f t h e criticism o f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          o u r p olice, fire, am bulance services etc. in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      T h e public/m edia c o n d e m n atio n o f th e . c o n n e c tio n w ith t h e t r a g e d y a t H ills­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         I W O U L D like to say how deeply sorry I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         a m a b o u t the disaster a t H illsborough and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         express m y sym pathy to those involved.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  police, a n d in p artic u la r S upt R o g e r M a r­   borough. W e feel they were m agnificent in                       How ever, I am concerned t h a t the police
 g ra m a ll U n e th a t co u ld              £ £ * £ 3 S f& ffiS S                                                                                                                , w h o m e a n t th e w h o le w o r ld to u s, s o                                                                  a very difficult situation, a s d o n um erous
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  s h all. sim ply c a n n o t b e allow ed to pass                                                                      sh o u ld n o t b e unfairly b lam ed fo r the
 a p p ly to m an y s tad iu m s               fa v0J r. „ a , th e b m h o f                                                                                                       j th e r e fo r e c a n id e n tify w ith th e w a y          w ith o u t com m ent.                                  Sheffield people we have sp o k en to. W e                     tragedy.
 a r o u n d th c co u n try .                 soccer, why n o t the re-birth.                                                                                                      1 y o u will b e fe e l i n g a t t h i s m o m e n t in                                                              h e a r o f the w onderful things d o n e by the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      In connection w ith m y business 1 have                                                                                T he re a re m any parties w h o m u s t s houl­
     T his m ight now b e seen a s                w Jo h n A n d rew s,                                                                                                             1 tim e .                                                     kn o w m an y policem en, som e o f w hom 1             fans, b u t w hat a b o u t the state those m en
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         d e r s om e o f the b lam e a n d these include:
 p ro p h e tic in the light o f th e          G lcadless R o a d . Sheffield.                   Chief Constable Peter W right — sensitivity                                               W e h av e a son-in-law w h o m w e love               have been silently critical.                            a n d w om en in o u r services w ere an d still
 H illsborough tragedy.                                                                                                                                                                very d early. H e is a very g o o d husband,                                                                       a re in.                                                           • T hose fans atten d in g the m atch with­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      S u p t M arshall, how ever, 1 h av e know                                                                         o u t tickets an d determ ined to en te r the

 £
     A r e there still people o u t
        ^   hl ,h" k,
 t ^ r club, w h o sUlFaHUme
                                               R IP P I N G d o w n the fences
                                                                   T H ^ b le m o f
                                                                                               Buck stops                                                                              a n d m u ch loved d a d d y , a n d like all o f his
                                                                                                                                                                                       colleagues is a h u m a n being in uniform .
                                                                                                                                                                                       Y es, h e is a p o licem an a n d a very fine one
                                                                                                                                                                                       too, h e w as a t H illsborough on .S atu rd a y
                                                                                                                                                                                       a n d w e w ere w o rried a n d concerned f o r his
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  since b e w as a P c in the village o f Oughti* -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  b ridge. D uring w hich tim e I have w it­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  nessed, first-hand, his skill a n d dedication
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  t o his j o b an d w a tc hed w ith a d m ira tio n his
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              T h e y were the ones w h o w orked tireless­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ly w ith the injured, dead, an d their families
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          after th e tragedy, b u t w e the public haven’t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          seen this in print.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         gro u n d by o n e m ea n s o r a n o th e r, fa ir o r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         foul:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             • S o c c e r fa n s w h o s e u n a c c e p ta b le
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         b eh a v io u r ov er a p eriod o f y e a n has
                                               «ry“                Ml,P™a«h„0
                                                                                               at the top                                                                                                                                         p ro m o tio n to h is p re sen t ra n k .                  T h e Liverpool s upporters a re dem a n d ­
                                                                                                                                                                                       safety as well as t h a t o f all tb e o t h e r                                                                                                                                  resulted in th e erection o f perim eter fences,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      H is decision a t t h a t fateful h o u r w as      in g t o b e h eard a t th e enquiry. Let th e                 cages etc;                                  *
 k lg &          S      5      o f th e ir                                                                                                                                            people.                                                                                                             peo p ic o f Sheffield a tten d th e enquiry, the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  m a d e u n d e r intolerable p re ssu re from two                                                                         + F o o tb a l l a u t h o r it i e s a t n a tio n a l,
                                                                                                                                                                                           W e h av e h e a rd a n d re a d explanations          th o u s an d s fans surging outside the g round        ones w h o live by W ednesday g ro u n d a n d
 " r t o e , n o t Sheffield no w . A j ,                                                                                                                                              fro m s u p p o rte rs a n d their fam ilies a s to                                                                s u rro u n d areas, w h o saw fans a t 2.45                   local a n d clu b level w ho f o r years have
                                                                                              1 H O P E M r R o g er M arshall c a n find the in n er s trength                                                                                   a n d w ith o u t the benefit o f hindsight.                                                                           neglected th e ir responsibilities regarding
 h a v e a w o n d e rfu l o p p o r - f « K » are vertical above the                                                                                                                 w h a t h a p p e n ed a n d h o w they have been                                                                   tan k e d u p carrying bottles a n d cans, u ri­
                                                                                                                                                                                      affected (a n d rightly so). E verything poss­                  W e will never k n o w w h e th e r a decision      natin g u p peo p le 's passages, also horses                  crow ds, preferring l o leave such m atters to
 t u n i t y t o th i n k b ig . and" ^ vTne' c[hr r l ! ; ^ dfo ™ l >r^                      a " i s“ P|P f r t rr? ra ^ loved             o v« o m e the tragedy
 quickly, a b o u t building a                                          S       h     v   °     f H illsborough.                                                                       ible s h o u ld b e d o n e in o rd e r to ease their      t o d o no th in g w o u ld h av e resulted in          being attacked w ith bottles a n d cans. P rin t               o th e r p artie s such as the police;
                                                                                                                                                                                      b u rd e n , b u t t h a t eq u a lly should be s aid o f   g re ater tragedy.                                      w h a t th e Sheffield public saw , outside a n d                  • T h e p ro f e s s io n a l p lay e rs w hose
 super-stadium  ...................................,
                           to b e s hared r !.L                                                  A s a L iverpool s u p p o rte r a t th c g ro u n d I c a n honestly
                                                      feet w ould allow fans in a             M y w h a, m a n y U v n ^ o , f a a s            th a t th e d ed s io n              .th e policem en a n d th e ir families.                        T h e problem o f large u nruly crow ds in           inside the ground.                                             s ta n d a rd o r sportsm anship a n d a ttitu d e to
 b y U nited a o d W ednesday?
                                                             nn?                              ° F* n th c Pa te* a t th a * tim e w a s P r o * » b l y t h e o n ly s e n sib le         W e all seem t o th in k t h a t bccause it is          u rb a n a rea s in g ro u n d s built well before          O u r thoughts a re w ith In sp e cto r M a r­             au th o rity leaves m uch to b e desired.
     T h e ‘Sheffield Stadium *
                                                                                                                                                                                      th e ir j o b th a t th ey a r e void o f an y feelings     the w a r will always b e gre at b u t surely they      shall an d his fam ily t o be accused all o ver                    N o w th a t there is t o b e a n inquiry and I
co u ld b e the best in the th e f e n i                                                       m a s t0        oncc th e kick'o f r h a<* 001 “         P u l b ac k -
co u n try , certainly o utside o f                      u                , ,i Ar                 I arrived a t the g ro u n d a t 2.15 a n d a lread y then there                    o r t h a t they c o u ld possibly possess all five         should n o t be b lam e o n o u r police force.         Eu ro p e w ithout all the facts a n d enquiries               h o p e a th o ro u g h on e, let it p roduce som e
a n im proved W em bley, w ith v a n titwfOT? th twin anH               J                     wasascverc                a n d no sem blance o f o rd e r. T he re w as                senses. W ell let m e tell y o u tney have all o f
                                                                                                                                                                                      these things a n d i f th e public w ould o nly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      P e te r Shaw, B runswick W o rk s, F orge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  L a n e, O ughtibridge. Sheffield.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          is despicable.                                                 positive courses o f ac tion which will be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         m a n d a to ry s o far a s football m anagem ent
all the n ow m uch t ru m p ete d                                th ? « « n i{ r* V n fiM      ro o m o n the terracing a t either c o m e r to a c co m m o d ate the                                                                                                                                        M rs J G raham , M rs K S haw , M rs A
                                                                                                                                                                                      t re a t th em w ith th e respect which they ju s t­                                                                L eachm in, J Betts (address supplied).                        is concerned.
virtues o f all seating, copi- p a tr o l inside the fence b e in e
o u s entrances, spacious sur- J v a i , a b I e t 0 t h e p’u b I i *
r o u n d s , public tra n sp o r t to                          jh e        arise
                                                                                               fans b u t ^
                                                                                               terraces
                                                                                                                  w erc n o t d irecled t o          u f c l y 0f « n p ly

                                                                                                  T h e blam e lies n o t w ith th e average b o b b y o r th e fans,
                                                                                                                                                                                      ly deserve a n d w o rk w ith them as a gainst
                                                                                                                                                                                      th em , th en m a y b e peace will reign am ongst
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  A ‘no-win*                                                                                                                 A n d let u s h o p e th a t recom m endations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         will b e in perspective. P rofessional soccer
the d o o r, a n d good access
f r o m a n v w h e r e in t h e -
!» u m rv
                                                         _ .            .    ., ,
                                                         E ntra nce sh o u ld also b e
                                                     restricted to the side o f th e
                                                                                        .      the buck s to p s a t the too
                                                                                                  ,,     *        - l ‘nc luP-
                                                                                                  H ow ever, I m ust also register m y p ro te st a t the vile lies
                                                                                                                                                                                      m en.
                                                                                                                                                                                          W e should all ta k e responsibility fo r o u r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  situation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  A S a n ex-resident o f Sheffield w h o spent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Offensive                                                    .is aga in enjoyed by som e, but n o t all, o f the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         popu latio n . Expensive solutions, a n d a s
    _V                                               terraces instead o f, as hap*
                                                               a t H illsborough, a n
                                                                                              th at have been directed a t the Liverpool fans.
                                                                                                  O u r m ates a n d loved ones died, w e w a n te d to help them .
                                                                                                                                                                                      ow n actions a n d if we d o n ’t a n d things go
                                                                                                                                                                                      w rong, then w e sh o u ld n o t b e able to lay
                                                                                                                                                                                      b lam e o n the shoulders o f others. I feel s o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  m a n y hap p y h o u rs in O w lerton stadium ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  alw ays ably policed b y Sheffield officers, 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           to bereaved                                                   gro u n d im provem ents m ust b e funded by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         thc gam e an d not by the public purse.
I 5n » S «                 1                     r e n tra n c e from b e h in d th e         we w ould n o t hin d er any o n e w h o tried to help a n d I feel                                                                                 feci I m ust write to express m y sym pathy                                                                               C R yan, Colley L ane, M irfield, W est
a n d the financial su p p o rt o f fa n s already in th e g ro u n d .                       --------- fo r the—c o w ard----------------                                            m uch sorrow fo r all conc ern ed b u t because                                                                     IN the afterm ath o f the H illsborough d is ­                Y orkshire.
                                                                                              sorry                         s w ho c a n --invent
                                                                                                                                            -------- s u chHdisgusting
                                                                                                                                                               - - - - -
                                                                                                                                                                                      the policem an m u s t suffer in silence th en I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a n d s u p p o rt for thc police have received so
■* s t a d i u m a v a i l a b l e f o r                                                                                                                                                                                                          m u c h o p p r o b r iu m f o r th is fo o tb a ll     aste r, I have listened to th e extensive
                                                         F in a lly , th e p e n n in g       stones,                                                                                 m ust a ppeal to the general public, fo r them
o th e r m a jo r m atches could                                                                                                                                                                                                                  disaster.                                               c o v e r a g e o f t h e e v e n ts o n lo c a l a n d
o ffer a q uick an d d ra m atic fences should b e rem oved                                       G o to Anfield a n d see the flowers a n d scarves at the K o p                     to give a th o u g h t t o this fine b o d y o f m en                                                               national radio a n d T V . an d re ad th c
                                                     a lto g eth e r because, in m y          to see how m u ch we loved them an d th en say thc stories a re                         w hose jo b is th an k les s in m an y cases, an d              T ru e to form , th e police a re being                                                                             S IN C E th a t tragic event w e (th e general
s tatem e n t o f intent.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 re p o rts in the press. I w ish to com m ent on
                                                     o p in io n , th is w a s th e           true!                                                                                   envied by none. I’d like t o see them give                  b tam ed fo r a situ atio n w hich w as neither                                                                        n o n ex p e rt public) have been subjected to
    A n d t o those Oat earthists g r e a t e s t c a u s e o f t h e                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     w h a t I consider thc over-reaction in last                   opinions expressed as facts, highly co n tra ­
                                                                                                 C M axw ell, C en tra l A venue, B ro m b o ro u g h , W irral,                      cred it a n d praise w h e re it is d ue. A fter all        o f their m aking n o r o f th e ir choosing. N o t
s o b e s o t t e d w i t h t h e i r tragedy.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            T uesday’s S ta r (A pril 18) in defence o f the               dicto ry “ evidence” from m an y sources,
                                                                                              M erseyside.                                                                            w e d o h av e th e fioest police force in th e             o n e o f the Sheffield officers should feel any
c r e a k in g V i c to r ia n s ta d i-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  p o lic e , a n d in p a r t ic u l a r t h e o p in io n s    ac cusa tions a n d s o on .
                                                         H a d they n o t been there.                                                                                                 w orld.                                                     guilt a b o u t the O w lerton disaster bccausc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          expressed by Pc P aul M id d u p conccm ing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  th e responsibility lies w ith o u t d o u b t w ith
«n^nht°fromn^ ^ Pf                            <»'r^ould t a l S
s en tim en t from sense, I saj£ a b J c (0 m o v e s i d e w a y s .                                                                                                                     W e a r e very p r o u d to h ave a policem an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  tw o g roups o f fans.                                  the s ituation in Leppings Lane.                                   S o m ay I m ak e j u s t o n e c om m ent? It is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         this: th o u g h o u t the whole sad business,
th a t i f the c hie f executive o f                           he ^ s S ’                                                                                                             a s p a r t o f o u r family.                                                                                           I quote: “T h e vast m ajority h a d been
                                                                      AS a L iverpudlian, a n d in th e a fterm ath o f H illsborough, I                                                                                                              Firstly, w ith those w h o h a d tickets b u t                                                                     th o se responsible f o r the gam e — the FA,
L iv e r p o o l F o o tb a l l C lu b               ,      ,b , .                                                                                                                        K & M S avage, C hape ltow n.                                                                                   d rinking — an d m y people should n o t be                    th e League, som e clubs including Sheffield
                                          P lease let us look fo r solu-
                                                                      w ould like to say, first, th a n k y o u to M r W right, S o u th                                                                                                          w h o , surely know ing there w ould b e a vast
c a n talk seriously o f c o m ­
bining w ith Everton t o p ro ­
d u ce a su p er stadium , if they
                                       tio n s , n o t scapegoats.    Y orkshire's C h ief o f Police, fo r the good sense an d sensi*
                                          S J E v e r i tt , C o t s w o l d
                                                                      tivity o f his m essage o n C h annel 4; t o the m a n y policcm en
                                                                                                                                                                                     Skill and                                                    cro w d all aro u n d th e stadium , nevertheless
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  t u m e d u p a t the last m inute. Second —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          asked to go in to no-w in s ituations like
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          this.” Surely the policc are there to m ain ­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          tain law -and-order, a n d n o t object to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         W ednesday — have scuttled aw ay, deny­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ing a n y responsibility. N o w , M r Peter
c a n affo rd it, then a n y ob- R o a d . W isewood, Sheffield.
                                                                      o f Sheffield w h o (in the w o rd s o f a L iverpool cfoctor) w ere
                                                                      “ fantastic” in their offers to help the injured a n d dying; to
                                                                      the rescue services, m edical personnel a n d o th e r present,
                                                                                                                                                                                     dedication
                                                                                                                                                                                     N E V E R before have I felt the need to vent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  an d m o re im portantly — guilt lies squarely
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  at the feet o f thc m an y Liverpool fans w ho
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  arrived w ithout tickets b u t w ho were clear­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          do in g a du ty , because it is distasteful.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Police w ho perform acts o f b ravery are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        W right, C h ief C onstable o f S o uth Y o rk ­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        shire, h as stated t h a t he is responsible for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        his officers a n d w hat tbey d id o r d id n ’t do.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          com m ende d an d services like fire, a m b u ­
 3.6pm kick-offs                                                      including the m an y sp ec tato r’s w ho gave th e ir help so
                                                                      unstintingly.
                                                                         I also t h a n k th o se people o f Sheffield. N o ttin g h a m an d
                                                                                                                                                                                     m y feelings publicly o n a n y subject, ho w ­
                                                                                                                                                                                     ever having en d u red tw o d a ys o f press, T V ,
                                                                                                                                                                                     a n d ra d io co verage o f thc H illsborough
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ly p re p are d , as T V pictures show , to force
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  illegal en try into the stadium . It w as the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ac tio n o f these fans w hich m ade a n already
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          lance. d o cto rs, nurses, sea, air, m o u n tain ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          a n d caving rescue services all a tte n d acci­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          d e n ts a n d disasters irrespective o f thc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        H e is to b e warm ly c ongratulated, w hat­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ever thc findings o f thc official enquiry. M r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        W right has, by his conduc t an d statem ents,
 C O U L D all next season’s a fte rn o o n m atches kick-ofT a t o th er p arts o f th e c o u n try w h o cam e forw ard t o redress the                                           disaster. I feel in t h e n am e o f sanity I m ust          difficult situation d isastrous.                                                                                      p ro v e d th a t he is a g iant a m o n g pigmies.
 3.6pm so as not to forget this tra g ic time?                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            cause.
                                                                      balance following th e lurid description o f Liverpool fa n s ’                                                p u t pen to p a p e r in d efence o f the police.               A s usual, the police find themselves in a                                                                            T h o se o f us w ho live in S o uth Y orkshire
    T his should apply to all divisions, a s six m inute s longer behaviour hy a few Sheffield p eople (descriptions take n up                                                           N o -o n e ca n feel a nything b u t shock,              *no-win* situation being m ad e the scape­                  I feel th at it is deeply offensive to the                sh o u ld b e grateful to have a m a n o f such
 js no th in g to wait in a lifetime, a n d this disaster will never a s m a n n a from heaven by som e sections o f th e ta bloid                                                   horTor a n d a b o v e all sym pathy fo r all the            go ats fo r a tragedy und o u b ted ly caused by        families o f thc bereaved to read reports as                  integrity a n d C h ief C onstable, Jet us hope
 be forgotten.                                                                                                                                                                       friends, relatives a n d lovea ones o f the vic­             th e loutish behaviour o f others.                      published o n the fro n t page o f Tuesdays                   th a t o th ers will follow his example.
                                                                     press: I should like t o think t h a t the la tte r will rue the d a y
                                                                                                                                                                                     tims. I certainly a m n o different a s I w rite                                                                     S tar.
    D Wydell, Barnsley su p p o rte r (address supplied).            a s decent-m inded people everw here sh o w their disgust by                                                                                                                     Rev Ivor H aythom e, D a shw ood R oad,                                                                               W a lla c c R e e d , B a n n e rd a le R o a d ,
                                                                     never buying their so-called new spapers again).                                                                from the biite r experience o f losing a d e a r             A lford, Lincolnshire.                                      C C TigwelL E d m u n d R o a d , Sheffield.              Sheffield.


  New approach                                                           We shall n o t kncAv w h e th e r there were s om e incidents o f


               ,              ...  r              j .

t h i n e s n e e d .1 f r e s h only he hoped th at thcv will
                                                                     m isbehaviour by so m e fans u ntil thc evidence h as been
                                                                     senled. but even i f there w ere, it is grossly unjust 10 im ply
                                                                     th a t all Liverpool su p p o rters can be placcd in the sam e
IN the m idst o f ihe tc m b ic fa n s a ro u n d the co u n try in category: thc vast m a j o n t y o f them a r e d c c e m p c o r le a lo n g
tragedy I feci one o r tw o thc last few days, but it c a n w ith genuine fooiball f i n s th ro u g h o u t thc co u n try
                                                                           .....................................                            .
                                                                                                                                                                                    Queue
                                                                                                                                                                                    jumpers                                                                                                              Faos slate W armand
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    human
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1 FFFT        a ln n c * u / i f h 1
   New approach
IN thc m idst o f thc terrible
tragedy I feci o n e o r tw o
                                                                                      Wc shall n o t know w heth er there w ere som e incidents o f
                                                                                   m isbehaviour by som e fans until th c evidence h a s been
                                                                                   settled, bui even if there were, it is e r o s r ’ ■ "njust to im ply
                                                                                   th a t all L iverpool s upporters can b e
                                              fan s around the c o u n try in category: thc vast m ajority o f them are
                                              the last few days, b u t it can with genuine football fans th ro u g h o u t * ..iuntry.
                                                                                                                                            n thc sam e
                                                                                                                                          ,< o p le along
                                                                                                                                                                       Queue
                                                                                                                                                                       jumpers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Fans slate W armand
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        human
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             I F E E L , a lo n s w ith m any
th in g s need a fresh
approach:
 • A f te r th e in itia l new s
b r e a k , a ll p u b l i s h i n g o f
photo g ra p h s o f the h ap p e n ­
ing a n d tn e tnierrogation o f
                                              only be hoped th at they will
                                              have som e influence o n the
                                              sm all b a n d o f h o o l i g a n s
                                              w h o attac h themselves to
                                              every club.
                                                  M ichael W a llk , St Quen*
                                                                                      I fear th at M r M id d u p o f the Sheffield Police F e d e r­
                                                                                   ation. an d the T o ry M P w hose n am e escapes m e. along
                                                                                   w ith a few m ore, ca n n o t know thc extent o f dism ay felt on
                                                                                   M erseyside by thc insult which w a s a d d e d to injur)' by their
                                                                                   w ords.
                                                                                                                                                                       R E G R E T T A B L Y no
                                                                                                                                                                       am ount o f precautions could
                                                                                                                                                                       he ad*-quate a t the present
                                                                                                                                                                       time. E»en it a separate pen
                                                                                                                                                                       » a s protided for each indi­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Patnick
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             I WRITE to express my utter disbelief and disgust at how
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             h u n d r e d s o f S h e ff ie ld e rs ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             p ro u d o f o u r L o rd M ay o r,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Phyllis S m ith . L a d y M a y o r­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ess D ia n e , a n d C o u n c il
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Leader Clive B etts, fo r thc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             way ihcy c c n d u cicd them*
                                                                                      I would a ls o like to disociate m yself (a n d s o I w ould                                                                                                                                           crass                    ih e c o n trib u tio n o f H a lla m M P Irvine       selves o n o u r b e h a lf during
all associated persons by the                 t i n D r i v e , B r a d w a y , guess w ould m ost, i f n o t all. o f the p eople o l Liverpool),                     vidual j o u would still find
press o r television should                   S h effield.                                                                                                             some people clambcrin" o ut.                                                                                          P atnick h as been re garding the H illsborough disaster.                       ihe stressful s ituations they
                                                                                        from the inflam m atory co m m en t re p o rted as being m ad e                                                                                                                                                                                                                      have altende d.
cease so as n o t to c o m pound                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 W ithin h o u rs o f thc event, a n d despite n o t having been
                                                                                        by a L iverpool solicitor — th a t Liverpool people w ould                        H o o lig an behaviour w as
the heartache.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               a t thc m atch , he asserted o n ra d io th a t the tra gedy could                 Th e y ca m e over as w arm ,
• In s te a d o f s e le c tin g a           D O N ’T blam e the police, not forget o r forgive. H e has n o right to speak for th e rest not (he direct cause a t Hills*                                                                                                                    have been avoided h ad identity c a rd s been in use.                           h u m an , feeling people, set-
s p ec ific g r o u p t o re ce ive          it's wrong, a n d to o easy. o f us.                                                                                     borough, but nevertheless the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 C o n g ratu latio n s, Irvine, by m y reckoning y o u were the             tin g a n exam ple to eve ryone.
very large sum s o f m oney                  D o n ’t blam e the F A , d o n 't           T h e p eople o f L iverpool, n o less th a n the people o f free*for*all a ttitu d e w hich
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             first person w ith th c gall to m ake political ca p ita l o u t of                 I suppose there will be
(as n o a m o u n t o f ca sh can            b l a m e g o v e r n m e n t Sheffield, a re big-hearted an d will surely forgive m istakes exists today doubtless m ade
                                                                                                                                                                      som e contribution.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ygmg,                    th a t one by alm ost a day.                                                    m any sad ta s k s fo r them to
m ak e u p fo r the Joss o f life)           decisions. I f yo u love fool* — a ren ’t w e all c a pable o f them ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 O n T uesday n ig h t h e ap p e a re d very stoney-faced on                d o . I d o n o t e nvy them , b u t I
set u p a N a tio n a l Socccr               bail, blam e yourself.                        W ould it b e to o m u ch to h ope fo r t h a t a lasting trib u te to         F ans regularly clim b w alls
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             n a tio n a l T V new s to reveal th a t he h a d “ sp o k en to m any          d o s u p p o rt them .
Disaster F u n d . T h e families                 F o r years you have w or­ those w ho have d ied, to the injured, a n d t o grieving rela­ t o g e t in to g ro a n d s ; th e y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             police officers w h o were kicked, punched a n d u rin a te d on                    J o a n n e L k e o c e , Villiers
o f victims in sm aller tra ge­              s h i p p e d a n d p r a i s e d t h e tives w ould b e — eventually — a grow th -m friendship seem quite enable to queue in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             by Liverpool fans.” T h e fans, he threw in fo r g o o d                         Drive, Sheffield 2.
dies also need their inunedi*                scum who, u n d er the guide between th e tw o cities? It w o uld ta k e tim e, b u t perh ap s it an orderly fashion like (bey
                                                                                                                                                                      used to do. I can Just im agine                                                                                        m easure, *'had been d n n k in g heavily” — all 25,000 o f
a te m oney problem s solved.                o f f o o t b a ll f a n s , c a u s e d w ould b e the m ost fitting m em orial?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             them ?
In th e long term a house*
h o ld p e n s io n c o u ld be
g ranted a n d children given a
                                             h a v o c in to w n , c i t y a n d           D .P ., S t A lbans, H e rtfordshire (N a m e a n d address how th e y su rg e d in to th e
                                             s t a d i u m , b y f i g h t i n g , supplied).                                                                         g r o u n d s w beo (he p o lic e
                                                                                                                                                                      opened the gate a( Leppings
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 A nd by thc w ay, h o w " m a n y ” o f the 800 police officers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             on d u ty d id you actually speak to. M r P atnick?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Donate the
p aym e nt in their early years.
    J Reaney, Ear! M arshall
                                             d ru n k e n e s s , fo u l
                                             m o u th e d n e s s a n d p itc h
                                             in v a s i o n w h e n a g o a l is
                                                                                                                                                                      Lane.
                                                                                                                                                                          T h e re seem s to be a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Weil I was there. Irvine, a n d yes I saw a little kicking a n d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             pun ch in g , b u t I saw ra th e r m ore people being given th c kiss
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             prize cash
                                             scored. Y o u co n d o n e these I W A S absolutely disgusted t o read a n an ie le blam in g g re a te r desire oowadays to                                                                                                                    o f life o r having their hea rts pum ped. T h e kicks a n d                    I T H I N K it w o uld b e a good
R o a d , Sheffield.
                                             pathetic, brainless idiots by L iv e r p o o l s u p p o r t e r s f o r t h i s t e r r i b l e d i s a s t e r a t push and shove; indeed the                                                                                                   tunchcs arose, it seem ed to me. o u t of th e fru stratio n o f              gesture if th e priae m oney
                                             d r i n k i n g a n d s o c i a li s i n g H illsborough.
                                             w ith them.
                                                                                                                                                                      rising generstioa seems to                                                                                             f ans w hose relatives a n d friends were d ea d o r dying.                     which th e finalists o f this
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             y e a r ‘s W o r l d S n o o k e r
O N E accepts t h a t there is a                                                          T h e police have full responsibility fo r cro w d c o n tro l, it enjoy a free-for-all. I f you                                                                                                       T h e y w anted to speed u p thc reaction o f th e a u thorities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             C h a m p io n s h ip receive w as
r i s k , h o w e v e r s m a l l , in           M ike Jones, M a n o r P ark w as the police w h o decided o n w hich e n d s the s u p p o rters wait to board a bus o r a train                                                                                                           an d thc to o few helping h ands to help th e ir loved ones. I                  do n ate d t o the H illsborough
flying o r o th e r m o d es o f             R o a d , M a n o r P a r k , should occupy an d it w as the police w h o h a d insufficient you fm d many young people                                                                                                  *i       '             can u nderstand th a t , c a n 't you?                                          D isaster A p p e al. •
tra n sp o rt w here a n accident            Sheffield.                                 num bers ou tsid e the gates a t L eppings L ane.                             pushing to the front o f (he                                                                                               I a ls o saw fans being th um ped by police officers w ho,
o f this m agnitude m ay have                                                                                                                                         queue. It is part o f the “ every                                                                                                                                                                         A n d I th ic k the sponor*
                                                                                          C ro w d co n tro l begins w hen th e su p p o rters arriv e in                                                                                                                                    q u ite u n dersta ndably w ere confused a n d s om ew ha t w ary
h ap p e n e d . It co u ld th en                                                                                                                                     m a n fo r him self* a ttitu d e                                                                                                                                                                       o f the co m petition should
                                                                                        Sheffield n o t a t the gates o f the g ro u n d . T h e incom petance                                                                                                                               o f w hat w as going o n a ro u n d them . I saw o n e fan try ing to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             also give t o the fund.
have been easier t o under*                  IT is am azing th a t there a re o f the S o uth Y orkshire Police w as unbelieveable. T h e week which exists nowadays.                                                                                                                        help tea r do w n the w ire fcnce w h o w as repeatedly dragged
stand. B ut w hen 95 lives are               alw ays tickets available for previously I attende d the L iverpool/W ednesday m atch                                                                                                                                                           aw ay by a police officer w ho obviously sUll h a d n 't grasped                   M Beech. S ta tion R o a d ,
                                                                                                                                                                          H aving said all th e above,                                                                                                                                                                       L a u g h to n C o m m o n ,
lost in circum stances w here                those w ho like to b e seen at plus th e G r a n d N a tio n a l w here crow ds o f over 100.000 I was indeed grateful to note                                                                                                                  the en o rm ity o f the disaster.
t h e r e re a l l y s h o u l d h a v e     sporting venues. A s m ost o f a ttende d these events a n d c ro w d c o n tro l b y the Liverpool how w d l the spectators r a l­                                                                                                                 T h e fan struggled free aga in a n d aga in to re tu rn to th e            Sheffield.
been n o risk, it is m uch                   these p eople h ad n o alle­ police w as impeccable.                                                                                                                                                                                            fcnce. F o r all I k n o w his son o r d au g h te r w as dying behind
                                                                                                                                                                      lied round, in th e appalling
h ard e r t o accept.
     I t w o u ld b e n a iv e to
                                             giance t o either o f the team s
                                              tn v o lv e d , w h a t r i g h t h a d      I accept th e fact t h a t som e fa n s will d rin k , b u t this is n o t circum stances, to assist the
                                                                                        the issue. T h e police know th e re will be drinkers am o n g st l e s s f o r t u n a t e o n e s a t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             it. In M r P atnick“s grey a n d sad w orld this p o o r m a n is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             p ro b a b ly a d ru n k e n y o b o b en t o n m ayhem an d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Main cause
im agine t h a t all o f football's
p r o b l e m s w ill d i s a p p e a r
                                              .h e y t o o c c u p y t b e s a f e
                                              stand seats?
                                                  K ay H u n m o o d (address
                                                                                        the cro w d a n d they should have been contingency plan s Hillsborough.
                                                                                        m ade to d eal with this.                                                         P e te r Fisher, D o n c a s te r   Irvine Patnick (left) escorts M rs Thatcher and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             destruction.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 I a m not so a rro g a n t a s to a tte m p t to iudge w ha t precipi­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             of trouble
w i t h t h e s c e n e s o f u n ity                                                      R W ilkinson, S tudfield R o a d , W ise w ood, Sheffield.                 R oad. Rotherham.                        Douglas Hurd on their tour of Hillsborough                                    ta te d S a tu rd a y 's tra gedy. I p ra y for the d e a d b u t I also        I C A N N O T h e lp b u t
between th e v ario u s sets o f              supplied).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     p ra y th a t those c h a rg e d with th e task o f investigating th e          express th e view th a t, b u t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              H illsborough d isaster a re able to filter o u t co n trib u tio n s          f o r t h e e n o r m i t y o f th e



Authorities, not victims, to blame
A S s o m e o n e w h o liv e s o n W a d s l e y
L a n e a n d w i t n e s s e d t h e c r o w d s en
                                                               IT w as w ith u tte r disbelief a n d m o u n t­          events. M ista k es w ere m ad e , b u t let's
                                                                                                                         ho p e w e lea rn from them .
                                                                                                                                                                              ticket allocation o r n o t is im m a tenat,
                                                                                                                                                                              t h e y w e re g iven a n a l l o c a t io n a n d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      alc o h o l to b e c onsum e d b y s upporters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      o n Saturday? In fa ct, w h y w e re they
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             like those o f Irvine P atnick w hich a re based o n blind p re ju ­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             dice a n d b igotry.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 They will need to weigh u p o nly fact* a n d real issues if
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              such a tra g ed y is to be avoide d in future.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Steve C artfu ll, A rgyle R o a d , M ee rsb ro o k . Sheffield.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             t r a g i c a c c i d c n t a t H ills ­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             b o r o u g h . m u c h m o re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             em phasis w o uld have been
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             put o n th e d ru n k e n behav­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             iour a n d 'tick et scrounger**
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             for. w hat I personally think.,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             was a m a in c a u s e o f the
                                                               ing anger th a t we read th e fro n t page of
r o u te t o th e H ills b o ro u g h sem i­                   T he S ta r (A pril 18) attem p tin g to c o n ­             F in a lly , to all th e people o f Liver­        should have ab id e d b y it. F orest sold all          selling them a n y a t all?                                                                                                            trouble.
                                                               vince w hat y ou obvio u sly reg a rd are the                                                                  their tickets, so c o u ld n o t have been                                                                     I A M a L iverpudlian b u t n o t a football fan. N evertheless
fin a l, I feel i t is i m p o r t a n t t o c o r r e c t                                                               p o o l, ac ce pt m y deepest h eartfelt sym ­                                                               2 W h y did fa n s w h o d id n o t have a                                                                                                  I t h a s a lw a y s b ee n so
                                                               gullible public o f Sheffield t h a t the                                                                      over-allocated.                                                                                                the sadness I felt o v e r th e last tw o days gave w ay to anger
s e v e r a l i n a c c u r a c i e s in y o u r c o v e r ­                                                             p a th y a n a c n e f. A s a Sheffielder —                                                                  ticket travel do w n in the h ope o f getting                                                                                          before. I h av e n o d o u b t th a t
                                                               H illsborough tragedy w as th e result of                                                                                                                              in w h e n they k new it w a s a sell-out?             a n d despair. T h e re ason fo r this w as quite sim ply the insen­
a g e o f t h c tr a g e d y .                                                                                           Hillsborough b o rn an d bre d — seeing                  Soccer su p p o rters have a responsi­                                                                                                                                                      F IF A p re s id e n t Ja c q u e s
                                                               som e so rt o f d ru n k e n ra m p ag e o n the                                                                                                                                                                              sitivity o f H allam M P Irvine P atnick.
                                                                                                                         such h o rr o rs o n m y ow n d o o rs te p will     bility fo r the safety o f themselves and               3 W h y did soccer's so-called football-                                                                                               G eorges w a s rem em bering
    F ir s tly , th e L i v e r p o o l s u p p o rte r s      p a rt o f Liverpool fans.                                                                                                                                                                                                       WTjen all o th ers expressed th e ir deep regret a t w h a t h a p ­
                                                                                                                         live w ith m e forever.                              their fellow supporters. W e ca n n o t go              fa n atics leave it until 2 0 m in u te s before                                                                                       th e re p u ta tio n t h a t British
were certainly n o t d ru n k n o r badly                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    pened a n d q u estioned so m e o f the org a n isa tio n a l aspects
                                                                   I f this w as th e case, w here a re the                 B R ic h m o n d , P e n is to n e R o a d .      o n blam ing everyone else in sight when                the g a m e t o m ak e their w a y t o th e                                                                                            soccer fans h av e b u ilt up fo r
behaved; th ey were a lm o st totally good                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   th a t led t o the c a rn a g e a t H illsborough, w h a t did h e chose
                                                               television pictures to ad d credence to                   Sheffield.                                           som ething like this h appens.                          gro u n d ?                                                                                                                            them selves over t h e years
h u m o u re d a n d disciplined.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            to d o b u t score political po in ts by going o n a b o u t t h e sale
                                                               th o se reports? W here are the eyewit­                                                                            S C o llin s , S h e ff ie ld ( a d d r e s s           I spent 15 years o f m y life su p p o rtin g                                                                                      w hen going ab ro a d .
    T h e a r e a w as j u s t as congested a s any            nesses a m o n g the public? p erh ap s m ore                                                                                                                                                                                 o f alcohoL
                                                                                                                                                                              supplied).                                              Sheffield W ednesday. I s to o d o n the                                                                                                    S o m e m em o rie s are short.
n o rm a l S a tu rd a y a f te rn o o n w hen                 im po rtan tly , w h a t are th e m otives o f                                                                                                                                                                                   T h e real cause o f th e d isaster h as been the obsession w ith
                                                                                                                         L E T us n o t b lam e th e club, the police o r                                                             K e p a n d th at very terrac e m o re tim es                                                                                           I a m in n o w ay suggesting
Sheffield W ednesday a re a t h om e, and                      th e p eo p le w ho have con c o cted these                                                                                                                                                                                   the few m indless ho o lig an s w h o m a r the en jo y m en t o f this
                                                                                                                         the F A ticket allocation. We sh o u ld ask                                                                  th a n I care to rem em ber. I'v e been in                                                                                              th a t they a re all b a d . b u t the
o n several occasions in th e recent past                      stones?                                                                                                        W A L K IN G from W o rrall to Hills­                                                                          sp o rt, a t t h e expense o f the real fans w ho vastly o u tn u m b e r
                                                                                                                         questions a b o u t any L iverpool s u p ­                                                                   c ro w d s o f 60.000 a n d n ever Come to                                                                                              m ajority alw ays suffer from
b o t h v is itin g a n d h o m e sup p o rters*                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             th e latter.
                                                                  P e t e r an d J i l l J o h n s o n . T re s w e ll   p o rte rs w h o arrived a t the g ro u n d w ith­   b o ro u g h via W adsley o n th a t S a tu rd a y ,'   h a rm . But then, I c a n never rem em ber                                                                                             the few.
beh a v io u r h a s given m u ch m o re cause                                                                                                                                I passed thre e p u b s, a n d a t 11.55am                                                                        C o m m e n ts like Irvine P atn ick ’s only serve to reinforce
fo r c o n c e r n th a n on this p artic ular                 C rescent. H illsborough. Sheffield.                      o u t tickets, d ete rm ined to get in a t any                                                               a n y o n e going to a football m atch for                                                                                                  M y u tm o s t praise goes t o
                                                                                                                         c o s t, an d a ls o s upporters w ith tickets       they were all choc-a*bloc inside a n d                  an y th in g o th er th a n enjoying a g o o d         th e idea th a t ail fo o tb a ll fans a re n o t h u m an b u t som e k in d    all the helpers, b u t especially
Saturday.                                                                                                                                                                     crow ded outside.                                                                                              o f lesser b ea st th a t needs caging. W e n ow k n o w the c ost o f
                                                                                                                         w h o arrived in g o o d tim e b u t then                                                                    g am e o ffo o tb a ll!                                                                                                                 the p o lk v . a n d in p articular.
    Secondly, the football clu b ’s inability                                                                            chose to h ang a r o u n d th e s tre e ts instead       A t 2.40pm I re tu rn ed h o m e on the 65                                                                 th a t m entality.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         M r s Roth H uftoo, M o w so n C rescent.                                                                                            R o g er M arshall.
t o p rovide a d e q u ate c a r parking an d                  IN T H E afterm ath o f H illsborough,                    o f m aking a n orderly entrance in to the           b u s via D ykes H a ll R o a d a n d passed                                                                      P e te r M c N u tt, M a c h o n B ank. N e th e r E dge. Sheffield.
refreshm ent facilities fo r its custom ers                                                                                                                                                                                           Sheffield.
                                                               e v e ry o n e a n d e v e r y t h i n g h a s b e e n    g ro und.                                            th o se pubs again. T h e b u s I w as o n w as                                                                                                                                                    M rs Ireo e S la ck , N o r to n
results in congestion w hich forces ca r                       blam ed fo r the tragedy, yet n o one                                                                          stopped by several Liverpool lads as
ow ners to p a r k up to tw o m iles aw ay                                                                                   D o n ’t b lam e the police fo r o pening                                                                                                                                                                                                        P ark R o a d . Sheffield.
                                                               seem s to have attached any blam e to the                 the gate: p eople w ere being crushed o u t­         they asked t h e b u s drive r the quickest
a n d th en to w alk to th e g ro u n d . Both                 t h o u s a n d s o f fa n s o u ts id e a t th re e                                                                                                                   O V E R a week a fte r the tragic events o f           I A M sure th a t, like m yself, th e m ajority o f Sheffielders
                                                                                                                         side. O nc e th e g ate w as opened a n d the        w ay to H illsborough as they w ere late.
fa cto rs inhibit a n ea rly arrival a t the                                                                                                                                                                                          t h e H illsborough disaster, the tim e h as
g ro u n d . ■
    D u r in g t h e re c e n t m a tc h ag a in s t
                                                               o ’clock.
                                                                   W h a t w ere th ey do in g there a t th at
                                                                                                                         fans b egan t o flo o d in it w o u ld have
                                                                                                                         been virtually im possible to d ire ct them
                                                                                                                                                                              T h e y were n o t ro a rin g d ru n k , b u t h ad
                                                                                                                                                                              obviously h a d m o re th a n one o r tw o.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      n o w c o m e fo r all tru e football fans to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      reflect an d a s k them selves w h a t they
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             w h o wish t o dissociate them selves from th e re m a rk s m ad e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             by M P Irv in e P atn ick .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                His m a n n e r w a s cruel a n d insensitive; h is allegations ca n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             The initial
M a n c h e s te r U n ite d s u p p o rte r s from
M anc hester w ere still w aiting to get into
                                                               tim e? T h o se w ith tickets sh o u ld have
                                                               been inside long before, a n d those w ith­
                                                               o u t tickets shouldn’t have been there a t
                                                                                                                         calm ly t o less full area s, a s t h e y w o u ld
                                                                                                                         ch a rg e to th e n ea re st p o in t — it's
                                                                                                                         h u m a n n a tu re .
                                                                                                                                                                                  A t th e t o p o f D y k e s H a ll R o a d there
                                                                                                                                                                              w ere literally th o u s a n d s o f fans still
                                                                                                                                                                              m aking their w ay fr o m th e p u b s t o the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      c o u ld d o to p re vent such a d isaster ever
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      hap pe niftgaga in. T h e answ er lies w ithin
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             help n o o ne, only a d d to th e distress.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                C hristine G anby, G r o v e R o a d . MiQhouses, Sheffield.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             cause
th e gro u n d 15 m inute s a fte r th e gam e                                                                                                                                                                                        themselves.                                                                                                                             W H IL S T I s y m p a th ise
                                                               alL                                                          I t w o u ld also have caused fu rth e r          ground. T his w a s 2.45pm . T h e w alk
h ad started. T h is w ith a c row d only in                                                                                                                                                                                              T o m ake a v ow t h a t th ey will never                                                                                           deeply w ith th e relatives o f
                                                                   A s L a urie M cM enem y said o n local               delays a n d a n g e r to start checking every       tak e s a good 10 m in u te s a t least; they
the 34,000 range.                                                                                                                                                                                                                     a g a in com m it a n a c t o f violent behav­                                                                                          the d e a d a n d injured a t the
                                                               ra d io , H illsborough is one o f the safest             ticket a t th is stage, w hich explains w h y        w o u ld re a c h th e g ro u n d a t a b o u t                                                                I T O O K m y children to lay som e flowers a t the Hills­
    Y o u r coverage, w hich seeks to blam e                                                                                                                                                                                          i o u r t h a t could e n d a n g er th e lives o f                                                                                     H illsborough tra gedy, let u s
                                                               gro u n d s in the country w ith a re co rd o f           s o m a n y fa n s sull h av e their stu b s on      2.55pm , h o t a n d b o th e re d , pro b a b ly                                                              b o ro u g h gates. I t w as a quiet a n d sad m om enL T h a t m o rn ­
the victim s ra th e r th a n th e authorities,                                                                                                                                                                                       fellow supporters, a n d pledge this vow                                                                                                no t forget t h a t th e initial
                                                               staging semi-finals second to n o n e —                   their tickets.                                       sh o rt tem pered bec ause th ey w ere late                                                                    ing I w as disgusted t o h e a r Irvine P atnick s p re ad in g such
d o es n o credit to y o u r n ew spaper.                                                                                                                                                                                             t o th e m em ory o f those th a t perished.                                                                                            ca u se f o r th is w as th e
                                                               yet w hat w ent wrong?                                       P u ttin g b a c k th e kick-ofT m a y n o t      a n d the m ajority w ith 2 ’/* h o u rs ' d rin k ­                                                           terrible gossip o n th e ra d io . H a s h e n o respect o r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          T h e ones w h o w o u ld s ta n d o u t in a                                                                                       n u m b e r o f L iveipool sup­
    O n ly w hen the fans o n th e terraces                        N o single person o r th in g w as to                 h av e helped, either, if m a n y o f those          in g behind them .                                                                                             sensitivity?
hav e m o re co n tro l ov er th e ir g am e will                                                                                                                                                                                     cro w d like th a t w ould b e th e hooligan                                                                                            po rte rs w ith o u t tickets w h o
                                                               blam e. A culm ination o f m a n y things                 outside d id n o t have tickets anyw ay.                 I a m n o t suggesting the police be                                                                          A city is in m o u rn in g , a n d h e slanders.its people, before            actually “ g ate -crashed” th e
th ey be tre ated o th er th a n a s anim als by                                                                                                                              to tally ex onerated fro m all blam e. I                elem ent: they w ould po in t th e finger o f
                                                               com ing to g eth er a t th e w ro n g tim e               H a d th ey been refused entry a rio t m ay                                                                                                                         th ey h ave even h a d a cha nce t o b u ry their d ea d . E nough is            scene.
th o se w ho p rofit from the g a te m oney.                                                                                                                                  believe a h u m an e r r o r w as m ade. I              guilt a t themselves.
                                                               caused the disaster. It c o u ld have h a p ­             well h a v e ensued, an d they m ay have                                                                                                                            enough.                                                                             G e rald S tree t. B rom pton
    A M cC auley. Wadsley L a n e, Hills­                      pened a t a p o p concert o r a n y o th e r              tried t o force e ntry.                              w ould be far m o re interested to know:                    M A S c h o f i e ld , T h i r w e l l R o a d .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Sheffield.                                                W endy Richm ond, B layton R o a d , Sheffield.                               R o ad . Sheffield.
b o ro u g h , Sheffield. .                                    large g athe ring given the sam e chain o f                  W h e th e r Liverpool agreed w ith their          I W hy d id the pu b lican s allow so m uch
S h e ffie ld C ity L ib ra rie s , S u rre y S treet, S h e ffie ld S1 1XZ                                                     T elep h o n e: ( 0 7 4 2 ) 7 3 4 7 5 0

                                                                                                                                                        -       - •=




                           rage over
                         belongings
                        of dead fans By Bob Westerdale and Hugh Lawrence
                     A FRESH storm of controversy over the Hillsborough dis­
                     aster broke this afternoon as grieving families were refused
                     permission to pick up the belongings of their dead.
                       M e a n w h i l e Mrs
                     Thatcher insisted the
                     w id ely -d e sp ised ID
                     card scheme must go
                     ahead.
                        The developments came a
                     day after Home Secretary
                     Douglas Hurd and South
                     Yorkshire's Chief Constable
                     Peter Wright ordered a halt
                     to statements likely to cause                 C i t y standstill m o v e
                     further distress.                         T H E cities of Sheffield, Nottingham and Liverpool are I
                       Two writs alleging police               expccted to come to a standstill at 3pm on Saturday as a
                     m is m a n a g e d S a t u r d a y ’s     mark of respcct for the 95 who died at Hillsborough.
                     semi-final in which 95 died                  Leading Sheffield politicians are looking at turning
                    have now been served on M r                traffic lights to red during the minute’s slienee.
                     Wright.
                       T h i s a f t e r n o o n . W est       O Sadness o f the            O Angry Kenny hits
                     M idlands police issued a                 C hief Constable: P 3
                    statem ent explaining why                                               at critics: P 3
                     they were refusing to return              O Bishop speaks out:         O Fundraising events:
                    victims" possessions.                      P3                           P13
                       They said the items —
                    and where they were found                   •'We appreciate the dis-    Midlands Chief Constable
                    —
                    — ,-uu.u
                         could be ^ ».Winn.um
                                         significant inm     trcss relatives a re goin g    Geoffrey Dear, added: "The
                    identifying exactly where                through and the last thing     coroner is also aware o f the
                    rach o n h if d e a d had fallen         « « ™ " t to do is to add to   requests and u nderstands
                                                             that he said. “ However        fne r e q u ire m e n ts oT the
                       Assistant Chief Constable             those belongings could form    in q u ir y to r e t a i n th e
                    M e rv y n J o n e s a c k n o w ­
                                                             an important part of the       possessions,
                    ledged requests had been
                                                             inquiry."                         "Already belongings are
                     macie fo r th e r e tu r n ol
                     belongings.                                Mr Jones, who is working    being p h o to g ra p h e d a n d
                                                             under the direction of West      TURN TO PAGE 5

                                                              A p p e a l tops k 4 6 0 , 0 0 0
                                                             T H E Lord M ayor o f Sheffield's Hillsborough Disaster
                                                             Fund today topped £460,000. Money continues to pour in
                                                             boosted by a £15,000 contribution from Bradford City
                                                             Council.
                                                                O ‘Magnificent’ appeal response, P13.
                                                                                 <1     p►

S h e ffie ld C ity L ib ra rie s , S u rre y S tre e t, S h e ffie ld S1 1XZ                                                                       T e le p h o n e : ( 0 7 4 2 ) 7 3 4 750




              FR O M PAGE ONE
                                                                                                                            an a                                              Kl'WH




          f
              ®gsag£s^ 5 m m , , , .,„
                     ? ot know'whether              :??V?n has been embarked                  *~y--/yg           t-r?;!V--■/1"
           .^Ml*??fopiingsr;w ould be              ' IJPon-*’                >’ '                                                           But. he stressed: ••This
           .kept^umil the end o f the                   The matter was               raised
                                                                              n a j lUliC U bv
                                                                                             Oj                                         will not be a discussion
            lnqmry. which is expected to             -------
                                                     many o f the ’bereaved fami­                                                       m e e t in g a s th e o f f ic ia l
          ■ take several months. '                   lies being counselled by                                                           inquiry is now in the hands
         * !        >J- J‘*I i■                  , social        workers in the grief-
                        •Bereaved                   stricken city.                                                                      police'- W eS t M i d , a n d
              The decision not to
           release the cloln,mS
                           clothing and
                                                        In London, Prime Min­
                                           per . ister Thatcher is preparing
          t n n a li a      l
                                    ana per- .
                                                                                                                                        ® More than 500 mourner*
           so n a l effects h a s caused to order rebellious MPs to                                                                     packed a church today for
          .. immense
             ........     distress” to   .fami-
                                    lu .ia  m i- fall into ---------- line over    ID   iard s
                                                                           w , w , » iy S.4IU5.                                         the  first rimeral o f a victirr
          Iies. according to Liverpool Ministers are being urged to                                                                     o f the disaster.
         .so c ia l se r v ic e s d i r e c t o r go out and spread arsu~
          David Mason.                             ments in favour of identity                                                             Distraught relatives anc
         - He said; “ People are find­ cards.                                                        Coun Gordon Gallimore              friends wept openly as the-
          ing it very difficult toio under
                                      unaer-           an e a rg u e s th a t i f the
                                                       She                                          '■ - s p e c i a l meeting          paid their last respects to 19
                      why that course o f present spectator legislation insist d e la y could mean y e a r - o l d j o i n e r G a r -
                                                   ■s shelved, then opportuni­ waiting                                                  Church.              ■. “
                                                                                                       •    ? another 12 munins
                                                   ties for action will be lo s t __ — losing a chance to act P
                                                                                                                             months
                                                   including plans forall-seater
                                                   accommodation.
                                                                                          arteryearsofhooliganism. |
                                                                                                 _ At today's Cabinet meet­
                                                                                                 ing. which lasted about two
                                                              Hooliganism                        hours.' top ministers agreed
                                                      Officially, the G o v e r n ­ to follow M rs T hatcher's
                                                   ment .says Taylor Inquiry tough line:
                                                  recommendations could still
                                                  be included in amendments c o M                        e a n w h ile D o n c a s te r
                                                                                                    u n cil le a d e r G o rd o n
                                                  to their legislation. .
                                                                                                 G a llim o r e is to c h a ir a
                                                      The timetable has been special meeting of the South
                                                  aimed at getting laws on Y o rk s P o lice A u th o rity
                                                  identity cards through Par­ tomorrow when the Chief
                                                 liament by the summer and C onstable W right reports
                                                 to get the into operation at on the tragedy.
                                                 the tail end o f the 1990                         He says the Chief will give
                                                 season.
                                                                                                an appraisal of what hap­
                                                     But Mrs T hatch ers aides pened at the stadium.
T B T T O T O r B E c E I S r H s S I ^ im ^ S n S t o r O i. M e r s^ id e mourn their son Gary, the
 first ot the Hillsborough disaster victim s to be buned yesterday.                        24 -^


  Fan’s funeral hears priest^
  ciM cise iffiensitive debate                                                                                              T H R E E c itie s a r e b e in g a s k e d to
 •A 'P R I E S T     c r itic ise d   in se n sitiv e
 t e m a r k s o n th e H ills b o r o u g h s o c c e r
  d is a s te r a s m o r e th a n 500 m o u r n e r s
                                                               Horror of Hillsborough - P.8                                 o b s e r v e a m i n u t e ’s s i l e n c e o n S a t u r ­
                                                                                                                            d a y a fte r n o o n in        m em ory         o f th e
                                                                                                                            H ills b o r o u g h d e a d .
 -p a c k e d a c h u r c h y e s te r d a y fo r th e          T h e   m o u r n e r s w e r e le d b y M r                   C iv ic le a d e r s in L iv e r p o o l, S h e f­
  fir s t f u n e r a l o f a v ic tim .                      C h u r c h ’s p a r e n t s , D a v i d     £ n d            fie ld a n d N o t t in g h a m w e r e y e s t e r ­
     ■A    19-y e a r -o ld   jo in e r ,   M r   G ary       M a u r e e n ,     o f   D o r i c   S t r e e t ,           d a y o r g a n is in g th e tr ib u te .
  C h u r c h , w a s la id to r e s t a fte r a n            S ea fo r th .                                                    A b out     tw o    m illio n   p e o p le   are
  e m o tio n a l s e r v ic e a t C h r is t C h u r c h ,                                                                 e x p e c te d to p a y h o m a g e b y s to p p in g
                                                               ■ A m o n g th e m ou rn ers            w e r e L iv e r ­
  W a te r lo o , n e a r L iv e r p o o l. M r
                                                              p o o l's   m an ager,       K en n      y   D a lg lish ,    w h a t t h e y a r e d o in g .
  C h u r c h w a s c r u s h e d to d e a th o n th e                                                                         In L iv e r p o o l th e o b s e r v a n c e       w ill
                                                              a n d fo u r o f th e tea m .             T h e cen tre
  te r r a c e s a fter h e sw a p p e d a sta n d
                                                              fo r w a r d , J o h n A ld r id g e ,    w a s a m o n g     b e a t 3 .0 6 p m     —    th e   tim e w h e n       th e
  tic k e t to b e w ith fr ie n d s.
                                                              th o se   to read a le sso n .                                d is a s te r b e g a n .
      T h e R e v R a y H u t c h in s o n to ld th e                                                                          T h e id e a w a s s u g g e s te d           b y th e
                                                                 M r    C h urch w as    b u r ie d           at    th e
  c o n g r e g a tio n th e m e s s a g e “ o f c a r in g                                                                 v ic e -c h a ir m a n o f T r a n m e r e       R overs
                                                              G a r d e n       o f   R e s t     i n     n e a r b y
  a n d w a n tin g to sh a r e y o u r b u r d e n o f                                                                      F C , M r F r a n k C c jrfe. T h e c lu b          is
                                                              T h orn ton .
  g r ie f     h as     b een      s a d ly    m arred   by                                                                  s ta g in g a m e m o r ia l s e r v ic e a t its
                                                                 A f te r t h e s e m i-fin a l t r a g e d y th e
  in se n    s itiv e ,    d is t a s te f u l  and    very                                                                  g r o u n d , le d b y th e B ish o p o f C h e ste r .
                                                              fa m ily    h o m e w a s b ed ecked           w ith
  b a d ly   -tim e d      rem a rk s w h ic h        h ave
                                                              card s a n d m e ssa g es of sy m p a th y .                     A S h e ffie ld C ity C o u n c il s p o k e s ­
  b een      r e p o r te d c o m in g fr o m v a r io u s
                                                                   B efo re      th e fu n era l   th e   fa m ily           m a n sa id th e c o u n c il w a s o r g a n is in g
   q u a r te r s .”
                                                              l i s t e n e d t o M r C h u r c h ’s f a v o u r i t e       its o b serv a n ce .
       H e a d d e d : " B u t o n M e r se y sid e th e
                                                              r e c o r d , S h in e O n C r a z y D ia m o n d , b y           N o ttin g h a m        w ill b e   h o ld in g  a
   m e s s a g e is lo u d a n d c le a r a n d a ll th e
                                                              th e v e te r a n ro c k b a n d , P in k F lo y d .           m i n u t e ’s s i l e n c e a t 3 p m w h e n a n
   s tr o n g e r a s o u r c ity a g a in h a s to
                                                              M r C h u r c h          w a s    o n e   o f f o u r          o p e n -a ir r e m e m b r a n c e s e r v ic e w ill
   s h o w it s r e s ilie n c e to y e t m o r e p a in
                                                              c h ild r e n .                                                b e h e ld    in   th e   c ity   cen tre.
   an d   s u ffe r in g .”
Thatcher presses aheadwi                                                                                                                          P L -                          (
       ID cards Bill
T H E P R I M E M inister yesterday
insisted o n having th e football
identity card Bill o n the sta tu te
b o o k by th e a utum n, b u t h e r C a b ­
inet gave T o ry whips a t least two
w eeks to b e a t off re b el back ­
b en ch ers befo re the G o v e rn m en t                    By Colin Hughes, Political Correspondent
tries to press on w ith its passage
thro ugh Parliam ent.                           seeks a C om m ons second r e a d ­         the n ational m em bership schem e;
    M a rg a re t T h a tc h e r m ad e a       ing. M inisters hope, over the next         it enabled such a schem e to be in­
lengthy sta te m en t du rin g C o m ­          two weeks, to convince those MPs            troduced, if and w hen a schem e
m ons Q u e stio n T im e , justifying          to back off. Only w hen they are            h a d been p repared. How ever, her
the decision t o proceed . She a r ­            confident o f winning a third re a d ­      Cabinet colleagues m ade it clear
gued th a t the Bill w ould provide             ing in the Lords, a n d th en a sec­        privately th a t they did not expect
the be st vehicle for im plem enting            o n d reading in the Com m ons, will        L o rd Justice T aylor to advise
any early r e c o m m en d a tio n s that       they re sta rt the Bill’s passage           against such a scheme.
may com e from Lord Justice Tay ­               through Parliam ent — possibly                  T h e Prim e M inister a d d ed th at
 lor’s re p o rt in to last S a tu rd ay ’s     not until late May o r early June.          a 12-month delay to the Bill would
Hillsborough disaster.                             T h a t m eans, assum ing the Bill       m ea n no legislation against hooli­
    She said i t w ould be “ negli­             wins a se c o n d reading, that the r e ­   ganism being in place before next
g e n t” not to pass th e Bill this Bes­        port stage a n d third reading may          y e ar’s W o rld Cup — a point m in­
s'         b e cause its suspension             fall into an au tu m n overspill of         isters re g ard as im p ortant in d e ­
         j m e a n m ea su re s to c om bat     the session. M inisters said last           ciding w h e th e r they shou ld re c ­
hooliganism a n d im prove safety               night th a t am e nd m ents to take ac ­    om m e n d the re-entry o f British
a t soccer grounds — including                  count o f L o rd Justice T aylor’s r e ­    clubs to E u ro p e in 1990/91.
 legislation on all-seat stad ium s —           port could be taken at report                   How ever, M r K innock said last          has b e e n sadly m a rre d by the in­
having to w ait a n o th e r year.              stage in the autum n.                       night that re-entry to E urope                sensitive, distasteful and very
     Neil Kinnock, the L ab o u r lea d ­           M r K innock said th at, by press­       hung on the second p art of the              badly-tim ed re m a rks w hich have
er, accused M rs T h a tc h e r o f “ u t­      ing ahead , Mrs T h a tc h e r was in       Bill, which will enable courts to             b e e n re p o rte d coming fro m vari­
 te r inconsistency, as well as great           effect putting the identity card             prevent convicted hooligans trav­            ous q u a rte rs.”
vanity” , in h e r refusal to p o stp one       scheme off limits for the ju d g e ’s       elling to m atches abroad. L abou r               New sagents in L iverpool r e ­
 the Bill until the next session.               inquiry. H e a d d e d at a later W est­     o pp ose d only the m em bership             p o rte d a slum p in sales o f The Sun
     His atta ck o n the Prim e M inis­          m inster press conference that ev­         scheme in the first part of the Bill.         am id a n g er at its coverage of p o ­
 te r’s style angered so m e C o n se r­         eryone he had spoken to in his                 In Liverpool, the first funeral           lice allegations of d r u n k e n b e h av ­
vative backbenchers. B ut T ory                  two-day visit to Hillsborough and           o f a victim of the tragedy took             iour by fans. Som e new sagents re ­
 M Ps who oppose the G o v e rn ­                Liverpool this w eek believed that          place. T h e Rev Ray H u tchinson            fused to sell the p a p e r and
 m e n t’s d e te rm in a tio n to press         an identity card system w ould              told the service for G ary Church,           cu stom ers b u rn e d copies.
 a h e a d re m a in ed firm last night.         have w orsened the crush.                   19, at Christ Church, Seaforth:                              U nited in grief, page 3
 M any say they will vote against                   Mrs T h a tc h e r em phasised that      “ T he message o f caring a n d w ant­                           P a r lia m e n t, page 6
 the G o v e rn m en t w he n e v er it          the Bill did not itself introduce           ing to sh a re y o u r b u rd e n of grief          Anfield fences to go, page 32


                              LETTER TO THE EDITOR
Dear Sir,                                       buffeted by a police horse’s hind           Several times we had to shout at
I survived at Hillsborough only be­             quarters. T here was nothing in the         oblivious policemen to get out of
cause another spectator collapsed               crowd’s behaviour to differentiate it       our way as the stretcher parties
and died, giving me space to escape.            from any other football crowd I             moved up and down the ground.
      -* secretary of the South York-           have witnessed at similarly impor­          4. At no time did I see any assaults
s.        Police   Federation, Paul             tant games over the past 24 years.          on the police, looting of the dead, or
Miadup, has maintained that Liver­              2. As the tragedy inside the ground         anyone urinating on the police. In
pool supporters outside the ground              unfolded, a large proportion of the         the worst moments of the crush I
were very drunk and aggressive to­              attendant police force seemed               was both urinated and vomited on
wards the police, and, during rescue            shocked and dazed. Many support­            — this was not malevolence, but
attempts following the carnage, uri­            ers from this point behaved, I              death throes.
nated on police officers and as­                thought, heroically. From my posi­             I have great sympathy with the
saulted those attempting to help the            tion, trapped against a crush bar­          police officers on the ground — it
injured.                                        rier, I witnessed supporters who had        was a shocking experience. I feel re­
   I was in the queue outside the               managed to escape on to the pitch           pugnance for the statements made
now infamous Gate B before the                  begin to rip the wire mesh from the         by Paul Middup in what is a blatant
game, and was plunged into the                  enclosing fence. Two police officers        attempt to deflect justified criticism
heart of the crush just before the              joined them, dozens of others stood         away from the police. If these state­
kick-off. I remember:                           and watched. It was through this            ments regarding assault, looting,
1. A proportion o f the crowd had               hole in the fence that I escaped.           etc, are true, then I assume that they
been drinking, but I noted no exces­            3. On the pitch, some of the police         will be readily highlighted on the
sive levels of drunkenness or aggres­           officers attempted to help the in­          BBC film of the events. If he has no
sive behaviour; alcohol intake was              jured; most seemed to mill around,          such evidence, I assume Mr Middup
much less evident than at the last              appearing confused. I joined in par­        will retract and resign.
rugby international I attended.                  ties using makeshift stretchers to         Yours faithfully,
T here were complaints voiced and                ferry the injured to the medics at         M ICH AEL B R A D FO RD
catcalls directed at the police, which           the far end of the ground. Very few        Crawley, Winchester
is nothing unusual; it is difficult to           police joined us; most others con­          Hampshire
 react with equanimity when being                tinued to stand around the pitch.          20 April
                                                                                                                                                                             0 'X
 Players attenc                                                                                                                Race code o f
 funeral of first                                                         Anfield                                             practice urged'
  Hillsborough
 disaster victim
                                                                           fences 7^                                           on so lic ito r s^
                                                                                                                                           B y O u r L egal

         By Philip Shcrwell
♦W R E A T H S o f c a r n a t i o n s in
                                                                          to come^T                                                       C o rre sp o n d en t
                                                                                                                              A D O P T IO N by th e s o lic ito rs ’
                                                                                                                              p ro fe ssio n o f a C o d e o f P r a c ­
 t h e s h a p e o f a f o o t b a ll a n d t h e                                                                             t i c e t h a t w o u l d m a k e it p r o f e s ­
 F A C u p a d o r n e d t h e c o ffin o f
 t h e f i r s t v i c t i m o f S a t u r d a y ’s
                                                                                 d o w n / ^                                  sio n a l m is c o n d u c t fo r s o lic i­
                                                                                                                              t o r s to d i s c r i m i n a t e on
  H illsb o ro u g h d i s a s t e r to b e                                                                                   g ro u n d s of ra c e o r sex in any
 b u rie d y e ste rd a y .                                                          FOOTBALL                                 p r o f e s s i o n a l d e a l i n g s w i t h c li­
       Y ou’ll N e v e r W a lk A lo n e , th e                                                                               e n ts , e m p lo y e e s , b a r r i s t e r s
 a n th e m o f L iv erp o o l’s K o p ,                                          By J o e Lovejoy                            an d o th e r so licito rs is b e in g
 r a n g o u t a s t h e coffin o f M r G a ry                                                                                urg e d by th e R ace R e la tio n s
 C liu rc h , 19, w a s c a rrie d in to a n d                                                                                C o m m itte e                of th e              Law
 o u t o f C h ris t C h u rc h , W a te rlo o ,                       L I V E R P O O L a n d E v e rto n yes­
                                                                       te rd a y a n n o u n c e d th a t th e i r p e ­      S o c ie ty ,
  n e a r L iv erp o o l.
                                                                       r i m e t e r fences will b e rip p e d o u t                In a r e p o r t p u b l i s h e d y e s t e r ­
       A m o n g Ih e 500 m o u r n e r s
                                                                       b e f o re th e ir next h o m e m atch e s,            day, t h e c o m m i t te e s a y s it d o e s
  w e r e K e n n y D a lg lis h . L iv erp o o l
                                                                       P e te r R o b in so n , th c Liverpool                 not b e lie v e th a t th e c u r r e n t
  F C m a n a g e r , a n d fo u r p la y e rs .                                                                              r u le s o f t h e p ro f e s s io n g o far
  J o h n B a r n e s . R ay H o u g h t o n .                         chic f cxccjitive. said a f te r a five-
                                                                                                                               e n o u g h to o u t l a w r a c i a l d i s ­
  G a ry A b le lt a n d J o h n A ld rid g e ,                        h o u r m e e tin g w ith E v c rto n o ffi­
                                                                                                                               c r im in a tio n a s th e y o n ly c o v e r a
  w ho re ad th e le s s o n . J o h n                                cia ls t h a t th e b a r rie r s w o uld b e re ­
                                                                                                                               r e f u s a l to a c t for a c l i e n t on
  B a r n e s s a id a t le a s t tw o p la y e rs                     p la c e d w ith a "s a fe ty c o r r i d o r ” —       g ro u n d s of th e c o lo u r , e t h n i c o r
  w o u ld a t t e n d e v e ry o n e o f t h e 95                     div id in g fans from t h c pitches,                    n a tio n a l o rig in , s ex o r c r e e d .
   f u n e ra ls .                                                         L iv e rp o o l h a d a n n o u n c e d on               T h e y d id n o t d e a l w i t h the
         M r C h u r c h , a j o i n e r , fr o m                      W e d n e s d a y t h a t th e fe nce s w ould          m any fo rm s of ra cial d is c rim i­
   D oric S tr e e t, S e a f o rth . M e r s e y ­                   stay, b u t afte r c o n s u ltin g w ith th c           n a tio n t h a t co u ld t a k e p l a c e in a
   s id e , h a d e x c h a n g e d h i s s ta n d                    clu b 's s u p p o rte r s , R o b in so n said          s o lic ito r’s p ra c tic e ,
   t i c k e t fo r a p la c e o n t h c t e r r a c e s              t h a t " i t w o u ld b e insensitive lo ask                 “ A g e n e r a l s t a t e m e n t from
   to jo in h is fr ie n d s .                                        o u r fa n s to s ta n d b e h in d fences               t h e L a w S o c ie ty t h a t all f o r m s of
         Y e s te rd a y t h o s e fr ie n d s le f t a               aga in a f t e r t h c h a p p e n in g s at             r a c ia l d i s c r i m i n a t i o n in a s o lic i­
   w r e a t h o f re d a n d w h i t e c a rn a -                    H ills b o ro u g h ” .                                  t o r ’s p r a c t i c e a r e u n a c c e p ta b l e
   t i o n s in t h e s h a p e o f a pillow ,                             R o b in s o n a ls o unv eiled plans               will go s o m e w a y to r e a s s u r i n g
   w ith t h c m e s s a g e : “ W c b ro u g h t                                                                              p e o p le fro m th c e t h n i c m in o r-
                                                                      t o m a k e A n fic ld th e first all-
   y o u b a c k in o u r h e a r t s ” .                                                                                    I itie s t h a t th e L aw S o c i e t y will
                                                                      s c a te r football s ta d iu m in E n g ­
         T h e 3 5 -m in u te s e rv ic e ,                                                                                    t r e a t a c o m p la in t o f r a c i a l d i s ­
                                                                      land, T h e K o p a n d th e s m all visi­
    re la y e d lo c r o w d s o u t s i d e by                                                                                c r im in a tio n s e r io u s l y .” s a y s th e
                                                                      to rs ' p e n al th e o p p o s ite e n d will
    l o u d s p e a k e r , w a s c o n d u c t e d in                                                                         r e p o rt.
    C h ris t C h u r c h ’s f o r m e r p a r is h                   b e s e a t e d , ev e n th o u g h ca p ac ity
                                                                      will b e r c d u c c d to a r o u n d 32.000.                 T h e C o m m itte e is a l s o c a llin g
    h a ll w h e re M r C h u rc h on ce                                                                                        for i m p r o v e m e n ts in t h e h a n ­
    a t t e n d e d C u b S c o u t m e e tin g s ,                        R o b in so n said: " I know this
                                                                                                                                d lin g o f c o m p la in ts o f r a c i a l d i s ­
     l i e w a s a ls o a f o r m e r c h u r c h                     m ove m ay n o t b e p o p u la r with
                                                                                                                                c r im in a tio n by t h e S o li c it o r s '
    c h o irm e m b e r.                                              m any o f o u r fans, b u t w c a r c c o n ­             C o m p la in ts B u re a u .
          T h e R ev R ay H u tc h in so n                            vinced th a t s e a tin g is th c o nly way
                                                                                                                                     It f o u n d s o m e r e l u c t a n c e
     s a id : ’’T h e m e s s a g e o f c a rin g                     to g u a r a n t e e safe ty .”
                                                                                                                                a m o n g t h e e t h n i c m i n o r i t i e s to
     a n d o f w a n tin g to s h a r e y o u r                            F o o tb a ll s h ru g g e d o f f th e P rim e      a p p r o a c h t h e B u re a u w ith c o m ­
     b u r d e n of g rie f h a s b e e n m a r r e d                 M in is te r’s in siste n ce y este rd ay                 p l a in ts a n d a p e r c e p ti o n t h a t it
     b y i n s e n s i t iv e , d i s t a s t e f u l an d            th a t t h c G o v e rn m e n t s h o u ld press          m ig h t n o t b e i n t e r e s te d in d e a l ­
     b a d ly - tim e d r e m a r k s re p o r t e d                  a h e a d w ith its id e n tity c a rd legisla­           ing w ith s u c h c o m p la in ts .
     in so m e q u a rte rs , and so m e d is­                        tion, c o n f id e n t th a t m o u n tin g                    T h e B u re a u , say s t h e c o m m i t ­
     t a s t e f u l r e p o rtin g b y t h e m e d ia .              b ac k b e n c h o p p o s itio n w o u ld p r e ­        te e , sh o u ld c o n lirm p u b lic ly
           “ B u t o n M e r s e y s id e th e m e s ­                v en t t h c F o o tb a ll S p e c ta to r s Dill         t h a t it w ill d e a l w ith s u c h
      s a g e is lo u d , c l e a r , a n d all th e                  from b e c o m in g law.                                  c o m p la in ts .
      s t r o n g e r , a s o u r city a g a in h a s to                   A n a p p e a l to M rs T h a tc h e r to                 It a ls o r e c o m m e n d s t h a t , in
      s h o w i ts r e s ilie n c e to y e t m o r e                  re a p p ra is e t h c p ra ctica lity o f                lin e w ith t h e r u le in t r i b u n a l s
      p a in a n d su fle rin g .”                                    m e m b e r s h ip c a rd s in th c light o f             h e a rin g ra c e d is c rim in a tio n
            l i e u rg e d t h o s e re s p o n s ib le               Ihe H ills b o ro u g h d is a s te r fell o n            c a s e s , if a p rim a fa cie c a s e of
      fo r t h e d i s a s t e r in q u i r y ’’to li*                d e a f c a rs , b u t th c F o o tb a ll L e ag u e      d i s c r i m i n a t i o n is m a d e o u t by
      t e n to t h e vo ice o f t h e w e a k a n                                                                               t h e a lle g e d v ictim a n d t h i s is
                                                                      b elieve they h av e sufficient s u p ­
      n o t j u s t to t h o s e w ith a v e s te '                                                                             s u p p o r t e d by th e s u r r o u n d in g
                                                                      p o rt a m o n g r a n k a n d file M P s to
      in te re st” .                                                                                                             fa cts , th e b u r d e n o f p r o o f s h o u ld
                                                                      p re v e n t th e i r in tro d u c tio n .
           T h e fo o tb a ll o f r e d a n d whit*                                                                              s w itc h to th e a lle g e d d i s c r i m i ­
                                                                          T h c L e ag u e say they have
      c a r n a ti o n s c a rrie d th e w o r d s                                                                               n a t o r to sh o w t h a t th e i n c id e n t
       “ F ro m th e d i r e c t o r s , p la y e rs                  ce ase d to b e s u rp ris e d by thc
                                                                                                                                w as            not       due        to       ra c ia l
       m a n a g e r a n d s ta ff o f L iv e rp o o                  P rim e M in iste r’s in tran sig en c e.                 d is c rim in a tio n .
       FC” .                                                         T h e ir s p o k e s m a n . A n d y W illiam ­
                                                                                                                                     A n o t h e r r e c o m m e n d a ti o n in
            O t h e r fa m ilie s o f t h o s e k ille t             son. a tta c h e s g r e a t e r significance              t h e r e p o r t is t h a t t h e R a c e R e l a ­
       h a v e b e e n d i s t r e s s e d by a police               to C a b in e t u n e a s e a t th c g ro u n d -          t io n s A c t 1976 s h o u l d be
       d e c i s io n to r e t a i n c lo th in g and                swell o f o p in io n ag a in st th c IUH,                 a m e n d e d to b rin g all s e c t o r s of
       p e r s o n a l effec ts.                                     a n d t h c possibility o f it b ein g d e ­               t h e leg a l p ro f e s s io n , in c lu d in g
            M r D avid M a s o n , d i r e c t o r of                fe ated a t its s e c o n d re ading.                       th e n o n -c o n tra c tu a l re la tio n -
       L iv e rp o o l so cia l s e r v ic e s , s a i d 1                “ M o re a n d m o re M P s a re te ll­             I sh ip b e t w e e n s o lic ito rs a n d b a r ­
       " T h is h as ca u se d im m e n se d is ­                    ing us t h a t th e y a re ag a in st m e m ­               r i s t e r s , w ith in its ju r i s d i c t i o n ,
       t r e s s l o a n u m b e r o f fa m ilies .                  b e r s h ip c a rd s ,” W illiam so n said              i T h e c o m m i t t e e s a y s i t is
            “ P e o p le h a v e fo und it e x c e e d ­             y este rd a y . “ It m u s t be veiy d o u b t-             " s e r i o u s l y c o n c e r n e d a b o u t th e
       in g ly difficult to d e a l w i t h , an d                   fnl w h e th e r t h e G o v e rn m e n t can               w ide g u lf o f p e r c e p ti o n b e t w e e n
       to t a l l y i n c o m p r e h e n s i b l e t h a t          push t h e i r sch e m e th ro u g h ."                     b lac k a n d w h i t e la w y e rs r e g a r d ­
       t h e r r r e l a t i v e s sh o u ld b e t r e a t e d            W h ile       Ja c k      D u n n c tt,    the         ing r a c ia l p ro b le m s w i t h i n th e
       n o t a s v ic tim s b u t a s c r i m i n a ls .”            L e a g u e p re s id e n t, w as ap p e a lin g            p r o f e s s i o n .’1
             M r M e r v y n J o n e s , W e s t M id ­              y e s te rd a y f o r a re th in k , th e Prim e                T h e r e w e r e no s t a t i s ti c s to
       l a n d s A s s i s t a n t C h ie f C onsta*                 M in is te r w as tellin g th e C o m ­                     sh o w th e e x t e n t o f d i s c r i m i n a ­
       b!e, le a d in g t h e p o lice i n q u iry                   m o n s t h e r e w o u ld be n o U -tu rn .                tio n o r h o w o fte n b la c k s o lici­
       in to t h e t r a g e d y , said : " i t is                                                                               to rs w e re s l ig h te d o r t r e a t e d
                                                                          M rs T h a tc h e r t o ld P arliam e n t:
       i m p o r t a n t to t h e ju d ic ia l in q u iry                                                                        w ro n g ly b e c a u s e o f t h e i r c o lo u r.
                                                                     “T o re fu s e to pass the Dill this
       to r e t a i n t h e s e b e l o n g in g s . It                                                                          B ut h a v in g ti s te n e d to b lac k
                                                                     session to d e a l w iih p ro b le m s a l ­
       c o u ld b e th a t t h e y co u ld h e l p u s                                                                           la w y e rs s p e a k in g o f t h e i r e x p e ­
                                                                     re ad y i d e n tifie d , a n d t h e n to leave           r i e n c e , it h a d no d o u b t t h e s e
       to id e n tify w h e r e p e o p le w e r e in                on rsclves w ith n o v eh ic le by w hich
       t h e g r o u n d .”                                                                                                      w e re fr e q u e n t o c c u rre n c e s .
                                                                     to r e s p o n d im m e d ia te ly to t h e le s ­
             C iv ic l e a d e r s in L i v e r p o o l,             so ns o f H illsb o ro u g h , in cluding
        S heffield an d N o t t i n g h a m h a v e
                                                                     a n all-se atin g s ta d iu m , w o uld be a
        a g r e e d to u n ite in s ile n t t r i b u t e
                                                                     g rave d e c is io n for this H o u s e .”
        t o t h e d e a d . U p to tw o m illio n
        p e o p l e a r e e x p e c te d to r e s p e c t a              T h c L e ag u e have g u a r a n te e d
        m i n u t e ’s s i l e n c c in t h e t h r e e              th e H ills b o ro u g h D is a s te r F u n d
        c itie s a t 3 .0 6 p m to m o rro w .                   i   £lm . A il in itia l p ay m e n t o f
             T h e r e will b e m e m o ria l s e r -            '   £ 250,000 will b e in c re a s e d if fu n d ­
        v ic e s at T r a n m e r e H o v e rs                   ]   raising s c h e m e s fail to ta k e t h c t o ­
        g r o u n d , B irk e n h e a d , a t 3 p m a n d        1   tal to th e scvc n-figurc m ark.
        in S heffield C a th e d r a l a t 6 .3 0 p m                     C lu b s d e c id e d y e s te rd a y to
        on S u n d a y                                           i   press a h e a d w ith th c w e e k e n d
             A m u lti-d e n o m in a tio n a l                      p ro g r a m m e . “ AH 44 g a m e s will go
         m e m o r i a l s e r v ic e wifi b e led by                a h e a d a s p l a n n e d ,” s a id a L e ague
         t h e R t R ev D a v id S h e p p a r d ,                   s p o k e s m a n . T w o p o s tp o n e m e n ts
         A n g lic a n B ish o p o f L iv erp o o l,                 w e re a g r e e d e a r l i e r — by L iv e r­
         t h e M o s t R ev D e re k W o rlo ck ,                    po o l, w h o w e re to h av e p lay e d A r ­
         H o m a n C a th o lic A r c h b is h o p of                senal o n S u n d ay , a n d T ra n in c rc ,
         L iv e r p o o l, a n d D r J o h n N e w to n ,            a t h o m e to G rim sby.
         F r e e C h u rc h M o d e r a t o r , in Liv­
         e r p o o l ’s A n g lic a n C a t h e d r a l a
         w e e k to m o rro w .
6           PARLIAMENT & POLITICS * * *
                              Football Spectators Bill > h,-u ^ ^

Thatcher accused
 of putting pride
before fans’ safety
MARGARET T IIATCIIER yes­                                                      schcmc. “ It sets up a procedure
terday reaffirmed her d eterm ina­          By Stephen Goodwin                 under which others (football’s ad­
tion to get the Football Specta­                                               ministrators) may propose such a
tors Bill through in this session of    th ro u g h ” thc ID card schcmc as    schcmc for thc Secretary of
Parliament.                             “ an offcncc against comm on-          Sta te ’s approval which would
    It would be “ negligent” to d e ­   sense and an offcncc against com ­     then have to be laid before the
lay tlic Bill for an other 12 months,   mon dccency. How can you, in thc       House.
the Prime Minister told the C om ­      a fterm ath of that terrible tragedy       “ So it docs not pre-empt any
mons, but Tory doubts about the         last Saturday, put thc safety of       decisions which may be taken by
identity card scheme remained.          others second to your own              Lord Justicc Taylor.”
    Jo h n Carlisle, chairm an of thc   pride?”                                    But Mr Kinnock said thc Prime
Conservative sports committee,              N oting thc question had been      Minister could have an enabling
said many in thc party were still       put “very sharply” , Mrs T hatchcr     Bill o r a “ no-holds barred in­
worried about the “ largely u n ­       told M P s she wanted to make one      quiry” , but not both. “ Your
 loved Bill” and felt alternative       or two points she thought relevant     coursc        is  full   of    utter
 measures should be prepared for        to thc decision on thc Bill.            inconsistcnces as well as great
 the next session.                          “T h e decision wc arc asked to    vanity,” he told her.
    M rs Tliatchcr delivered what        take is against a background of           “ It is five days since thc
 am ounted to a statem ent of intent     four decades o f a problem of          Hillsborough disaster; four days
 on the Hill in response to an un­       crowd control and two decades of       sincc you went to thc Leppings
 usually personal attack by Neil         hooliganism,                           L ane pen; three days since you set
 Kinnnck, who accused the Prime             “ Nearly 300 people have died.      up the Taylor inquiry, and now
 Minister of putting her own pride       We have thc worst rccord in thc        you are undermining it already.
 before the safety of football sup­      developed world. T o refuse to         . “ By pressing ahead with your
 porters.                                pass the Bill this session to deal     legislation you arc effectively
     It was thc first occasion on        with problem s already identified      putting thc vital question of iden­
 which Mrs T h atch er h;is faccd thc    and th en to leave ourselves with      tity cards off-limits to Lord Jus­
 Commons sincc the Hillsborough          no vchicic by which to respond         ticc Taylor,” M r Kinnock said.
 tragedy which has heightened            immediately to thc lessons from            Mrs T hatch cr accuscd the La­
 anxiety in all parties about thc        Hillsborough, including an all­        bo ur leader of not treating thc
  identity card schcmc. Yesterday        scat stadium , would be a very          Bill with thc seriousness it de ­
  morning thc Cabinet discusscd          grave decision for this H ouse,”       served, and of not listening to
  how to handle thc Bill.                   Mrs T h atchcr no ted that thc      w hat she said.
     Opening thc Question Time ex­       W orld Cup was coming up in 1990           “T h e timetable easily permits
  changes, thc Labour leader said        and then, as MPs began to protest       anything which Lord Justicc T ay­
  many MPs on both sides of thc           about thc length of her statement,     lor may propose to be taken into
  Commons and people throughout           m oved on to stress that the Bill      account bccause thc Bill itself
  thc country would regard Mrs           was an enabling m easure and did        docs not provide a national m em ­
  T h atcher’s decision to “ forcc        not itself provide a membership        bership scheme.”


                                                                                                     n         -n     ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                V     J L I/I/U L IU O




                                                                                  Vvfc
                                                                                -y'':i&“.;
                                                                                                                                                                                                 fr‘                                                                                      property,1
                        l*»                  '&-<&':i#'
                                                                                *$?$?■$£
                                                                                     *».*s^«                                                                                                                                                              >■'&*?<?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          essential
                                                                                      ;#S„
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         to inquiry
                                                                                    »Ji'Vy V“W
                                :**!?■                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B y M a l c o l m P ith c rs

                                                                                                                                                                             W2M    fa.
                                                                                                                                                                                      ,                                                          . **o»V'                          *          N o r t h e r n C orre spo ndent
                                                                                     m m
                                                                                                                                                                            Tir4w#V                                                                                                         n i t : l ’O I .I C I i M A N lea d in g the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            in v e s tig a tio n in to the H illsb o ­
                            U 'S ^ 4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ro ugh d i s a s t e r ex p la in e d y e s te r­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            day w h y o ffic ers co u ld n o t re tu rn



                                                                                                                                                                                                                 I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            th c p e r s o n a l belo n g in g s o f th c 95
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            p e o p le w h o died.
                                                                                                                                                                          *                                                                                                                      M c r v y n J o n e s . W e s t M id lan d s
                                                                                                                                                                                                   I                               *                 . ^ . 7 '                              A s s is ta n t C h ie f C o n s ta b le , said
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4        *•                             th at e v e ry effort w o uld b e m ad e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            t o r e t u r n thc effec ts to Liverpool
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            as s o o n as possible, b u t fo r the
                                                                                       l-rsn*/                                                                                                                                                                                              m o m e n t th ey fo rm e d p a r t o f thc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            p olice in q u iry .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 H e s a i d he a c k n o w led g e d that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            m an y o f th c b e r e a v e d fam ilies
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            h ad m a d e a d ire ct re q u e s t for th c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            b e lo n g in g s to b e re tu rn e d .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1 Ic s a id : “ W e d o a p p r e c ia te thc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            d is lrc s s       re lativ es      a rc     going
                                                                                                                                                      M                                                                                                                                      th ro u g h a n d th c last th in g we
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            w ant t o d o is to a d d to th a t. H o w ­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ever. t h o s e belo n g in g s c o u ld form
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             a n i m p o r t a n t p a rt o f t h c inquiry."
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            T h c S h e ff ie ld c o r o n e r w as also
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             a w are o f th c requests.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 T h e p o lice te a m n e e d to know
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             p re cisely w h e re th e s u p p o rte r s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             d ie d a n il th c belo n g in g s c o u ld be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             o f c r u c ia l im p o rta n c e .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  D a v id M as o n , th e d ire c to r of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             social s erv ic es in L iverpool, said
                      .            W'tK"
                           ^ S>’.^J* '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       y  e s te rd a y th a t th c dec isio n n o t to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             re le a s e th e belo n g in g s h a d ca u sed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             " im m e n s e d is tre s s " . H e ad d e d :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             " P e o p l e a rc finding it very diffi­
                       tfamst
                                                                                             b
                                                                                         •> a • *1          & *«&
                                                                                                        «*> ««fc'<*Sfc.. awfe'fu                                                                 -.
                                                                                                                                              **1 ,.>.” *1" / f . I . r I ].--IM~. 1 ».-»•-■■. ' i; ' j ■«,.» ■•.- > r . '!*..                    •     ■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ,-*. ;<« «'<•, „'.:? j „ .        ■        1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              «c>.',)"K'i«4^.''.
M o u r n e r s a t t h c f u n e r a l o f G a r y C h u r c h , 19, n t C h r i s t C h u r c h , L .l> c rp o o l, w h i c h w a s a t t c l u l c d hy a b o u t 8 0 0 p e o p l e , i n c l u d i u i ’ t h c t e a m ’s m a n a g e r a n d f o u r p l a y e r s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             cult t o u n d e r s ta n d why that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             c o u r s e o f ac tion h as b e e n e m ­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             b a r k e d u p o n ,”
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   M an y o f thc b e r e a v e d fam ilies
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     . / h a d p ers is te n tly ra ise d th c m a tte r



 Fans and stars united in grief at funeral
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     j ^ - r v i t h so c ia l w orkers, he said.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A r e p o r t in thc D aily Express
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              c la im in g t h a t th re e fo o tb a ll s u p ­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              p o r t e r s h a d died o u ts id e ihc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              g r o u n d w as d es c rib ed by a s en io r
D O K R I C S I H I - I T , S c a f o rth , Is a                                                           c r o s s ro a d s in S e n fo rih a n il m ad e            b u ild in g , c a n b a re ly h o ld a oiiople                  H is voice h a r d e n e d a s h e said:              police offic er in S heffield y e s te r­
lin y , b a c k s lrc c l cu l-d e -s a c close                By J a m e s D a l r y m p l e              its way to C h r i s t C h u rc h in Ihc                    o f h n n d r e d n t b est, lm t y es te rd ay            “ T h e m e s s a g e o f e a r i n g a n d w a n t­        day as “ grossly in a c c u ra te ” .
to flic b ig d o c k y a rd c r a n e s (if Liv­                                                           n e a rb y s u b u r b o f W a te rlo o .                   it w as a lm o s t a t b u r s t i n g point                ing to s h a r e y o u r b u rd e n o f g rie f                 It is th o u g h t som e o f thc v ic­
e r p o o l. Y e sle rd n r five M crc e d c s      h o u se. T h e la d s w ere u n c o m f o rt­              T b e r o a d to (lie left le a d in g in              n n d som e o f G a ry 's fr ie n d s s tood                h a s been sad ly m a r r e d by th c In­                  tim s w e r e m oved by re s c u e rs and
lim n u s in c s could tinrcty squee ze             ab le in w hite s h i r t s j u s t o u t o f          to D e rby R ond n n d u p to A nfield                      o n th e s te p s o u ts id e a n d w a tc hed              sen sitiv e. d is t a s t e f u l n n d very               m ay h av e b e e n outsid e th e in n er
in w h e n I hoy cam e fur t h e fn n c rn l        t h e i r w r a p p e r s w ith b la c k ties          S ta d iu m w as one t h a t ( i a r y a n d                t h r o u g h th e o p e n d o o rs .                       h a d h - t im e d r e m a r k s w hich have               t e r ra c e a r e a w h e n they died.
o f IV-yenr-old G a ry C h u rc h ,                 n n d s u its , n n d th e g irls, in d a r k          Ids m a te s hu d ta k e n , re ligiously,                      I he o r d e r o f s e n ice w a s tried                been re p o r t e d co ining from v a r i ­                     T h e tw o S heffield h o sp itals still
    C a r y w as d ie firs t o f th c 95 vic­       Iwo-picces bo rro w ed from th e i r                   s in ce th ey w ere old e n o u g h to be                   nn d I rue , b a u d - h u ilt fo r tragedy;                ous q u a r t e r s — om l th e ta s te le ss              t re a tin g survivors y este rd a y r e ­
t im s o f th c H ills b o ro u g h tra g ed y      m u m s , w ere try in g luird nut to                  allow e d on d ie h n s o n I h e i r own.                  " A b id e W ith M e“ n n d th c 23rd                       r e p o rtin g by so m e o f thc m e d ia ,”               le a s e d sev e n nam e s, In all. 1ft Liv­
In h e Inirtcd.                                     weep.                                                        O u ts id e th e c h u r c h , w a itin g             P sn lo i. to p p e d o ff w ith tb e b i t te r ­                B efore th e p riv a te b u ria l a t                e r p o o l s u p p o rte r s a re still being
    A        q i n c k - w iltrd ,   life-loving         At th c to p o f t h c little s tre e t a         a m o n g a crow d of a b o u t 80 0 p eo ­                 sweet w o rd s o f “ Y oo’ll Never                           T h o rn to n C em ete ry th e r e w as a                 e a re d for in th e R oyal lla lla m -
S c o n s e la d , h e w illingly g av e u p a      big, re d -b ric k p a h , th e D o rrlc,               p le, w ere a t lea s t five o f t h e m en                W a lk A lo n e” , It will p ro b a b ly be                 c h a n c e f n r t h c Liverpool m a n a g e r            sh ire a n d t h c N o r th e r n G e n e ra l
.stand ticket fo r l a s t S a t u r d a y ’s       looks r ig h t a c ro s s a t th e lla llc h i-         t h a t played a h u g e — i f d i s t a n t —             th e t e m p la te fo r every L iverpool                    a m i h is p l a t e r s — all f i v c o f t h c m         h o sp itals.
( u p s e m i-fin a l to s la n d m i th c          j u h I Ini) a n d iibont 60 n eig h ­                  p a r t in (Gary's life;                   Kenny           b u ria l s c n l e e t h is w eekend.                      t r j l n g >ciy b u rd to re ta in co n tro l                  l ive a re s;iid to b e still in a c r iti­
t n t n r c s w ith his unites — an d                b o u rs , so m e o f (be w m ucn s till in            D a lg lish , th e f a rm e r s t r i k e r mid                 J o h n A ldridge c a m e elose to                      — to s h a k e h a n d s m id s p e a k to                cal c o n d itio n ,il th e H a lla m s h itc
died in t h c H ills b o ro u g h cages.            c a rp e t s lip p e rs , w ho h ad know n              now m a n a g e r, w ith fo u r n f his                    b re a k in g dow n a s b e re n d t h e les­               ( i n n ’s fam ily a n d h is frie n d s.                  a n d G illia n [’d w a rd s. IX, o f B ir­
    T h r o u g h o u t this — L iv erp o o l’s     ( i a r y s in ce h e w as h o rn , s to o d hy         sta rs,           John      B a rn e s ,      Rny          so n . h n t th c Rev Hay H u tc h in s o n ,                    A cynical 'l e w m ig h t have been                   k e n h e a d . re m a in s in the intensive
 lo n g e s t n n d d a r k e s t w e ekend —        th c d o o n v ay s o f h o th ho ild iu g s,          H o u g h to n , (Jury A h lctt n n d J o h n              w ho know s tb e fam ily well, gave n                        (lint it took a c a t a s t r o p h e to b rin g          c a r e u n it o f t h e N o r th e rn G e n ­
 tin- s i g h t s , s o u n d s him ) e m o tio n s       T h c Innocuous s o u n d s o f a po p            A ldridge.                                                 c la s s ic w ord p o r t r a i t o f a M e r ­             (In ry a n d h is m a te s in to d ire ct                  e ral. S h e was said y es te rd ay t o be
s f        •‘c s te rd n y will he re p e n te d    s o n g — s o m e th in g w ith th e w ords                  T h e L iverpool m e n h o d n rriv e d               sey sid e la d — g o o d -h e n rte d , fun-                 p e rs o o n l c o n ta c t w ith t h e i r idols.        “slow ly im p ro v in g ”.
 {          oe en d of Ih e city lo th c             " l it t l e d i n m o o d ” re p e a le d over        in th e i r tl.MW n n d M e rc e d c s Cnrs                 loving n o d p n s s io n n tc n b o u t Ins                B ut eve rybody knew t h a t it w n sn 't                      T h c o t h e r p a tie n ts n a m e d arc:
 o          F o r t b e In st few flays th c         no d ov er — cmwc from in s id e th e                  no d they w ore very expe nsive                             m u te s , h is m u m n n d d a d , a n d L iv­             a q u e s tio n o f fans a n d football he*                S c a n L u c k ctt. 20, o f C l.iverdon.
u n d e r t a k e r s , m m a l o r i o o t s am i   fa m ily's h o m e, an d a fr ie n d ex ­              s u i t s . T h e ir lives nm l (J u ry 's h a d            e rpool fo othnll club.                                     roes y este rd ay .                                        W a rw ic k sh ire: S can C onnelly. Ift,
 g ra v e d ig g e rs h a r e h re u w o rk in g     p lain ed t h a t (f u ry 's p a r e n ts , |>;ivc     bee n s c p n r a lc d by a c h a s m nf                        It wks s im p le , co m fo rtin g nn d                       T o p a r a p h r a s e th e w o rd s of P e­         n f I lesw all, W irrnl, su ffe rin g from
 nil h o u r s .                                     n o d M a u r e e n , nn d h is b n i t h c r          w c n lth nn d fa m e, h o t D a lg lish                    pow erful, w ith o u t b itte rn e s s fo r                 t e r K ohiitson. L iv erp o o l's chief                   h e a d injuries: A n th o n y tlia u d . IS,
      The Mg lim o u s in e s a r riv e d nt         a a d two s i s te r s , h a d decided to              w a s p r o n d to b e th e r e . » o d he h as             n n jh o d y in a u th o r ity o r n n jh o d y             executiv c. it w as j u s t d ec en t j o u n g            o f K eighley, W e st Y orkshire:
 9 .4 5 a m , G a ry ’s crow d, n b m it 3d          piny it b e c a u s e it w as one be                    p ro m is e d t h a t h is p la v e ts will be            w ho could have m a d e m is ta k e s                        m en a n d b a c k s tre e t k id s fro m Hie              R o b e r t G r a h a m o f S k clinersdnle:
 hoys a a d g irls, luul h e r n w a iting           played all Ihe lim r. It ivas, he                       a t every o n e o f t h e fu n e r a l s held              lust S a t u r d a y n fie rn o o n . I h e b it­           s a m e city o ffering e a ch o th e r                     a n d G a ry C urry a n d A n d re w De-
 fu r m o r e Ilian m i h o u r, .lust               s :n d . n k in d of t rib o te lo th e lad.            in th e d a j s to com e.                                  te r n e s s M r ilc itc h in s o n kep t for               fr ie n d s h ip n n d co m fo rt in d ;t) S of            vine. 23, b o th o f T o w e r H ill, Liv­
 s tiu u lia g nrouiul o u ts id e the                    T h e cortfrgc t u rn e d l i g h t a t n              C h ris t C h u rc h , n s m a ll, s q u a r e         c c rtn in o th e r s.                                      c h a o s, a o g e r n n d grief.                          erp o o l.



  ID cards ‘time-lag^
  calms some critics
AS N tC I IO I A S R ID L U Y left II)                     o p p o s e d to th e sch e m e anyw ay.’*
D o w n in g S tr e e t y e s te rd a y m o r n ­          I b e m ain g estu re which t b e C a b i­
ing, fo llo w in g tw o m in iste rial                     net m a d e to try' to b iid g e the gulf
m e e tin g s an d a fu ll C a b in e t on                 w ith n orm ally loyal b ac k b e n c h
the fo o tb a ll identily c a r d Bill,                    M i’s w a s its dec isio n n o t to set a
w a itin g jo u rn a lis ts ca lle d o u l to              d ate fo r re s ta rtin g th e Bill’s
a sk h im th e o u le o m e . C olin                       pi ogre ss       th ro u g h    P a ilia m e o t.
H u g h e s w rites.                                       ThiU is n o t a concession o n the
     ” l ’m go in g to brnch," b e re ­                    Bill as the sch e m e a s s u ch —
p lied . “ But w hat n b o u t tb e B ill?’'               m erely a tim e -lag , d u rin g which
a n e a g e r ra d io ( q v a t c r p ers is te d .        G o v e rn m e n t w hips h n p e to calm
" B ills d o n 't have l u n c h ,” t h e drily            p o te n tia l rebels, and p c is u a d c
la c o n ic S ecie t-uy o f S ta te f o r the              th e m againsl rocking tbe P rim e
 l ;u v iio rn n e n t said.                               M in iste r's b o at,
     O n e o f th e p riv a te pailr;u n e n -                 But thc s iory is lai h o rn o \ c r ,
 tavy s e c r e t a r i e s u h n w as t h r e a t e n ­   h o w e v er d e te rm in e d M a ig .u c t
 ing t o les ig n o v e r the ( io v c rn -                T h a tc h e r ’s to n e d in in g q u e s tio n
 t n e h t's re fu sal to delay th e Bril                  tim e yeste rday. If in two o r th re e
w as d e lig h te d w ith th e 1’iim e                     w eeks th e r e ic m ains a s u b s tan tial
 M in iste r's d c c la ia tro n t h a t there             b o d y o f b ac k b e n c h T o iic s willing
was n o l o n g e r a n y p re s s u re to                 to vote ag a in st th e G o v e rn m e n t,
 have th e Bill on t h c s tatu te b o o k                 sh e m ay still h e fo rced to b ac k off,
by Ih c c u d n f July, l i e said: “ C o l ­                  T h e lifetim e o f thc Bill in Ibis
 le a g u e s like m e w h o w e re pievi-                 p a tlia tu c n ta ry session b angs on
ousiy iu fa v o u r of th e sc h c m c will                w h e th e r m in is te rs a n d w hips can
 p ro b a b ly feel th a t they h av e got                 p e js n a d c th e ir b ac k b e n c h t ro o p s
 s o m e th in g o u t of t h i s w e ek 's p ics-         against m utiny. T h c ic i c m a in c d
 s u ic . a n d will b e re aso n ab ly                    m u ch m u tin o u s feeling a to u u d
 h ap p y , T h o s e w h o re m a in u n ­                Ih c C o m m o n s cm ridors last night.
 h a p p y a r e m ostly th o s e w h o were                                     P u rH a m c n t, p a g e fi
                                s«t <-


                   HORROR OF HILLSBOROUGH
                                                                            frivals plan safety corridors at grounds
                                                                                                                                                                                                           axe
                                                                                                                                                                                                           i\"        4 i*       ’C ' \ ' r ’Z V        ‘
                                                                                                                                                                                                           4   ■           • .        - 1 -}■.c.            v'




                                                                             o f t h e g r o u n d a n d t h e p i t c h , a n d a s i m il a r      h o p e f u l t h a t t h i s m a y b e c o m p l e t e d fo r          fe n c e s: " I t h i n k t h a t is t h e r i g h t t h i n g t o      w a n t e d t o “ p r o v i d e e n t e r t a i n m e n t In a
{SA FE TY fe n ce s a r e to b e p u lle d                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           safe, m o d e rn sta d iu m , w ith a d e q u a te
                                                                             c o r r i d o r w o u l d b e b u i l t a t t h e G la d w y s          t h e s t a r t o f t h e 1989-90 s e a s o n .                         d o .’*
M o w n b y L iv e rp o o l a n d E v e r to n                                                                                                                                                                                   T h e F o o tb a l l S u p p o r t e r s A s s o c i a ti o n       fa c ilitie s f o r a l l f a n s re g a r d l e s s o f s e x , a g e
                                                                             S t r e e t e n d o f G o o d is o n P a rk .                               M r R o b in s o n s a i d t h e c o r r i d o r w o u ld b e
ib e fo re th e ir n e x t h o m e fix tu re s,                                                                                                      a n a r e a a b o u t tw o y a r d s w id e a t t h e f r o n t         l a s t n i g h t w e lc o m e d t h e c o r r i d o r i d e a a n d    o r s c a rf c o lo u r".
                                                                                T h e firs t tim e th e n e w safety a r ra n g e ­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                r a i s e d L i v e r p o o l a n d E v e r i o n f o r th in k *
j L i v e r p o o l’s c h i e f e x e c u tiv e , M r P e t e r
•R o b in s o n , e m e r g e d f r o m a f i v e - h o u r
^ m e e tin g b e t w e e n t h e s o c c e r d u b s l a s t
                                                                            m e n t s a r e l ik e ly t o b e o n s h o w Is t h e
                                                                            sc h e d u le d d e rb y m a tc h b etw e en E v e rto n
                                                                                                                                                     o f t h e t e r r a c i n g , s e p a r a t e d fr o m t h e fa n s
                                                                                                                                                     b y a l o n g c r u s h b a r r i e r . S te p s w o u l d b e
                                                                                                                                                     in s t a l l e d a t t h e p i t c h side'. - ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E  i g o f t h e fans* s a f e ty .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  M e a n w h ile w o r k w ill b e g in t o d a y o n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          In a tw o -p a g e a r t ic l e e n t i t l e d P la y in g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     S a fe a t S h e ffie ld , M r D o u g la s L o c k w r o te
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     o f t h e i m p r o v e m e n ts m a d e a t t h e p o u n d
                                                                            a n d L iv e r p o o l a t G o o d is o n P a r k o n M a y 3.
J n i g h t a n d s a id b o t h w o u l d r e p l a c e t h e                                                                                                                                                               d i s m a n t l i n g p e r i m e t e r f e n c i n g a t Shef*         In t h e l i g h t o f t h e 1985 S p o r t i n g E v e n ts
                                                                            w h i c h h a s n o t s o Car b e e n p o s tp o n e d .                     H e sa id th a t th e b a r rie r w o u ld be
► b a r r i e r s w i t h a “ s a f e t y c o r r i d o r ' d iv i d in g                                                                                                                                                    fie ld 's s e c o n a m a j o r fo o tb a ll s t a d i ’u n .           ( C o n tro l o f A lc o h o l) A c t a n d t h e Pop-
                                                                                I n a j o i n t s t a t e m e n t Is s u e d b y t h e tw o          e n o u g h t o k e e p f a n s b a c k fro m t h e f r o n t
‘f a n s f r o m t h e p i t c h e s ,                                                                                                                                                                                            S h effie ld U n i t e d o ffic ia ls h a v e a g r e e d to        p le w e ll R e p o r t o n t h e B r a d f o rd s o c c e r
                                                                            d u b s , t h e y s a i d t h a t n e w s a fe ty m e a s u r e s        w a ll, a n d w o u ld a l s o m e a n t h a t t h e y
j H e s a id : “ W e t h o u g h t i t w o u l d b e                                                                                                                                                                         re m o v e fe n c e g a t e s a t t h e i r B r a m a ll L a n e         s t a d i u m fin ;.
                                                                            h a d b ee n w o rk e d o u t a t ta lk s w ith th e                     w o u ld h a v e a b e t t e r v ie w o f t h e p itc h .
( I n s e n s i ti v e t o a s k o u r f a n s t o s t a n d b e h i n d                                                                                                                                                     g r o u n d a f t e r t a l k s w i t h p o lice a n d c o u n c il
                                                                             lo c a l a u t h o r i t y a n d p o lice.                                  " B u t In a n e m e rg e n c y th e fa n s c o u ld                                                                                            H e r e f e r r e d t o im p ro v e d m e t h o d s o f
•fe n c e s a g a i n a f t e r t h e h a p p e n i n g s a t                                                                                                                                                                 s a f e ty e x p e rts .
                                                                                “ F o r th e re m a in d e r o f th is sea so n safety               e a s i ly d u c k u n d e r t h e c r u s h b a r r i e r s a n d           T h e a l t e r a t i o n s w ill b e c o m p l e t e d in         s e g r e g a t i n g r i v a l f a n s a t t h e L e p p in g s
{Hillsborough.**
                                                                            w i l l b e e n s u r e d b y I n c r e a s e d p o lic in g o f         go u p t h e s t e p s o n t o t h e p itc h i n a m a t t e r          t i m e f o r t h e c l u b ’s h o m e D iv is io n T h r e e           L ane en d — th e scene o f S a tu n ia y s
» A il t h e t a n s t h e c l u b h a d s p o k e n to
f w a n t e d t h e fe n c e s t o c o m e d o w n .                        th e g ro u n d s an d th e ex p e ctatio n t h a t th e                 o f seconds.**                                                           le a g u e m a t c h w i t h B r e n t f o r d t o m o r r o w ,       d isaster.
* T h e d u b s h a d d e c id e d a f t e r t a l k s o n                  f a n s w ill c o n t i n u e t o a c t re s p o n s ib ly a n d             E a r l ie r M r R o b in s o n s a id t h e c l u b 's             w h e n e x t r a p o lic e w ill b e o n d u t y . F u r t h e r
                                                                            to d o a ll th e y c a n to e n s u r e safety a n d n o t               a r c h i t e c t h a d b e e n c a lle d In to s t u d y t h e                                                                                      I n t h e p a s t , f a n s w e r e s e p a r a t e d b y l in e s
•W e d n e s d a y t o m o d ify t h e f e n c e s , e x te n d -                                                                                                                                                            t a l k s w ill b e h e ld a b o u t t h e p o s s i b il i t y of
                                                                                                                                                     K op w i t h a v ie w t o t u r n i n g A n fle ld I n t o a n                                                                                  o f p o lic e m e n . T h a t m e th o d h a d b e e n
* in g t h e g a p s i n t h e m a n d r e m o v i n g t h e                e n c r o a c h o n t h e p itc h .                                                                                                               r e m o v in g a l l fe n c e s b e f o re t h e s t a r t o f
                                                                                                                                                     all-se a te r s ta d iu m , .                                                                                                                   i m p r o v e d b y u s i n g s e p a r a t e e n t r y turn*
; s p ik e s .                                               , .            . “ F o r n e x t s e a s o n t h e K op e n c l o s u r e a t                                                                                   n ex t season.                                                          s t i le s a n d K e ep in g f a n s ap a rt* i n t h e
* B u t M r R o b in so n sa id la s t n ig h t:                            A n f le ld a n d b o t h t h e P a r k E n d a n d                          " I n v iew o f a ll th e d e v e lo p m e n ts, w e                     It w a s r e c a lle d y e s t e r d a y t h a t t w o y e a r s   g ro u n d b y m e a n s o f a “ m etal-b arred
• 'T o d a y w e h a v e h a d a f u r t h e r m e e ti n g                 G i a d w y s S t r e e t e n c l o s u r e s a t G o o d is o n         t h o u g h t It w a s t i m e to s e e k t h a t                        a g o I m p ro v e d s a f e t y a r r a n g e m e n t s a t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     s t e r i l e v o id ” .
*a n d I a m g la d t h a t w e h a v e fi n a ll y f o u n d a             P a r k w ill b e p r o v i d e d w i t h a s a f e ty                   In f o r m a t i o n a s a m a t t e r o f u r g e n c y . W e           H ills b o ro u g h w e r e t h e s u b j e c t o f a n
                                                                            c o r r i d o r w h i c h w ill b e s t e w a r d e d a n d              w o u ld look a t p r o v i d i n g s e a t in g In t h a t              a r t ic l e In t h e p o lic e m a g a z in e . P o lic e                  T ra in in g o f ste w a rd s h a d b ecom e a
• w a y t o r e m o v e t h o s e fe n c e s. W e h a d a                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            p r i o r i t y a n d a h ig h -te c h n o lo g y s y s t e m
• d u t y t o fin d a w a y t o g e t t h e m d o w n a n d I               p o lic e d a n d w ill b e a v a i la b l e f o r firs t-a id           a r e a a t a p ric e t h e o r d i n a r y a v e r a g e f a n          R ev iew .
                                                                                                                                                     c a n a ffo rd . T h a t Is w h a t t h e c l u b m u s t                    A f o r m e r p o lic e s u p e r i n t e n d e n t w h o          u s i n g v i d e o c a m e r a s a n d c o m p u t e r s to
* am p lea sed to sa y t h a t th e y a r e co m in g                       p u rp o se s.
                                                                                " P l a n s a r e p r e s e n t l y b e l n g p r o d u c e d fo r   d o .”                                                                   w a s t h e n S h e ffie ld W e d n e s d a y 's s a f e ty            m o n ito r crow d m o v e m e n ts in sid e a n d
• d o w n ."
                                                                            t h e c o n v e r s i o n o f E v e r t o n ’s B u le n s R o a d            T h e L a b o u r le a d e r , M r N e ll Kin*                       a n d s e c u r i t y c o n s u l t a n t s a id t h e b o a r d o f   o u ts id e th e s ta d iu m h a d b een
* M r R o b in s o n s a i d t h a t a s a f e t y c o r r i d o r
                                                                            p a d d o c k to a sea ted a r e a a n d E v e rto n a re                n o c k , s a id o f t h e d e c is io n t o p u l i d o w n t h e      d ire c to rs, m a n a g e m e n t a n d p e rso n n e l                In tro d u c ed .
“ w o u ld b e b u i l t b e t w e e n t h e S p lo n K o p e n d




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6 3-B-&                                       SlEo
                                                                                                                                                                                        S tills
                                                                                a-
                                                                                                           if nr                                                                        -gasWsf 8? I^S§! B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3 J2.5 *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sacs ess
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Issis'ls
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         32.S3
    £=*2.                                                                                                                                                   22.0.                           lU H                    -fii l M                                                                                                                                                   •

    er_ ■
2   *<o» s                                                                                                     c-jj w E|
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *2*1III                                              m      * cD
                                                                                                                                                                                               S’ p *                                                                        fig -
    S £ -2 zrta -ijj                                                                                                  0 39 ■>                                                                                                        o -£ .£
    VA *23
    t r 3 n.                                                                                                                                                                                3 3       pv 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         I gif l l
                                                                                                                                                     o o
                                                                                                             .-iS-B'Sare                       SrsS%                                        Sasrc3
                                                                                                                                                                                           o £ S S S 3
                                                                                                                                               WW u Q.                                     S n 3 Q.A
iVW-i&fc
                                                                                                                                                                                                               to pr ss on
W M
                     fmStgK
                    ‘T “•C?HAivft <3*
                                                                                                                                                                                                               with ID cards
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           By CHARLES HYMAS, Political S tiff :
w                                                                                                                                                                                                                M RS T H A T C H E R d e c id e d to p r e s s a h e a d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 y e s te r d a y w i t h t h e s o c c e r id e n tity c a r d
                                                                                                                                                                                                              - B ill in t h e fa c e o f i n t e n s e p r e s s u r e fr o m
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 th e T o ry b ack b enches to su sp en d th e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 m e a s u re fo llo w in g th e H ills b o ro u g h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 tr a g e d v .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ’ A t tn e s a m e tim e th e G o v e rn m en t
                                           ’
                                           i                                ^?&*S£SSS,                                                                                                                           m o v e d to h e a d o ff t h e t h r e a t o f a n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                e m b a r r a s s i n g d e f e a t i n t h e C o m m o n s by
                                £&&B3iratfin» i i s £ ’                                                                                                                                                          i n d ic a tin g t n e bill c o u ld b e d e la y e d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 l o n g e r t h a n o r ig in a lly p la n n e d . .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     L a s t n i g h t t h e r e w e r e s ig n s t h a t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 b a c k b e n c h e r s w o u ld b e p r e p a r e d to lis te n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 t o t h e G o v e r n m e n t's c a s e l o r b a ttlin g o n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 w ith th e b ill a lth o u g h a n x ie tie s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 re m a in e d .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     S ir M a r c u s F o x . t h e S h ip le y T o r y M P.
■ ^ • tffiiim in «r iiW*iwnrTninrn«MM
                                    tinrij n r i t in i                                      ^         ^ f i m i n r .w u i i .                   -------- ------------------------------------------            w h o is v ic e - c h a ir m a n o f t n e in flu e n tia l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 b a c k b e n c h 1922 C o m m itte e , to ld t h e
Liverpool's manager, Kenny Dalglish, second left, and players pay their respects at yesterday’s funeral                                                                                                          Y o r k s h ir e P o s t; “ A lo t o f d o u b t s till
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S IR M ARCUS FOX
for Mr Gary Church, 19, the first of the Hillsborough victims to be burled. From left: Gary Ablett,                                                                                                              r e m a i n s a m o n g m y c o lle a g u e s .” B u t h e           r e c o m m e n d a ti o n s 'b y L o rd J u s t i c e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                s a id h e w o u ld b e " k e e p in g a; n o p e n                   T ayli ydor.
Dalglish, John Aldridge and John Barnes.                                                                                                                                                                         m in d "                                                                     N o t to pro* p ro c e e d w ith t h e b ill t h i s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  . T h e c h a irm a n of th e T ory b ac k b en c h                 s e s s io n w o u ld d e la y b y 12 m o n t h s a n y


 Funds appeal for soccer safety                                                                                                                                                                                 s p o r t s c o m m itte e , M r J o h n C a rlis le , w h o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 w a n te d a lo n g - te n n p o s tp o n e m e n t a n d a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 n e w bill in tr o d u c e d in t h e n e x t P a r l i a ­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 m e n t a r y s e s s io n , w e lc o m e d t h e lo o s e n in g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 o f t h e " r ig id '' t i m e ta b le fo r t h e ID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      re s p o n s e to t h e s e g r a v e problem s.*’
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           G o v e r n m e n t s o u r c e s s a id th e bill w a s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e n a b lin g le g is la tio n u n d e r w h ic h a n y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      re c o m m e n d a tio n s fr o m t h e T a y lo r i n - ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q u lr y c o u ld b e a c te d u p o n b y th e F o o tb a ll i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |



F O O T B A L L L e a g u e c h ie fs a p p e a le d to              a r e tr e a t e d v e r y m u c h m o r e s t r i n g e n t l y   t h e b a ll r o ilin g b y m a t c h i n g t h e F o o tb a ll
t h e G o v e r n m e n t y e s t e r d a y fo r m o re f u n d s    t l ia n ra c e c o u r s e b e ttin g — t h e t a x is 42.5       A s s o c ia tio n 's i25G,000 d o n a tio n .                          c a rd s.                                                             M e m b e rs h ip A u t h o r ity w h ic h w o u ld be
t o w a r d s g r o u n d s a f e t y ‘m e a s u r e s . •••■ •      p e r c e n t a g a i n s t e i g h t p e r c e n t.        ■ -        D o n a ti o n s m a y b e m a d e a t a n y b a n k o r          ’ 1> “ B iu t m a n y d o r e m a i n s o m e w h a t                   re s p o n s ib le fo r p e ttin g u p t h e I d e n tity ;
   .T h e L e a g u e h a s l a u n c h e d Its o w n s tu d y            “T h e G o v e r n m e n t g e ts £240m a y e a r             b u i l d in g s o c ie ty fo r c r e d it to th e Hills*,               w o r r ie d a b o u t t h a t la r g e ly u n lo v e d b ill       'c a r d s c h e m e . l , • .                                        ■
I n to t h e p o s s ib ility , v ia b ility a n d f e a s i­        fr o m b e ttin g ta x . M u c h o f t h e m o n e y               b o r o u g h D is a s te r A p p e a l F u n d a t B a r­              a n d fe e l a l t e r n a t i v e m e a s u r e s s h o u ld              M rs T h a tc h e r to ld M P s t h e bill d id ,
b ility o f e n c o u r a g in g a ll- s e a te r s ta d iu m s      re c e iv e d fr o m ra c in g Is p lo u g h e d b a c k           c la y s D a nk. C ity O lflce.     lflc e. W a te r S tree t,           h a v e b e e n b r o u g h t f o r w a r d In t h e n e w           n o t p re -e m p t a n y d e c is io n s w h ic h m ig h t
In t h e w a k e o f t n e H i l l s b o r o u g h                   In to t h e i r s p o r t , b u t t h e r e Is n o s u c h         ...........................
                                                                                                                                        L  iv e r p o o l 1,69 2EX  *EX,. a c c o u n t n u m b e r ‘2 056       s e s s io n ," h e s a la .                                         b e t a k e n b y L o r a J u s t ic e T a y lo r .                     j
d is a s te r .                                    • -               p r o v is io n w ith fo o tb a ll.”                             - 5555. s o r tin g c o d e 20-51-01; o r a t th e                             M r J o h n G r e e n w a y , t h e T o r y M P fo r                  It w a s o rig in a lly p la n n e d to h a v e t h e
    I ts v ic e -p re s id e n t, M r G o r d o n M cK eag                F o o tb a ll L e a g u e c lu b s h a v e p le d g e d to ‘ C o o p e r a t i v e B a n k ,                  W e st S tr e e t.    . R y e d a le a n d p r e s id e n t o f Y o r k C ity                 b ill th r o u g h P a r lia m e n t b y J u l y b u t It j
t h e N e w c a s tle c h a i r m a n . le d th e a p p e a l        c o n t r ib u t e a t le a s t E lm t o t h e H ills ­ . S h e f f i e l d S i 3 E X , a c c o u n t n u m b e r                          fo o tb a ll c lu b . 3ald t h e r e s till r e m a in e d            w a s c le a r l a s t n ig h t t h e G o v e r n m e n t h a d
f o r f in a n c ia l a id . H e s a id : " F o o tb a ll P ools     b o r o u g h D is a s te r F u n d . T h e L e a g u e s e t      50000005, s o r tin g c o d e Odwrrs.                                   a “ s tr o n g r i s k ” t h a t t h e b ill w o u ld b e             c o n c e d e d its f in a l s t a g e s s h o u ld b e h e ld ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                d e f e a te d .                                                      o v e r u n t i l t h e s p ill-o v e r s e s s io n in


                 IG A R A G E S v S H E D S                                                 Club chaplain tells                                                                                                      A n n o u n c in g t h e d e c is io n i n t h e Com*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                m o n s y e s te r d a y , M rs T h a tc h e r s a id It
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 w o u ld u e n e g lig e n t to d e la y t h e bill fo r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                a n o t h e r 12 m o n th s .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      O c to b e r.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           L o rd J u s t ic e T a y lo r h a s a lr e a d y in d i-'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      c a te d a n I n te r im r e p o r t is lik ely b efo re th e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       s t a r t o f t h e n e x t s o c c e r s e a s o n g iv in g tim e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ;



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ‘Magnificent’ social
                  'S U M M E R H O U S E S
                    GREENHOUSES                                                             of hero ball boys                                                                                                        M a n y T o ry b a c k b e n c h e r s h a v e b e e n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                c a llin g fo r t h e G o v e r n m e n t to p o s tp o n e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                t h e b u l u n t i l t h e H ills b o r o u g h In q u ir y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                h e a d e d by L o rd J u s tic e T a y lo r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       fo r k e y re c o m m e n d a tio n s to b e In c o r­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       p o r a te d in t h e bill.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B u t in s p ite o f t h e c o n c e s s io n , d o u b ts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      s t i ll re m a in e d . T h e T o ry M P for K e ig h le y .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  workers praised ;
                                                                                           T H E S h e ffie ld W e d n e s d a y c h a p ­            in g so c ia l s e r v ji e s a n d o t h e r                                                                                                                                                               S O C IA L w o r k e r s w h o s e w o r d s o f c o m f o rt
                  C O N S E R V A T O R IE S                                               l a in y e s t e r d a y re v e a le d t h e fu ll         cle rg y .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                r e p o rte d .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     B u t th e P r im e M in is te r sa id a b ill
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      M r G a ry W a lle r, s a id : *'I d o n 't t h i n k It's
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e n o u g h to s a y w e w ill h a v e o n e d a y                          h e lp e d s u r v iv o r s a n d g r ie v in g r e la tiv e s
                                                                                           im p a c t t h e H ills b o r o u g h tr a g e d y             lit; said : “ I c a n o n ly u n d e r lin e                                                                                                                                                            o f t n e d i s a s t e r w e r e p r a i s e d y e s te r d a y b y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                c o m p le te d In t h e c u r r e n t P a r l i a m e n ta r y       lo o k in g a t t h e bill a g a in w h i c h Is w h a t t h e
                                                                                           h a s h a d o n t h e club.                                th e t r e m e n d o u s c o in a g e b e in g                                                                                                                                                              S h e ff ie ld 's so c ia l s e r v ic e s d ir e c to r , M r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                s e s s io n c o u ld still t a k e a c c o u n t o f a n             effec t of t h e sp ill-o v e r p e rio d w o u ld
                                                                                               T eenage m em bers of W ednes­                         s h o w n . T h e r e is s till a s e n s e of                                                                                                                                                              N e il Kay.
                                                                                                                                                      s h o c k a n d a fe e lin g t h a t th e place           I n te r im r e p o r t by 1-ord J u s t ic e T a y lo r .            be.'*
                                                                                           d a y 's J u n io r t e a m s , w h o a c te d as                                                                                                                                               l i e ad d e d : “1 t h in k It is u n f o r tu n a t e t h a t
                                                                                                                                                      will n e v e r h«» tl,e s.u n e a g a in lin t                 “ In th e f.ic e o f t h e r e c o r d o f t h e                                                                                                 M o re t h a n 120 s t a f f fr o m h is d e p a r t ­
                                                                                           b a ll b o y s a t S a t u r d a y 's f a te f u l c u p                                                                                                                                   w e a r e n o t b e in g m o r e fle xible In o u r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                h o o lig a n is m , of t h e r e p u t a t i o n o f th is                                                                                       m e n t, w ith d o z e n s o f v o lu n te e r s fro m
                                                                                           m a tc h , fe rrie d b o d ie s w h e n d i s a s ­        t l u i e . is a re a l d e tc im in a tio n                                                                                    r e s p o n s e to w h a t h a p p e n e d a t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                c o u n tr y , d o es th i s H o u se p o s itiv e ly w is h                                                                                      c h u r c h e s a n d o t h e r b o d ie s, u s e d a bo y s'
                                                                                           t e r s tr u c k .                                         a m o n g c \ t r y o i i e to c a r r y o n a n d to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                to d e la y for 12 m o n t h s a n a d o n o t h i n g in             ilills D o ro u g h .“                                                      c lu b n e a r t h e s t a d i u m a s a c o u n s e llin g
                                                                                               M a n y o f t h e c lu b 's y o u n g fo o t­          co o p e r a t e w ilh t h e in q u ir y so we                                                                                       S ir M a r c u s , w h o a s v ic e -c h a irm a n o f t h e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                fa c e of d e a t h s w e h a v e r e c e n tl y s e e n ," s h e                                                                                 c e n t r e fo r fr ie n d s a n d r e la tiv e s o f t h e d e a a
                                                                                           b a lle r s h a v e re c e iv e d e x p e r t c o u n ­    c a n l e a r n f r o m t h i s e x p e rie n c e "                                                                              iy22 C o m m itte e Is r e g a r d e d a s a w e ath er*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                asked.                                                                                                                                            a n d I n ju re d , w o r k in g r o u n d th e clock.
                                                                                           s e llin g to h e l p th e m r e c o v e r fr o m              M r W ilso n is a ls o c h a p la in to                                                                                      v a n e fo r t h e m o o d o f c o lle a g u e s, s a id
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     S h e sa id t h e d e c is io n w a s b e in g ta k e n                                                                                          M r K a y s a id : “ T h e re s p o n s e w a s
                                                                                           t h e s lio ck o f w itn e s s in g s u c h                S o u th Y o r k s h ir e 's fir e s e rv ic e ,                                                                                 b a c k b e n c h e r s w o u ld n e e d to b e a s s u r e d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ag a in s t a b ac k g ro u n d of fo u r d ecades of                                                                                             m a g n ific e n t. T h e s i t u a t i o n r e a u lr e d lm*
                                                                                           t r a u m a t ic s c e n e s a t c lo s e h a n d .        w h o s e o f t n v r s h a v e a ls o b e e n                                                                                   t h a t " a lot o f o p tio n s a r e g o in g to b e left
                                                                                                                                                                                                                p r o b le m s w i t h c r o w d s a f e ty a n d tw o                                                                                            p r o v is a tio n a n d fle x ib ility o n t h e p a r t of
                                                                                                N ow t h e i r c h a p la in , t h e R ev             d b n i i l u l b y t h e sc a le of th e                                                                                        o p e n to n u k e c h a n g e s .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                d e c a d e s o f h o o lig a n is m .                                                                                                            s ta ff, w h o c o p e d w e ll i n v e ry d iffic u lt
                                                                                           G o r d o n W ilso n , Is p la n n i n g to                e m e rg e n c y w h ic h c o n fro n te d                                                                                           ’“H ie r e a r e g o in g to b e a lot of
                                                                                           p ro v id e s i m il a r s u p p o r t fo r first-                                                                        " N e a rly 300 p e o p le h a v e d ie d ," s h e to lc                                                                                     c ir c u m s ta n c e s ."
                    m m HUGERANGEONPOTAYlpfP                                                                                                          th e m ,                                                  M l's. “ We h a v e t n e w o r st r e c o rd In th e                 d i s c u s s io n s a n d a l o t o f r e a s s u r a n c e fo r a
                                                                                           t e a m s ta r s .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S ocial s e r v ic e s s t a f f fr o m K e n t a n d
                     ■‘   FREESURVEYSERVICED '.                                                                                                           O n S a t u r d a y hi* w a s a t Ihlhi-              d e v e lo p e d w o rld .                                             n u m b e r o f u s to s u p p o r t th e m e a s u r e ," he              B ra d f o rd w e n t to S h e ff ie ld y e s te r d a y to
                                                                                               S e n io r p la y e r s h a v e b e e n r e l u c ­
                                                                                                                                                      b o r o u g h w ith m a n h o u r of th e                      " T o re fu s e t o p a s s t h e bill th is s e s s io n        added.                                                                      h e l p s ta f f t h e r e to l e a r n fr o m c o u n s e llin g
                    OVERTWENTYFIVEYEAIREXPERIENCE                                          t a n t to d is c u s s t h e tr a g e d y w Inc h         d is a s te r a l t e r h e a r in g a ra d io            to d e a l w ith p r o b le m s a l r e a d y Id e n tif ie d              T h e l a b o u r l e a d e r . M r Neil K in n o c k ,                e x p e rie n c e g a in e d In t h e w a k e o f th e
                                                                                           t h e y w a tc h e d u n fo ld fr o m th e ir              a p p e a l fo r m e d ic a l h e lp w h ile e u                                                                                 c la im e d th e d e c is io n to p ro c e e d w ith th e
                             C O T 5 W O L O B U I L P I N C S UM rTC O                                                                                                                                         a n d t h e n to le a v e o u r s e lv e s w ith n o                                                                                              V a lle y P a r a d e fire a n d t h e Z e e b ru g g e
                                                                                           h o m e g r o u n d 's m a in s ta n d .
                         FerndaleNutstjry&GafflenCenire                                        M r W ilso n , a m e m b e r o f th e
                                                                                                                                                      r o u te to a W eddm ;; r e c e p tio n                   v e h ic le by w h ic h to r e s p o n d im m e d ia te ly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                to t h e le s s o n s fr o m H lHsborotiL'h i n c l u d ­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       bill w a s e ffec tiv e ly " p u t ti n g th e v ita l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q u e s tio n o f id e n tity c a r d s o lf lim its to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  fe r r y d is a s te r ; a n d t h e S a m a r it a n s offered
                           CoalAslon.Dronlield,Sheffield ,                                 M e th o d is t C h u r c h 's i n d u s t r i a l             lie said . T h e l.iH Ik >>s w e re n l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                in g a n a ll s e a t in g s t a d i u m w o u ld b e a v e r y        L o rd J u s tic e T a y lo r ” a n d u n d e r m in in g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  to p ro v id e s u p p o r t fo r s o c ia l w o r k e rs a n d
                     \ Telephone:Oronlmld41!662                                            m is s io n In t h e c ity , h a s b e e n                 th e f r o n t h u e , w o r k in g like h e r o e s
                                                                                                                                                      to g e t v ict im s o u t. re v iv e th e m am i          g r a v e d e c is io n for t h i s H o u se .                         t h e in q u iry .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  p e o p le t r a u m a t ls e d b y t h e tra g e d y .
                      ChalliaGardenCentre.Boroughbnd^eRd.J                                 c o - o r d in a tin g a id b y p r o v id in g a
                                                                                           lin k b e tw e e n t h e c l u b ’s o ffic ials            c a r r y a w a y th e in ju r e d a n d d y in g .            *'A bill c o m p le te d tn th i s s e s s io n w o u ld               H e s a id it w a s a n offence a g a i n s t
                                 York.Tel:7S0066         '                                 a n d o u ts id e o r g a n is a tio n s , i n c l u d ­   It w a s a m a g n if ic e n t e ffo rt."                 s till be a b le to t a k e a c c o u n t o f a n y I n te r im        c o m m o n s e n s e a n d c o m m o n dec en c y .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Bereaved to travel
                                                                                                                                           F an s say th a n k you w ith flowers                                                                                                                                                                                  A T le a s t 50 o f t h e b e r e a v e d will tr a v e l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  to a m e m o r ia l s e r v ic e fo r t h e H ills ­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  b o r o u g h v ic tim s in S h e ffie ld C a th e d r a l on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  S u n d a y e v e n in g . T h e A r c h b is h o p o f Y ork,
                                                                                                                                           A WOMA.\* b u r.it in to te.tr> w h e n a                           I V n ty 's h u i n e in B ro w n in g R o ad , F o x h ill,           sh o c k e d a n d d is tr e s s e d . I j u s t d id w h a t I
                                                                    S n s a is im n s                                                      b o u q u e t from tw o L iv erp o o l f.ius a r m e d
                                                                                                                                           o n h . r d o o rste p .
                                                                                                                                                                                                               b e w ild e re d a m i w e a r in g o n e shoe.                        c o u ld .”
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          P o lic e w h o h a v e w o r k e d o v e r tim e s in c e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  D r J o h n H a b g o o d , w ill p re a c h .


                                                                                                                                               M rs h-a n I 'e n ty . of SUt'UiHd. o tte re d
                                                                                                                                           h e lp w h e n M r M.ir-. H aiim -v am ! M r S teve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  S h e in v ite d h im in a n d k e p t a
                                                                                                                                                                                                               lo o k o u t fo r M r G r ic e , w h o s e c a r w a s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      t h e d is a s te r a r e d o n a tin g t h e i r o v e r tim e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      p a y to th e H ills b o ro u g h appe al.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Volunteers needed
                                                                                                                                                                                                               p a r k e d o u ts id e . B o th p h o n e d h o m e to t e ll             S h e ffie ld 's Ow le r to n S p o rts S ta d iu m is                  V O L U N T E E R S a r e n e e d e d for a s tr e e t
                                                                                                                                           G ric e, b o ih ui tH u l u w . a n iv« d d M n ^ s r d             th e i r r e la tiv e s th e y w e r e safe.
                                                                                                                                           a t h e r h o u ;c a f t . t U k Ih lM m i'o u g h                                                                                         to s t a g e a g r e y h o u n d m e e tin g o n                            c o lle c tio n tn S h effie ld to m o r r o w in a id of
                                                                                                                                           d i ..e t e r                                                           Mi s i ’e iity said : ” ! h a d a w e e p w h e n I                W e d n e sd a y , M ay 3 fo r th e appe al.                                t h e H ills b o ro u g h d i s a s t e r a p p e a l. A n y o n e
                                                                                                                                               Mr II inn* (.        lj‘i w.i •       ‘d u ih i >i >            s a w tht* flower:;. I ju s l n e v e r ex p e c te d                      All g a te a n d r a c e c a r d re c e ip ts will h e                  w i s l t in g to h e l p is a s k e d to r i n g
                                                                                   j c r « s> i u u
                               C IT Y OF SHEFFIELD — M E M O R A N D U M

From        The Ac     ead of Administration;        •]-0   The City Treasurer"
            and Leg.   partment

Date          10 th Mi   989
Ref.          MRO
Tel. Ext.
              4007 - Mr.                             Ref.




            Financial Implications of the*Hillsborough Disaster/Inquiry

            At a meeting on 10th May, 1989, with officers involved with aspects of
            the Hillsborough disaster and arrangements for the subsequent Inquiry by
            Lord Justice' Taylor, consideration was given to the financial issues arising
            from the events. These would appear to fall into two categories as follows

                    (a) the financial issues arising from action taken by the Local
            Authority in connection with the arrangements for the Inquiry which was
            set up by the Home Office and for which the Home Office has undertaken
            to meet all reasonable costs; and

                    (b) the broader financial implications arising from the operational
            action     taken by this Authority following the Hillsborough disaster,
            including inspection/repair work and possible overtime/honorarium payments.

            There are a number of Departments involved in the issues arising from the
            disaster and there is now a need to establish a formal central mechanism
            through which the financial aspects of these issues can be co-ordinated.

            I should therefore be most grateful if you would undertake within your
            Department, the collation and evaluation of the financial data and cost
            implications to the Authority, with a view to the preparation of a submission
            to the Home Office and, if necessary, a report to the Policy Committee
            in due course.

            Subject to your agreement as respects these arrangements I will arrange
            for a memorandum to be circulated to all Chief Officers.




            JD
BRIEFING NOTES


Tuesday, 18th April, 1989



Transportation of Bodies of Victims back to home towns


Liverpool Victims

To be organised (at no cost) by Liverpool branch of National Association
of Funeral Directors:-

         Co-ordinator
                         Tel. (051)
                           or (051)
                         FAX (051)
                         (marked for urgent attention of

Initial contact 12.15 p.m. on Tuesday, 18th April - Passed on details of
arrangements for Inquest together with my telephone number, the telephone
number of the Police Co-ordinator and the Medico-Legal Centre.

Liverpool undertakers do not want to have responsibility for personal
possessions/valuables of deceased.

Noted further information required including details of bodies to be released
each day (particularly those to be released at 4.00 p.m. today). Request
passed to R. Michie who will supply that information direct.

R. Michie to sent appropriate information with plan of Sheffield to Liverpool
undertakers via FAX.


Other Victims

To be co-ordinated by Sheffield Family and Community Services Department
in consultation with Social Services Departments of Authorities concerned.


Police

Action co-ordinated through Chief Inspector Addiss    Tel. 852120
                                                        or 852121

Police advised that Liverpool undertakers prefer NOT to return possessions/
valuables with bodies - separate arrangements required. R. Michie also
informed of this- view.

Police notified of arrangements for removal of bodies.
    t




Emergency Liaison Officer

P.S.     (a)   Liverpool do NOT want police escort - Police notified 2.45 p.m.
         (b)   Liverpool City Council to meet transportation costs of bodies
               of ALL victims.
         (c)   Issue of possessions/valuables resolved between police and
               Liverpool undertakers.
       8 3 ? >9                                                                                Sch 9 )6 0
                                            C IT Y OF S HEFFIELD — M E M O R A N D U M

From              The Acting Head of Administration                To     The City Treasurer
                  and Legal Department

Date                   10th May, 1989
Ref.                   MRO        _______
Tel. Ext.              4007 - Mr.                                  Ref.




                  Financial Implications of the Hillsborough Disaster/Inquiry

                  At a meeting on 10th May, 1989, with officers involved with aspects of
                  the Hillsborough disaster and arrangements for the subsequent Inquiry by
                  Lord Justice Taylor, consideration was given to the financial issues arising
                  from the events. These would appear to fall into two categories as follows

                          (a) the financial issues arising from action taken by the Local
                  Authority in connection with the arrangements for the Inquiry which was
                  set up by the Home Office and for which the Home Office has undertaken
                  to meet all reasonable costs; and

                          (b) the broader financial implications arising from the operational
                  action     taken by this Authority following the Hillsborough disaster,
                  including inspection/repair work and possible overtime/honorarium payments.

                  There are a number of Departments involved in the issues arising from the
                  disaster and there is now a need to establish a formal central mechanism
                  through which the financial aspects of these issues can be co-ordinated.

                  I should therefore be most grateful if you would undertake within your
                  Department, the collation and evaluation of the financial data and cost
                  implications to the Authority, with a view to the preparation of a submission
                  to the Home Office and, if necessary, a report to the Policy Committee
                  in due course.

                  Subject to your agreement as respects these arrangements I will arrange
                  for a memorandum to be circulated to all Chief Officers.




                  JD
INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE RECEIPT AND RETRIEVAL OF MESSAGES

ft-   RECEIVING CALLS

       1. The pager must be switched to the ’N ’ position to
          receive calls.

       S. When a message has been left in the VOICEBANK, the
          pager will bleep.  If the message is not retrieved
          VOICEBANK will page you twice more at 30 minute
          intervals.

       3. To cancel the bleep depress the control switch.

       4.    If the control switch is left in the ’M’ position the
            pager will not bleep but it will store the calls.   To
            find out whether or not a call has been received the
            control switch should be moved to the ’N’ position
            and the pager will bleep if a call has been stored.
            Depression of the control switch cancel the bleep arid
            erase the stored call.

       5.    The pager should be switched off when not in use to
            preserve the battery by sliding the control switch to
            ’OFF’.

            MN £400 alkaline batteries should be used.

       6. Messages will be erased automatically after 40 hours.

B.     RETRIEVING MESSAGES

       1. The retrieval telephone number is


       In case of queries contact              extension 5000.
       (or at home on




        VCBNK4.DOC
BRIEFING NOTES


Tuesday, 18th April, 1989


Transportation of Bodies of Victims back to home towns


Liverpool Victims

To be organised (at no cost) by Liverpool branch of National Association
of Funeral Directors:-

         Co-ordinator   |
                        ___________ ______
                        Tel. (051)
                           or (051)
                         FAX (051) __________
                         (marked for urgent attention of

Initial contact 12.15 p.m. on Tuesday, 18th April - Passed on details of
arrangements for Inquest together with my telephone number, the telephone
number of the Police Co-ordinator and the Medico-Legal Centre.

Liverpool undertakers do not want to have responsibility for personal
possessions/valuables of deceased.

Noted further information required including details of bodies to be released
each day (particularly those to be released at 4.00 p.m. today). Request
passed to R. Michie who will supply that information direct.

R. Michie to sent appropriate information with plan of Sheffield to Liverpool
undertakers via FAX.


Other Victims

To be co-ordinated by Sheffield Family and Community Services Department
in consultation with Social Services Departments of Authorities concerned.


Police

Action co-ordinated through Chief Inspector Addiss    Tel. 852120
                                                        or 852121

Police advised that Liverpool undertakers prefer NOT to return possessions/
valuables with bodies - separate arrangements required. R. Michie also
informed of this view.

Police notified of arrangements for removal of bodies.




Emergency Liaison Officer

P.S.     (a)   Liverpool do NOT want police escort - Police notified 2.45 p.m.
         (b)   Liverpool City Council to meet transportation costs of bodies
               of ALL victims.
         (c)   Issue of possessions/valuables resolved between police and
               Liverpool undertakers.
AdministrationOffice:                                                                          RegisteredOffice:
26, Crabtree Lane, Sheffield S5 7AY.                                                           45, Strelley Avenue, Sheffield S 8 OBE.
Telephone Sheffield (0742) 425379                                                              Telephone Sheffield (0742) 747510.
                                                           BEGON

                                                BECON
                               A non-profit, non-political public service organisation.




       Hr
       Principle Assistant                                                               ADMINISTRATOR               s-fiAl
       Administration and Legal Department
       Town Hall                                                                        A
       Surrey Street
       Sheffield SI 2HH                                                                ( ? ) 2 1 APR 1989

        18th April 1989
                                                                                                                                         (

       Dear Sir

                        RE:      HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUSE DISASTER:

       I feel I must write and express my concern regarding certain matters
       relating to the above incident. As an Emergency organisation, albeit
       voluntary, with a uniformed and disciplined membership trained and equipped
       in Communications, First Aid and specialised ground rescue, I find it
       inconceivable that our services were not requested.

        Ironically, some of our First Aid staff were on duty only a short distance
        away at the Sheffield Ski Village and heard the request for doctors to
        attend the incident via Radio Sheffield. Also at this location for a
        standard training session was our mobile Communications Control unit. All
        staff at that location came to immediate readiness at 15:20hrs and awaited
        further instructions. Other staff around the city made radio contact to our
        main control. In short, some 15 trained personnel could have attended the
        incident with stretchers and much    needed equipment by 15:30hrs. Others
        would have followed by 5 to 10 minutes depending on any traffic problems.

        I feel I must also mention that we have been made aware of other
        organisations which were not requested but took it upon themselves to
        attend the incident in any event. ¥e too felt this way inclined but
        disciplined ourselves to receive instructions via the Emergency Disaster
        Plan. In fact, no such call was received and it was impossible to contact
        the Incident Room at Snig Hill by telephone.

        I am sure you will understand our    frustrations and                                         to be blunt, angerand
        also the need for some answers as   to why a trained                                          and well equipped
        organisation was not called upon to help.


        Yours faithfully,




                                          occon Emergency Communications Network Ltd.

      DIRECTORS: J. Blake, D. Cox, L. Cox, M.A. George, T.W. George, P.H. Gordon, C. Lippeatt, G.T. Parker, P.V. Parker, M. Steer.
                               Registered in England, Company No. 1743731, Limited by Guarantee.
P ossib le Meeting   R   o o d   Venues

Central

St. Paul's Parade                  2 small rooms           300   sq.ft.       Vacant
                                   1 dance studio          700   sq.ft.       Vacant .

The Moor - Shop Unit               Shop unit              2000   sq.ft.       Vacant

Town Hall Chambers                 Lecture Theatre                            Courses
                                                                              arranged

17 Matilda Street                  1st & Grd. Floor        4-40 seated        Vacant
                                   offices

Furnival House                     4th Floor                                  Vacant.
                                   1st Floor                                  Courses
                                                                              arranged.

City Plaza                         2 meeting r oom s       16 persons         Heavily
                                                                              booked

Town Hall Extension                1st floor Conference    700 sq.ft.     ]   divides into
                                   room                                   ]   three
                                   2nd floor Conference    700 sq.ft.     ]   separate
                                   room                                   }   rooms

Education Office                   2 Committee Rooms                          Fully
                                                                              utilised.
                                   2 Committee Rooms                          Under
                                                                              Repair.

Reivers House                      1 meeting room          20 persons         Heavily
                                                                              booked

48/62 Pinstone Street             2nd floor offices      20-30 persons
                                  3 rooms various sizes.

Central Library                   Committee Room          25 persons

Palatine Chambers                 4th floor office        225 sq.ft.

3arkers Pool House                2 offices on the        120 sq.ft.
                                  2nd floor               192 sq.ft;
                                  1 office 3rd floor      310 sq.ft.

City Hall                                                                     Subject to
                                                                              negotiation
                                                                              re-lettings
                                                                              etc.

Medico Legal Centre               Large room              70 persons          - fit around
                                                                                timetable.
2   .
Possibles

Brooncroft                                                Vacant

Park Head House                                           Vacant

Castle Dyke                                               Vacant




Schools




District Accommodation

Library - Hillsborough      Conaittee Roon    25 people

    "     - Chapeltown           II     I!    30 people

          - Darnall         Meeting     "     20-30 people

    "     - Upperthorpe     Community   "     20 people

    "     - Crystal Peaks   Waterthorpe       50 people
                            Library Theatre


Grenoside Offices           Council Chanber   40 people.
                            Canteen           40 people out of lunch
                                              hours.


Stocksbridge Offices        Council Chamber   20 people used by
                                              Parish Council.




kbl/zfs'a)
 NEWS RELEASE                                             50 Queen Anne'# Gale London SW1H 9AT
                                                          (Night line 01 -273 4595)
                                                          Contact Number:




HOME OFFICE PRESS OFFICE                   FAC8IMILIE TRANSMISSION


    prom :


    TO:

    ORGANISATION:
                                                             \                             C o v A J C i L_
    DATE

    t im e   :




    NUMBER OF PAGES INCLUDINC THIS ONE;




    IF THIS,OR ANY OTHER PAGES WITHIN THIS TRANSMISSION ARE UNCLEAR,
    PLEASE TELEPHONE:
                                             01 - 273 -
                                           ■•(■■■■•••■■■■■■a           IMMEDIATELY.




   RECEIVED      F ROM   01   222   5182                         4.17.1989      15 : l 3              P. 1.
                                                       AG’
                   THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

            STATEMENT BY HOME SECRETARY;    17 APRIL 1989



With permission/ Mr Speoker, I             should like to make a
statement about the disaster at            the Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club ground at Hillsborough             on Saturday.
Ever/onepeople*
            has been horrified by this incredible tragedy in
whi ch 94^1ost their lives and 174 were injured.

Shortly after the start of the match there was a surge of
spectators on the Leppings Lane terrace which crushed many at
the front agoinst the perimeter fence. This accounted for
m os t of the deaths and- injuries.


The m a t c h was due to start at 3 p.m.     To help ensure orderly
access/ the gates of the ground were opened at 12 noon.                 At
2,30 p,m, most of the Nottingham fans were in the ground/ but
many of the Liverpool supporters were still arriving.              It was
         mosV of
cleor to^the police officers in charge that there was ample
                               \'
capacity still to be filled in some parts of the enclosure
allocated to Liverpool.
                     II
                               i

At about 2.45 p.m. ,there was a large crowd            of     Liverpool
supporters at the turnstiles in Leooings Lane behind the West
Stand.     There was difficulty in cooing with the pressure on
the turnstiles and the police used loudhailers to              urge     the
crowd t o be p a t i e n t .




                                               /At about    2 . 5 0 p. m.
At about 2.50 P.m. more Liverpool supporters a r r i ve d a n d the
numbers in front of the turnstiles increased.^                 Some
                                     ii^K   thp w a l l s   and     turnstiles        ana
supporters started to               climb the walls
those at the f r o n t of           the crowd outside         the     stadium
u „der c o n s id e r a b l e pressure from those behind.


       je n lo r                                                                     ” ”
 possible          danger to the lives of the s p e c t a t o r s o              ^       ^
 Of  the crowd outside the stadium. In order                                                     ^
 pressure he arranged for an exit gate near t e u                                            ^
 be opened to let a section of the crow                    ro
  relationship of that action to the disaster on
  shortly a f t e r w a r d s is d e a r l y a central auestion
  investigated,

                          n .   M i n k t p r and l y e s t e r d a y v i s i t e d
  tty Rt Hon friend,the Prime Minister
                       ^ nun the two S h e f f i e l d h o s p i t a l s v m i c n
   the football around and the                                                 ^
                            t would 1 ike to pay         tribute
   received casualties.                         H n n « at t h e ground,
   those involved in the rescue °oerotlo" S                          ond to
    including the many spectators who gave the r e
      thoSe others,          including the hospital                                                  the
      agencies who hove since been working s                                         acc ounts
      injured and consoling the bereaved. Vie
      of courage exerted on behalf of others.




                                                                  /I h a v e a s k e d
I have asked for further factual reports from the p ol ic e and
other services* the local authority and the Football
Association,              Inquests will be held in due course.                                        But over
end   above            th i s >       there      is     clearly           need           for   a     full      and
independent inquiry to identify the causes of the d i s a s t e r
and to examine what needs to be done to prevent such an
accident          happening             again.              I    have         therefore            asked      Lord
Justice Taylor to carry out an inquiry* with the follo w in g
terms of references

           MT ©        in q u iro       In to    tho        o v s n tc   nt

           Wednesday football ground on 15 April 1989
           and to make recommendations about the needs
           of
         -I-..    I.
                      crowd       j
                                      control         and        safety        at        sports



Hr Brian Johnson,                       the Chief               Constable           of    Lancashire*          has
agreed           to      assist            the        inquiry            as         an ., assessor;            and
arrangements will be made as necessary for other q u a li f ie d
assessors to be a ppointed and for the inquiry to be p ro vi d ed
with technical advice and support.                                            I am asking              that     the
inquiry should prpceed with all possible speed.                                                    Lord J ustice
Taylor           will             visit         Sheffield           tomorrow              to        b egin      his
investigation.                      I     am     grateful           to        him        for   a gr ee i ng     to
undertake this task.



                                                                                / H o w e v e r * we n e e d
However* we need also to take a wider view. The G ov ernment
believes that the future of football in this country lies in
a notional membership scheme in designated grounds and now it
seems also in providing all seated accommodation at major
football     clubs.      This would          involve   the dis ap p ea ra n ce   of
terraces at those grounds. It might also involve amendments
to strengthen the Football Spectators Bill so that its
provisions for the licensing of grounds mat ch e d this
concept. We shall be considering these matters urgently.



An appeal fund is being set             up    by the civic a uthorities of
                         ' :'i>
Liverpool# N o t t i n gh am      and Sheffield.       The G ov ernment will be
                           »'                                   I
contributing £500/000 immediately towards this fund,
                           ’»

                                                               !(
This was a devastating tragedy.                 Our deep svmnnthv anes tn
the families of those who died/ to those
those still fighting for life and health.                   We, owe a d u t y ^ t o
these passionate supporters of football to examine urgently
an,d thoroughly the causes and background/ and to do all in
our power to prevent such a thing happening again.                        We have
to set our sights high and find a better way for British
football.
