                                                                                                                        355

                 ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE


                              94/97               Hackney Carriage and Private Hire          Refuse on the grounds that the applicant
                                                  Driver’s Licence                           is not a fit and proper person by reason of
                                                                                             the circumstances now reported.

                              102/97               Hackney Carriage and Private Hire         (a) Revoke the hackney carriage and
                                                   Driver’s Licence and Private Hire         private hire drivers licence on the
                                                   Vehicle Licence                           grounds that he is not a fit and proper
                                                                                             person by reason of the circumstances
                                                                                             now reported and (b) no action be taken
                                                                                             with respect to the private hire vehicle
                                                                                             licence




                              Meeting of the Licensing Sub-Committee held 5th September, 1997. Present: Councillors D.
                              Jones (Chair), M. C. Brelsford, Mrs. Newton, Mrs. E. Smith, M. Smith and K. Walayat.




                       (1)    Apologies fo r Absence
                                      An apology for absence was received from Councillor Mrs. Chadwick.

                       (2)    Exclusion o f the Public and Press
                              RESOLVED: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before consideration takes
                              place of the following items of business to be transacted on the grounds that, if the public and
                              press were present during the consideration of such business, there would be a disclosure to them
                              of exempt information described in paragraphs 7 and 12 of Schedule 12A to the Local Government
                              Act 1972, as amended by the Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985, relating to the
                              financial or business affairs of any person other than the Authority and legal matters and advice,
                              respectively.

                       §(3)   Hackney Carriage and Private Hire Licensing/Security Staff Registration Scheme Appeals
 tion takes                   Hackney Carriage and Private Hire Licensing
■lie and                                The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted details in respect of eight cases
re to them                    relating to hackney carriage and private hire licensing and four applicants attended the meeting
                              and addressed the Sub-Committee.
\c t 1985
:gal m atte^^F                Case No.                 Licence Type                               Decision

                              104/97                   Hackney Carriage and Private Hire          Refuse the Hackney Carriage and
                                                       Driver’s Licence and Private Hire          Private Hire Driver’s Licence and
ietails of                                             Vehicle Licences                           revoke the Private Hire Vehicle
 attended                                                                                         Licences, on the grounds that the
                                                                                                  applicant is not a fit and proper
                                                                                                  person by reason of the convictions
                                                                                                  and possible breach of Licensing
                                                                                                  legislation now reported.

 w reported                   105/97                   Hackney Carriage and Private Hire          No action be taken to suspend or
-nd or revoc                                           Driver’s Licence and Private Hire          revoke the Hackney Carriage and
nt be given.                                           Vehicle Licence                            Private Hire Driver’s Licence and the
future conck                                                                                      Private Hire Vehicle Licence but the
                                                                                                  licensee be given a warning as
                                                                                                  regards the need to produce
                                                                                                  Insurance as required by the
                                                                                                  Licensing legislation.
356

 ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE


            107/97                   Hackney Carriage and Private Hire         Revoke the Hackney Carriage and
                                     Driver’s Licence                          Private Hire Driver’s Licence as the
                                                                               applicant is not a fit and proper
                                                                               person by reason of the convictions
                                                                               now reported.

            110/97                   Hackney Carriage and Private Hire         Refuse the Hackney Carriage and
                                     Driver’s Licence                          Private Hire Driver’s Licence on the
                                                                               grounds that the applicant is not a fit
                                                                               and proper person by reason of the
                                                                               medical information now reported.

            103/97                   Hackney Carriage and Private Hire         Defer consideration to the next
                                     Driver’s Licence                          meeting of the Sub-Committee to
                                                                               allow the applicant to attend.

            106/97                   Hackney Carriage and Private Hire         Suspend the Hackney Carriage and
                                     Driver’s Licence and Private Hire         Private Hire Driver’s Licence
                                     Vehicle Licence                           Private Hire Vehicle Licence 1
                                                                               reason of the convictions now
                                                                               reported

            108/97                   Private Hire Operator’s Licence           Refuse the Private Hire Operator’s
                                                                               Licence as the applicant is not a fit
                                                                               and proper person by reason of the
                                                                               lack of information provided with the
                                                                               Licence application.

            109/97                   Hackney Carriage and Private Hire         Refuse the Hackney Carriage and
                                     Driver’s Licence                          Private Hire Driver’s Licence on the
                                                                               grounds that the applicant is not a fit
                                                                               and proper person by reason of the
                                                                               medical information now reported.

            Security Staff Registration Scheme - Appeals against Refusal of Applications for Registration
                      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted details in respect of one case
            relating to an appeal against a refusal of an application for registration on the Security Staff
            Registration Scheme. The applicant did not attend the Sub-Committee.
            RESOLVED: That the application now submitted (Case No. S29/97) be refused in view of the
            convictions now reported.

            (NOTE: 1. Councillor K. Walayat entered the meeting during consideration of Case No. 104/97
            and did not speak or vote there; and
                     2. Councillor D. Jones declared an interest in Case Nos. 107/97 and 106/97 and left the
            meeting during their consideration upon which Councillor E. Smith occupied the Chair.)




            Meeting of the Licensing Sub-Committee held 18th September, 1997. Present: Councillors Ms.
            Bowden, M. C. Brelsford, Mrs. Chadwick, Colk, Macfarlane, Nazir, Mrs. Newton, Mrs. E. Smith,
            M. Smith and K. Walayat.
                                                                                                       357

ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE


      (1)    Apologies fo r Absence
                     Apologies for absence were received from Councillors Ms. Fiore, D. Jones, Mrs. Leek, P.
             Moore and Webster.

     §(2)    Safety o f Sports - Issue o f Revised General Safety Certificates
                       The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted reports describing the
             alterations and general improvements which had been made at the Hillsborough and Bramall Lane
             Football Stadia prior to the commencement of 1997/98 football season, including the creation of
             new alcohol sale outlets at both Stadia. He stated that he had, prior to the commencement of the
             football season, granted an amended General Safety Certificate in respect of both Stadia and
             served copies on the Clubs and the Inspector for the South Yorkshire area of the Football
             Licensing Authority and the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group.
             RESOLVED: That confirmation be given to the action taken by the City Solicitor and Head of
             Administration in granting revised and amended General Safety Certificates in respect of the
             Hillsborough and Bramall Lane Football Stadia.

      §(3)   Hillsborough Stadium - Extension o f Office Accommodation
                       The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report referring to his decision
             to approve proposals submitted by Messrs. Bucknall, Austin & Co. to extend the South Stand
             second floor office accommodation at the Hillsborough Football Stadium. He stated that the
             Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group had raised no objections to the proposals but the South
             Yorkshire Fire Service and the City Council’s Building Surveyor had detailed a number of points
             to be included in the approval of any proposals.
             RESOLVED: That confirmation be given to the action of the City Solicitor and Head of
             Administration in approving the proposals set out in the report now submitted for the extension of
             the South Stand second floor office accommodation at the Hillsborough Football Stadium, subject
             to the incorporation of the requirements of the City Council’s Building Surveyor and the South
             Yorkshire Fire Service and full Building Regulation approval within the scheme.

      §(4)   Public Entertainments Licensing
             Millionaires. Carver Street
                        The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on an application for
             the renewal of a public entertainments licence in respect of Millionaires, Carver Street. The hours
             applied for were 10.00 a.m. to 1.00 a.m. the following morning Monday to Saturday and 12 noon
             to 1.00 a.m. the following morning Sunday which accorded,with the provisions of the current
             licence. The reports indicated that no adverse observations had been received from the inspecting
             authorities as a result of a pre-arranged inspection of the premises and that on an unannounced
             visit to the premises by Licensing Officers on 6th December, 1996 there were a small number of
             recent omissions from the inspection records and some people were drinking from glasses and
             bottles on the dance floor. These matters were raised with the licensee and following a further
             visit to the premises the inspection and security staff records had been checked and found to be in
             good order and action had been taken to address the problem of drinking on the dance floor.
             RESOLVED: That approval be given for the public entertainments licence in respect of premises
             at Millionaires, Carver Street to be renewed for a period of 12 months.

             The Leadmill, Leadmill Road
                       The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on an application for
             the renewal of a public entertainments licence in respect of The Leadmill, Leadmill Road. The
             hours applied for were 10.00 a.m. to 2.00 a.m. the following morning Monday to Thursday, 10.00
             a.m. to 6.00 a.m. the following morning Friday, 10.00 a.m. to 4.00 a.m. the following morning
             Saturday and 12 noon to 12 midnight on Sunday. The report indicated that no adverse
             observations on the condition of the premises had been received from the inspecting authorities
             arising from a pre-arranged inspection of the premises and that two unannounced night time
ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE


          visits by Licensing Officers had been made to the premises on 7th December, 1996 and 17th
          August, 1997. On the second of the visits it was noted that three security staff employed at the
          club were not registered under the Council’s Security Staff Registration Scheme, no health and
          safety matters arose from the visits and the Inspection and Security Staff records were found to be
          in good order.
                    An Officer from the Director of Environmental Services and Standards addressed the
          Sub-Committee and stated that on his re-visit to the premises on 17th September, 1997 the minor
          defects had been remedied.
                    The applicant addressed the Sub-Committee and stated that security staff at the club
          would now be required to confirm that they were registered under the Council’s Security Staff
          Registration Scheme prior to their signing a contract of employment.
          RESOLVED: That approval be given for the public entertainments licence in respect of the
          Leadmill, Leadmill Road to be renewed for a period of 12 months.

           The Roxv. Arundel Gate
                    The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on an application to
          renew the public entertainments licence in respect of The Roxy, Arundel Gate. The hours applied
          for were 10.00 a.m. to 2.00 a.m. the following morning Sunday to Thursday and 10.00 a.m. to 3.0
          a.m. the following morning Friday and Saturday.
                    The report indicated that following a pre-arranged inspection of the premises by officers
          from the Directorate of Environmental Services and Standards a large number of defects had been
          identified for example, damaged seating and damaged tables. Inspection and Security Staff
          records had been checked and were in good order. Following an unannounced visit on 2nd March,
           1997 by Licensing Officers it was observed that none of the security staff on duty were registered
          under the Council’s Security Staff Registration Scheme and that the nosings to some of the
          external stairs were damaged and in need of repair. A further unannounced visit on 8th June, 1997
          had revealed that all security staff present had now been registered under the Council’s scheme
          and the condition relating to security staff records was being complied with and that only limited
          progress had been made towards remedying the defective nosings of external stairs.
                    An officer from the Directorate of Environmental Services and Standards informed the
          Sub-Committee that following the identification of a number of repairs at The Roxy and a further
          inspection of the premises on 17th September, 1997, the repairs had been carried out to a
          satisfactory standard, in particular, the nosings to the external stairs had now been made in a
          proper and durable manner.
                    The applicant addressed the Sub-Committee and confirmed that the required remedial
          works had been carried out, repairs to the nosing to the external stairs had been delayed due to the
          securing of the landlords consent to the works, but had now been carried out to a satisfactory
           standard and the company was now complying with the Council’s Security Staff Registration
           Scheme.
          RESOLVED: That approval be given for the public entertainments licence in respect of premises
           at The Roxy, Arundel Gate to be renewed for a period of 12 months.

           Berlins, Eyre Street
                     The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on an application for
           the renewal of a public entertainments licence and to extend the public entertainment licensed
           hours in respect of Berlins, Eyre Street. He stated that the applicant had indicated that he wished
           to withdraw the application relating to the variation of the public entertainments licence.
                      The report indicated that following a recent pre-arranged inspection by Council officers
           on 10th September, 1997, where the premises had been found to be in a complete state of disrepair
           and of a potentially hazardous nature involving damaged seating exposing foam which presented
           a fire risk and pre-opening inspections at the premises which were only carried out in relation to
           fire safety checks and not to general health and safety issues, no daily closing checks being
           recorded, although a repair book was maintained in which any damage identified on the premises
           closing was recorded. The applicant had been advised that the premises should not open for the
           purpose of public entertainments until such time as the defects had been rectified and the premises
           made reasonably safe.
