        MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                             1087

      Resolved: That (i) Councillors Mrs. Nelson, Mrs. Walton and White be authorised to visit the
    Bramall Lane Sports Ground with the Chief Licensing Officer (Sports Grounds), Mrs. F.
    Woodhead (Assistant Solicitor) and Mr. A. Butler (Council Building Surveyor), together with a
    representative from the South Yorkshire Fire Service on Saturday, 23rd December, 1989, to
    investigate whether or not the works approved by the Panel on 27th November, 1989 for the
    upgrading of the staircase leading from the back of the Spion Kop have been completed to the
    satisfaction of the Council;
       (ii) depending on the outcome of such investigation, the Head of Administration and Legal
    Department in consultation with Councillor Mrs. Nelson be authorised to take appropriate steps
    to issue a prohibition notice in respect of certain areas of the Sports Ground or to amend the
    General Safety Certificate issued by the Council in respect of the Bramall Lane Sports Ground to
    permit an increase in the spectator capacity of the Spion Kop from 11,040 to 12,960.
      (b) the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on the situation
    regarding the carrying out by the Sheffield United Football Club of Works at the Bramall Lane
    Sports Ground required by the Panel at its meeting held on 27th November, 1989, to be carried
    out by 23rd December, 1989. The report indicated that all the works had not yet been completed.
      A copy of the schedule of required works served on the Club by the Council was attached to
    the report. The items in the schedule which had not been completed were reported as follows—
      Items 4.0, 7.1, 7.2 (sheet adjacent to seats 21/22 only), 9.3, 9.4 (handrail to vomitory 8 only),
    9.5 (Mr. D. Capper on behalf of Sheffield United Football Club undertook that the gas supply to
    the John Street Stand was isolated on match days), 15.0 and 16.0.
      Resolved: That Sheffield United Football Club be required under the terms of the General
    Safety Certificate issued to the Club (as amended) (i) to carry out by 31st January, 1990, works to
    rectify the following outstanding items detailed in the schedule of works attached to the report
    now submitted—
      Items 4.0, 7.1, 7.2, 9.3, 9.4 and 15.0; and
       (ii) to carry out by 31st March, 1990, works to rectify the following outstanding items detailed
    in the schedule—
      Items 9.5 and 16.0.
       (c) the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on proposals of the
    Sheffield United Football Club to remove and replace boundary walls on the Shoreham Street
    side of the Bramall Lane Football Ground. The report indicated that, since the submission of the
    proposals by the Club, the Head of Administration and Legal Department in consultation with
    the Chair of the Panel had authorised the carrying out by the Club of the proposals under the
    terms of Section 78 of the Building Act, 1984 in order to secure the removal and replacement of
    the boundary walls which had now become dangerous. (The new boundary walls are to be
    constructed in accordance with drawings numbered 11238/6 (17) and 7 as amended by drawings
    numbered 11238/17D and 7E submitted by Eastwood and Partners on behalf of Sheffield United
    Football Club.
      The Panel noted the information now reported.
★    (2) P U B L IC E N T E R T A IN M E N T
      The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported verbally on an application for the
    renewal of the Public Entertainment Licence issued in respect of Kiki’s Nightclub, 40 Charter
    Square, Sheffield. The licensee, a representative of the proprietors of the premises and their
    Solicitor attended the meeting to support the application. The Head of Administration and Legal
    Department stated that the South Yorkshire Fire Service and the Director of Health and
    Consumer Services considered the ground floor of the premises to be reasonably safe although
    minor works were still required to be carried out and that the first floor of the premises had been
    closed to the public although its use was still covered by the licence.
      Resolved: That (a) the application now submitted for the renewal of the Public Entertainment
    Licence in respect of Kiki's Nightclub, 40 Charter Square be granted for a period of three months
    and with the exclusion of the first floor of the premises; and
1088       MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

      (b) the Head of Administration and Legal Department be requested to investigate whether or
    not an offence has been committed under the conditions attached to the existing licence.


      Meeting of the General Purposes Panel held 2nd January, 1990. Present— Councillors Butler
    (Chair), Chadwick, Ms. Fiore, Hussain, Lamb, Mrs. Nelson, Mrs. E. Smith, and White. Also in
    attendance— Councillors Cromar and Whitfield.
    (1 )     SA F E T Y O F SPO RTS G R O U N D S
i t Responses o f the Police
      The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on the responses of the
    South Yorkshire Police to Lord Justice Taylor’s Interim Recommendations arising from the
    Hillsborough Disaster, so far as the Hillsborough (Sheffield Wednesday) and Bramall Lane
    (Sheffield United) Sports Grounds were concerned.
       Resolved: That (a) the contents of the report now submitted be noted;
       (b) the Chief Licensing Officer be requested to seek further advice from the Home Office on
    proposals for the improvement of closed circuit television systems at Sports Grounds and the
    Head of Administration and Legal Department be requested to keep the Panel informed each
    month on the action taken by officers to progress the proposed improvement of the closed circuit
    television systems at both the Hillsborough and Bramall Lane Sports Grounds;
       (c) the Sheffield Wednesday and Sheffield United Football Clubs be required under the terms
    of the General Safety Certificate to engage independent experts approved by the Police to survey
    their respective Sports Grounds and liaise closely with the Police with a view to producing, as
    soon as possible and in any case within three months of the date of this meeting, a scheme to be
    submitted to the Council for the provision of an emergency landline telephone system within
    their respective grounds. (The scheme for Sheffield Wednesday must detail a direct line between
    the Police Control Room and the Referee’s changing facility);
      (d) the Sheffield Wednesday and Sheffield United Football Clubs be given advance notice that,
    when details of the proposed closed circuit television systems, landline telephone systems and
    public address systems are approved, the Clubs will be asked to submit to the Council within a
    further period of two months, proposals for new Police control room facilities at their respective
    grounds; and
      (e) the Chief Licensing Officer be requested to enter into discussions with the South Yorkshire
    Police on the proposal raised in the report that appropriate parts of the agreement made between
    the Police and each Club setting out their respective responsibilities at the Sports Grounds be
    incorporated as conditions in the relevant General Safety Certificates when these are next fully
    reviewed.
★    First A id Facilities
      Further to the decision made by this Panel at its meeting held on 27th November, 1989 (page
    945 of the printed minutes), the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a
    report on action taken by the Sheffield Wednesday and Sheffield United Football Clubs to obtain
    medical equipment as specified by the Director of Health and Consumer Services in a
    memorandum to the Head of Administration and Legal Department dated 16th November, 1989,
    and on the response of the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group to the references in the
    memorandum to the provision of first aid facilities at certificated sports grounds in the City.
       Resolved: That (a) the Sheffield Wednesday and Sheffield United Football Clubs be required
    under the terms of their respective General Safety Certificates to submit as soon as possible and
    in any case within two months of the date of this meeting, appropriate schemes for the provision
    of new or improved first aid rooms at their respective sports grounds, the schemes to take account
    of the comments made by the Director of Health and Consumer Services in his memorandum of
    16th November, 1989;
      (b)     the objections of the Police to the suggestion of the Director of Health and Consumer
    Services that additional space for the first aid room at the Hillsborough Sports Ground (Sheffield
    Wednesday) could be provided by using adjoining premises currently used by the Police as a
    detention room, be noted; and
           MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                         1089

      (c)   the stated intention of Mr. John Strange of Eastwood and Partners to ask the Sheffield
    United Football Club to submit alternative proposals for the provision of a first aid room be
    noted.
    Survey o f Football Supporters
      Pursuant to the request of the Panel at its meeting held on 27th November, 1989 (page 947 of
    the printed minutes), the Communications Co-ordinator reported further on the survey carried
    out by the Communications Unit of the Publicity Department on behalf of the Football
    Supporters’ Association.
       The Panel noted the information reported.
    Visits to Football Matches
      The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported on proposals for visits by
    members of the Panel to future football matches in the City. He suggested that arrangements
    should be made in consultation with the Police for groups consisting of not more than four
    members of the Panel to attend each of a number of selected matches.
       Resolved: That the Head of Administration and Legal Department be requested—
      (a) to make arrangements along the lines now suggested for Panel members to attend football
    matches at the Hillsborough (Sheffield Wednesday) and Bramall Lane (Sheffield United) Sports
    Grounds; and
      (b) to investigate the possibility of members of the Panel attending events at the Sheffield
    (Owlerton) Sports Stadium.
    Safety o f Sports Grounds Advisory Group
      The Panel received and noted the minutes of a meeting of the Safety of Sports Grounds
    Advisory Groud held on 20th November, 1989.
    (2 )   m em bers’ allow ances

      The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported that the Secretary of State for the
    Environment had announced the introduction, with effect from 1st January, 1990, of increased
    maximum rates of motor mileage and overnight subsistence allowances payable to members of
    local authorities and other appropriate bodies.
       The Panel noted that details of the new rates had been sent to all members of the City Council.
    (3) r e p r e s e n t a t i o n o n o t h e r b o d i e s
    Sheffield Community Health Council
      The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported that a vacancy had arisen on the
    Sheffield Community Health Council arising from the resignation of Mrs. J. Hamlyn, one of the
    City Council’s nominees.
       The Panel noted the information reported.
    South Yorkshire Valuation and Community Charge Tribunal
      The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported that, under the authority given
    by the Municipal Enterprise and General Services Programme Committee at its meeting held on
    12th December, 1988 (page 988 of the printed minutes), Mr. Frank Blundy had been appointed a
    member of the South Yorkshire Valuation and Community Charge Tribunal.
★    (4) FIL M C L A SSIFICA TIO N
      Resolved: That confirmation be given to the action taken by the Head of Administration and
    Legal Department in consultation with the Chair of this Panel in authorising the exhibition in
    category “Sheffield 12” of the film “Roselyne and the Lions” .
    (5) PET IT IO N
      The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported on a petition signed by 47
    residents of Westfield objecting to noise and vandalism arising from the “disco” at The Mill
    public house, Westfield, which petition had also been referred to the Health and Consumer
    Services Programme Committee.
       The Panel noted that the Chief Licensing Officer was investigating the complaint.
1090       MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

    (6 )   G A M IN G A C T 1968 — A M U SE M E N T W IT H PR IZ E S
      The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported verbally on an application for a
    permit for the provision of amusements with prizes at the Tinsley Transcafe, 1A Shepcote Lane,
    Sheffield. The applicant attended the meeting to support his application.

      The Head of Administration and Legal Department pointed out that, as the premises
    concerned were accessible to the public, they did not comply with the Council’s policy for the
    granting or renewal of applications for permits for the provision of amusements with prizes as set
    out in the resolution of the Panel of 5th September, 1988 (page 521 of the printed minutes).
       A t this stage in the proceedings, the P a n e l-
       Resolved: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before a decision is made on
    the application now under consideration and before discussion takes place on the remaining item
    of business on the grounds that, in view of the business to be transacted, if the public and press
    were present there would be a disclosure to them of exempt information as described in
    paragraphs 7 and 12 of Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act, 1972, as amended, relating
    to the financial or business affairs of other persons and legal matters and advice.
      The Panel then considered the application for the grant of a permit for the provision of
    amusements with prizes at the Tinsley Transcafe, 1A Shepcote Lane, Sheffield.
★      Resolved: That (a) consideration of the application now submitted be deferred; and
     (b) the Head of Administration and Legal Department be requested to report back to the next
    monthly meeting of this Panel on the Council’s policy for the control of amusements with prizes.
★   (7) H A C K N E Y C A R R IA G E A N D P R IV A T E H IR E L IC EN SIN G
      The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported verbally on five individual cases
    relating to hackney carriage and private hire licensing. The applicants in cases 1/90, 2/90, 3/90 and
    5/90 attended the meeting to speak on their cases.
      Resolved: That (a) the holder of the hackney carriage vehicle and private hire and hackney
    carriage driver’s licences now mentioned be given a severe warning as to his future conduct (Case
    No. 1/90);
      (b) the private hire and hackney carriage driver’s licence now mentioned be revoked on the
    grounds that the holder is currently disqualified from driving (Case No. 2/90);
       (c) the application now submitted for the issue of a private hire and hackney carriage driver’s
    licence be granted for a period of nine months (Case No. 3/90);
       (d) with regard to the two hackney carriage vehicle licences now mentioned, the licence
    relating to the older vehicle (Licence No. 25) be revoked on the grounds that the vehicle had not
    been maintained in a reasonably safe condition, and the other vehicle (Licence No 181) be tested
    as soon as possible and preferably within seven days and that vehicle be tested on the maximum
    number of occasions allowed by the legislation (Case No. 5/90); and
      (e) consideration of Case No. 4/90 be deferred to enable the applicant to attend before the
    Panel.

    5 Trading Services Panel
    reso lved     :   That the following minutes be approved—
    Meeting of the Trading Services Panel held 4th January, 1990. Present— Councillors Ms. Fiore
    (Chair), Crowder, Godber, Moscrop, Mrs. Mulheam, Mrs. Nelson and Mrs. E. Smith.
    P R IN T IN G SER V IC ES
      The Manager of Design and Print submitted a report reviewing the current situation and
    containing proposals for restructuring within Design & Print.
       Resolved: That (a) approval be given for (i) the redeployment of five members of staff from the
    Origination Section, five members of staff from the Bindery Section, one member of staff from
    the Reprographics Section and one maintenance operative, (ii) the retention of existing levels of
    staff within the Press Room, (iii) the reorganisation of the Bindery Section to form a
