       ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                               33

Representatives on Other Bodies
   JOINT BLACKBURN MEADOW S SEW AGE TREATM ENT LIAISON COM MITTEE:
   Councillor Webster.
   JO INT CONSULTATIVE COM M ITTEE (SH EFFIELD HEALTH A U TH O RITY ,    FAM ILY HEALTH SERVICES
   AU TH ORITY AND CITY COUNCIL)
   The Chair (Councillor Mrs. Midgley) and Councillor Mrs. Leach.
   NATIONAL SOCIETY FO R CLEAN A IR (YO RKSH IRE AND HUM BERSIDE DIVISION)
   The Chair (Councillor Mrs. Midgley) (or her nominee) and the Director of Health and Consumer
   Services (or his nominee).
   NATIONAL SURVEY OF A IR POLLUTION— STANDING CONFERENCE O F CO -O PERATING BODIES
   The Chair (Councillor Mrs. Midgley) (or her nominee) and the Director of Health and Consumer
   Services (or his nominee).
   R ECY CU N G NATIONAL W ORKING PARTY
   The Chair (Councillor Mrs. Midgley) (or her nominee) and the Director of Cleansing Services (or
   his nominee).
   SHEFFIELD AND DISTRICT POST AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS ADVISORY COMMITTEES
   Councillors Mrs. Bullement, Mrs. E. Smith and Mrs. Walton.
   YORKSHIRE AND HUM BERSIDE HOM E SAFETY COUNCIL
   (1 vacancy) and the Director of Health and Consumer Services (or his nominee).
   YORKSHIRE AND HUM BERSIDE POLLUTION ADVISORY COUNCIL
     Executive Committee
     The Chair (Councillor Mrs. Midgley).
     Council
     The Chair (Councillor Mrs. Midgley) and Councillor Mrs. P. M. Smith, and the Director of
     Health and Consumer Services and the Environmental Protection Manager.
   YORKSHIRE PEST CONTROL COM MITTEE
   (1 vacancy) and the Director of Health and Consumer Services and the Environmental Protection
   Manager (or his nominee).
   SOUTH YORKSHIRE TRADIN G STANDARDS JOINT COM MITTEE
  The Chair (Councillor Mrs. Midgley) (1 vacancy).
   SOUTH YORKSHIRE W ASTE DISPOSAL JO INT COMMITTEE
  The Chair (Councillor Mrs. Midgley) (or her nominee) (1 vacancy).
   SOUTH YORKSHIRE WASTE REGULATION AUTHORITY
  The Chair (Councillor Mrs. Midgley) and the Director of Health and Consumer Services (or his
  nominee) and the Environmental Protection Manager.


                                   Meeting held 17th May, 1991

Present— Councillors Mrs. Midgley (Chair), Ms. Bullement, Butler, Chaplin, Mrs. Flemmg,
George, Hartley, Mrs. Leach, Memmott, J. A. Moore, Moscrop, Ms. Robinson, Sangar,
Ms. Sheldrick, Mrs. Shepherd, Mrs. E. Smith, Mrs. P. M. Smith, Webster and Ms. Whitty.

1 Minutes of Last Meeting
   It was reported that the City Council at its meeting held on 8th May, 1991 had confirmed the
minutes of the meeting of this Committee held on 19th April, 1991 with the amendment of item 10
relating to Toilet Provision, by the following alterations to the resolution passed by the
Committee—
  “(a) The addition of the following words immediately after the words   “ re s o lv e d :   That—
  “This Council recognises the importance of a properly provided and located public toilet
provision in the City and also recognises the financial difficulties created for the Council by
Government policy and therefore determines that” and
34       ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

     (b) The addition of the following words at the end of paragraph (iii) —
  “and that in order to progress these matters, the Director of Cleansing Services be requested to
produce a further report identifying all possible ways in which public toilet provision can be
maintained and improved, in conjunction with the report requested by the Policy Committee.”

2 Licensing Panel
r e s o l v e d : That, except so far as they relate to matters delegated to the Licensing Panel, the
following minutes be approved—
       Special Meeting of the Licensing Panel held 9th April, 1991. Present— Councillors Butler
     (Chair), Mrs. Askham, Damms, Memmott, Mrs. Midgley and Mrs. P. M. Smith. Also in
     Attendance— Councillor Whitfield.
★     ( 1 ) SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS-SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB-REDEVELOPMENT OF LEPPINGS
     LANE TURNSTILES AND TERRACE
       The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on a proposal prepared by
     Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic to redevelop
     the West Stand, West Terrace and turnstiles serving this area and turnstiles serving the Leppings
     Lane entrance to the North Stand.
      He reminded the Panel that the West Terrace, with the exception of the North West Terrace
     Upper Section, had remained closed since 15th April, 1989.
       The report gave details of each aspect of the redevelopment proposals together with the
     recommendations of the City Council’s Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group.
       The Panel heard from representatives of the Advisory Group and Dr. Eastwood of Messrs.
     Eastwood and Partners on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club during the course of the
     meeting.
       At this stage in the proceedings, the Panel—
        Resolved: That the public and press, members of the Council’s Safety of Sports Grounds
     Advisory Group and Dr. Eastwood be excluded from the meeting before a decision is made on
     the proposal now under consideration on the grounds that, in view of the nature of the business to
     be transacted, if the public and press were present there would be a disclosure to them of exempt
     information described in paragraph 12 of the Local Government Act 1972, as amended, relating
     to legal matters and advice.
       The City Solicitor and Head of Administration reported orally giving legal advice on various
     aspects on the proposed redevelopment at Hillsborough Stadium.
       At this stage members of the Council’s Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group, Dr.
     Eastwood and the press and public were re-admitted to the meeting. Dr. Eastwood was asked to
     clarify whether or not by levelling the gradient in the tunnel headroom would be affected and if
     the Panel decided a continuous gradient was the best solution, whether the extra work involved
     would delay the proposal.
       After these questions were answered the public, press, Dr. Eastwood and members of the
     Council’s Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group were again excluded from the meeting whilst
     the Panel were given legal advice.
       The Panel considered the representations made by Dr. Eastwood and the Advisory
     Committee, together with the advice now received from the City Solicitor and Head of
     Administration and following this the public, press, Dr. Eastwood and members of the Council’s
     Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group were readmitted to the meeting.
       Resolved: That (a) with the exception of the central tunnel access, approval in principle be
    given to the proposal now reported and submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on behalf of
    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic to redevelop the Leppings Lane (West End) of the
    Hillsborough Stadium, subject to any necessary details and technical information being provided
    to the satisfaction of the City Solicitor and Head of Administration in consultation with the Safety
    of Sports Grounds Advisory Group and inclusion within the scheme of the comments of the
    Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group as detailed in the report now submitted;
        ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                               35

       (b) following consideration of the advice and recommendations now submitted by the Safety of
    Sports Grounds Advisory Group the proposals submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners to
    redevelop the access tunnel be refused; the Panel preferring the recommendation detailed by the
    Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group to provide a continuous slope from the point of entry
    to the point of exit. (A gradient of approximately 1/16);
      (c) the Club be required to make appropriate revisions to the closed circuit television system,
    turnstile computer number monitoring system, and proposed land line emergency telephone
    system with all such revisions being subject to agreement between the Club and the City Solicitor
    and Head of Administration in consultation with the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police;
      (d) all works be completed prior to the 1991/92 Football Season; and
      (e) the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested to submit a report as soon as
    possible on the costs incurred by the City Council in dealing with this application.
★    (2) LICENSING FEES
      Following the decision of this Panel of 25th February, 1991, (page 1309 of the printed minutes)
    to revise the licence fees in respect of hackney carriage and private hire vehicles and private hire
    operators, the City Solicitor and Head of Administration reported orally on a letter containing
    143 signatures from licenced private hire drivers objecting to the increased charges.
      Resolved: That, having considered the objection now reported (a) this Panel affirms its
    decision to authorise the City Solicitor and Head of Administration to take all necessary action
    for the introduction of the licence fees in respect of hackney carriage and private hire vehicles and
    private hire operators with such increases taking effect from 10th April, 1991; and
      (b) the objectors be informed accordingly.


     Meeting of the Licensing Panel held 12th April, 1991. Present— Councillors Butler (Chair),
    Mrs. Askham, Damms, Mrs. Midgley and Mrs. P. M. Smith.
    ( 1 ) EXCLUSION OF THE PUBLIC AND PRESS
      Resolved: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before discussion takes
    place on item 2 relating to individual hackney carriage and private hire licensing cases on the
    grounds that in view of the nature of the business to be transacted, if the public and press were
    present there would be a disclosure to them of exempt information as described in paragraphs 7
    and 12 of Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act 1972, as amended, relating to the financial
    or business affairs of other persons and legal matters and advice.
★    (2) HACKNEY CARRIAGE AND PRIVATE HIRE LICENSING
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted details in respect of 7 cases relating
    to hackney carriage and private hire licences. The applicants in Cases 7/91, 8/91, 9/91, 11/91,
    12/91 and 13/91 attended the meeting and addressed the Panel.
      Resolved: That (a) the applications now submitted for a hackney carriage and private hire
    driver’s licence be granted for a period of 9 months in respect of Cases 8/91,11/91 and 12/91;
      (b) the application now submitted for a hackney carriage and private hire driver’s licence be
    granted for a period of 6 months in respect of Case 13/91 and the applicant be warned as to his
    future conduct;
       (c) the application now submitted for a hackney carriage and private hire driver’s licence be
    refused in respect of Case 7/91;
       (d) in the circumstances now discussed with regard to Case 9/91 and subject to the completion
    of a satisfactory test of the vehicle now mentioned and to the production of appropriate insurance
    documentation, authority be given for the City Solicitor and Head of Administration to issue a
    licence for the vehicle to be used for private hire purposes for the usual period; and
       (e) consideration of the application now submitted for a hackney carriage and private hire
    driver’s licence in respect of Case 10/91 be deferred to a future meeting to enable the applicant to
    attend before the Panel.
36       ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

     ( n o t e : (a) Councillor Mrs. Askham left the meeting during consideration of Case No. 7/91 and
     did not speak or vote thereon; and (b) Councillor Damms entered the meeting during
     consideration of Case 8/91 and upon confirmation that the applicant had no objection, he
     participated in the ensuing debate and decision in respect of this case.)
       At this point in the proceedings, the meeting was re-opened to the public and press.
★     (3) PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT LICENSING
       The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report summarising current
     applications for the grant or renewal of public entertainment licences and he stated orally that the
     application in respect of the Glossop Road Baths had been withdrawn from consideration due to
     the closure of the Baths.
       Resolved: That (a) consideration of the applications now submitted in respect of the Sheffield
     Polytechnic Main Hall, Pond Street Site, the Marshal Hall Dining Room and the Main Hall at the
     Collegiate Crescent Site, Sheffield City Polytecnic Art Gallery, Sheffield City Polytechnic,
     Southboume Drama Studio, the Mappin Art Gallery and the Mosborough Methodist Church
     Schoolroom be determined at the next meeting of this Panel;
       (b) the applications in respect of King Edward VII Baths, the Hillsborough Leisure Centre, the
     Sheffield Arena, the Sheffield Tennis Centre, the Rock Island Diner, Ratteners Rest and
     Nottingham House be deferred;
       (c) consideration of the application now submitted in respect of Chapeltown Baths be deferred
     subject to immediate action being taken on the lines now discussed to ensure that no risks exist to
     public safety;
       (d) the application now submitted in respect of the Ponds Forge International Sports Complex
     be granted on the terms and conditions now reported and authority be given for the City Solicitor
     and Head of Administration to renew, in appropriate circumstances and in consultation with the
     Chair of the Panel, the licence for a period of 12 months;
        (e) the applications now submitted for Kiki’s and Rebels be granted for a period of six months
     from the expiry of the previous licence;
       (f) subject to all inspecting authorities being satisfied as to the condition of the premises, the
     applications now submitted in respect of Stocksbridge Leisure Centre, Heeley Baths, the
     swimming pool at Hurlfield Sports Centre and Woodthorpe Baths be granted a public
     entertainment licence for a period of 12 months from the expiry of the previous licence; and
       (g) the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested to submit a report to a future
     meeting of this Panel on the existing and proposed arrangements in respect of applications for the
     grant or renewal of public entertainment licences.
     (4) CINEMA LICENSING
       The City Solicitor and Head of Administration reported orally that a planning application was
     to be submitted by the Rank Organisation to the City Council to convert premises previously
     known as the Fiesta, Arundel Gate into a multi-screen cinema complex and he introduced Mr.
     Maynard of the Rank Organisation and Mr. Mellor of Northern Building Design Associates who
     addressed the Panel and outlined their proposed scheme. It was stated that there were difficulties
     inherent in the site, but it was proposed to make the complex accessible for the disabled and Mr.
     Mellor exhibited plans of his proposals for the complex.
        Resolved: That the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested to convey to the
     Rank Organisation (a) the appreciation of this Panel for the presentation of their proposals in
     respect of the redevelopment of premises previously known as the Fiesta which are welcomed
     from a licensing point of view and (b) the concern of this Panel with regard to the proposed
     accessibility of the premises for people with disabilities and request the Rank Organisation to
     reconsider this and access provision generally in the light of the comments now received from the
     City Council’s Access Officer and the representative from the South Yorkshire Fire Service.

3 Consumer and Regulatory Services Sub-Committee
r e s o l v e d : That, except so far as they relate to matters delegated to the Consumer and Regulatory
Services Sub-Committee, the following minutes be approved—
