IN THE HIGH C O U R T OF JU STIC E                                    C ase N o . C O /1 0 0 9 /9 2

Q U E E N ’S B EN C H D IV ISIO N

CROW N OFFICE LIST

IN THE M ATTER OF A N A PPL IC A T IO N FOR JU D IC IA L REVIEW

BETWEEN:



                                          R EG INA

                                              -and-

                          HER M A JE ST Y ’S C O R O N ER FOR

                                    SO U T H Y ORKSHIRE

                                          E x Parte

                               STR IN G ER and OTHERS




                     SKELETON A R G U M E N T O N BEH ALF OF

                   SO U TH Y O R K SH IRE A M B U L A N C E SERVICE




A.     A BBR EV IA T IO N S




       SY M A S                       South     Y orkshire   M etropolitan    A m bulance      and

                                      Param edic S erv ice, and N H S Trust as from 1st

                                      January      1992,     p reviously     South    Y orkshire

                                      A m bulance S erv ice.
The Taylor Inquiry       The Inquiry into the H iU sboroaghlStadium iM sa st e r ,

                         presided over by the Rt Hon Lord Justice T aylor,

                         over 31 days from the 15th M ay to the 29th June

                         1989.

The Taylor Report        The Interim Report and R ecom m endations presen ted

                         by Lord Justice Taylor on the 1st A ugust 1989.

The L eppings Lane End   That part o f the H illsborough Stadium reserved for

                         L iverp ool football supporters.

Penni stone Road         T he    op p osite   end o f the   stadium ,   w here the

                         gym nasium and only vehicular access to pitch w as

                         to be found. The gym nasium w as th e designated

                         casualty clearin g station.

The E xit Gates          G ates "A", "B" and "C" at the L eppings Lane End.

Pens 3 and 4             T h e en closed areas im m ediately behind the goal

                         m outh at th e L eppings Lane End.

Gates 3 and 4            E m ergency E x it Gates in the perim eter fen ce o f

                         P ens 3 and 4.

Marshall                 Superintendent M arshall, in charge or area outside

                         Leppings Lane End




                                    2
B.   CHRONOLOGY (L IM IT E D TO E V E N T S R ELA TIN G TO SY M A S)




     15th April 1989

           1 4 .0 0            12,000 people had entered Hillsborough Stadium out of

                               a capacity crowd of 54,000.

           14.15               Tannoy message for fans in pens 3 and 4 to move

                               forward.

           14 .40 to 1 4 .45   Crowd inside and outside the turnstiles at the Leppings

                               Lane End numbered some 5,000

           14.47               Marshall requests permission to open the Exit Gates

           14.48               Gate C opened to eject a youth without a ticket; 150

                               people rush through.

           14.48               Marshall makes second request to open Exit Gates.

                               Marshall makes third request. Order given,

           14.52               gate "C" opened. Some 2,000 people entered.

           14.57               Gate "C" closed.

           14.59               Match kicks off.

           14.59               Radio message asking if ambulances were required:

                               emanated from police control at Snig Hill; officers

                               manning the radio control heard sounds of distress over

                               the police radios o f the officers stationed in front of

                               pens 3 and 4. Told to stand by.

            15.00              gates 3 and 4 opened to let crushed fans out.




                                          3
      1 5 .0 4               Ball strikes cross bar at the far end o f the pitch, crowds

                             in pens 3 and 4 surge forward.

      1 5 .0 5 .5            Match stopped.

      1 5 .0 7               SYM AS asked to send ambulances

      1 5 .1 2               Nesbit takes charge o f rescue at Gate 3

      1 5 .1 3               St John ambulance comes onto pitch from other end and

                             drives down to Gate 3.

      1 5 .1 3               First SYM AS ambulance arrives at Leppings Lane.

                             Ambulance officers commence triage.

      1 5 .1 6               Second SYM AS ambulance arrives at Leppings Lane

      15^17                  First SYM AS ambulance arrives at Pennistone Road „                      *
       I < -0-0               IX         H          u          IA   <D          J L *** f £

      1 5 .2 9               Tannoy request for doctors in the Stadium                        't~'7

      15 .32 to 1 6 .0 6     All the living casualties brought out through the tunnel

                             at the Leppings Lane End, numbering 40 in all, were

                             conveyed by SY M A S’ ambulances to hospital. All 40

                             survived.

      1 5 .3 2 to 1 6 .3 0   42 ambulances [31 from SYMAS] had conveyed a total

                             o f 172 casualties to hospital,

      c . 15.35              Ashton arrives at back o f Pens 3 and 4.




17th A pril 1989             Taylor Inquiry appointed

18th A pril 1989             Inquests opened and adjourned

15th M ay to 29th June 1989                Evidence given to Taylor Inquiry


                                       4
     1st A ugust 1989             Taylor Report published

                                  Writs issued against South Yorkshire Police for damages

                                  on behalf o f estates and relatives o f deceased.

                                  Admission o f liability by South Yorkshire Police

                                  Claims settled.

     18th A pril to 4th May 1990           Interim Inquests held

     19th N ovem ber 1990         Main Inquests resumed

     28th March 1991               Jury verdicts delivered

     15th A pril 1992              Memorial by six Applicants sent to A-Gen

     15th May 1992                 Order o f May J : application adjourned pending decision

                                   by A-Gen.

     22nd June 1992                Form 86A and copy o f Memorial served on SYM AS.

                                   NB no affidavits served.

     4th M ay 1993                 SYM AS notified o f hearing o f adjourned application

     6th A pril 1993               Leave granted to issue

     4th M ay 1993                 Affidavits served on SYMAS




C.   A LLEGED LACK OF CARE BY SY M A S




     1.     INTR O D U CTIO N




            1.1      O f the 174 witnesses who gave oral evidence to the Taylor Inquiry,

                     only two, Doctor Ashton and Doctor Philips, made criticisms of the

                     ambulance service and its response to the disaster.


                                            5
1.2   In addition to those 174 witnesses, statements were taken from several

      hundred other persons present on the 15th April 1989, and as far as

      SYMAS are aware, not one made any criticism o f the ambulance

      service.




1.3   SYMAS submitted statements from all o f its officers who took part in

      the provision o f emergency services on the 15th April 1989. A full

      transcript o f the radio messages received at SYM AS’ Headquarters was

      also made available, and Sir Peter Taylor inspected the equipment

      carried by a "front line", as w ell as the "major accident" ambulance.




1.4   The preparation o f the statements involved observing the videos o f the

      tragedy as it unfolded, and recalling those events for the purposes of

      making statements and giving evidence and was a terrible strain on

      those concerned. A ll the ambulance staff required counselling to help

      them through the ordeal.




1.5   The fact that SYM AS was represented at all at the Taylor Inquiry was

      occasioned solely as a result o f the remarks made by the two Liverpool

      doctors to the media at the time and subsequently. Dr Ashton sought

      out the press to make his criticisms o f the ambulance services. SYMAS

      treated those criticisms seriously; they caused great pain to the

      ambulance officers who attended at the scene, as w ell as all those who

      organised the mobilisation o f all SYMAS ambulances. Many of the



                              6
      ambulance men and women had returned voluntarily to duty after

      hearing the first reports o f the disaster on the radio. The effect o f those

      unwarranted criticisms was partly relieved by the findings by Sir Peter

      Taylor who, after he had heard and examined all the evidence

      available, rejected the three criticisms made by Dr Ashton outright,

      [paragraph 296 o f the Taylor Report, "API" page 73], and dismissed

      the criticisms o f Dr Philips at the absence o f defibrillators on the

      "overwhelming evidence" before him, [paragraph 296 as above],




1.6   Although the Taylor Report [paragraph 301, "API" page 73] found

      "that SYM AS and the fire brigade should have been called earlier than

      they were", it also concluded that "all three emergency services....

      responded promptly when alerted, that they brought appropriate

      equipment and that their personnel operated efficiently" [paragraph

      296], Contrary to what the memorialists are claiming, the Taylor

      Report concluded that "in view o f the nature o f the crushing, the time

      when the police rescue began and the pathetically short period for

      which those unable to breathe could survive, it is improbable that

      quicker recourse to the emergency services would have saved more

      lives."[paragraph 3011




1.7   This latter conclusion was based on all the evidence that was called to

      the Taylor Inquiry, and it is supported to the hilt by the statement o f

      Dr Phillips on a selected portion o f which the Applicants seek to rely



                                7
      for these proceedings. A full reading o f his statement, and, unlike the

      other Doctor on whom they rely, he was one o f the first to arrive on

      the pitch after the match was stopped, demonstrates quite clearly that

      by the cut o ff time chosen by the Coroner, the fatal injuries had been

      inflicted. See pages 321 for a description o f what he found when he

      arrived on the pitch. See also pages 323 and 324 and 325:

             "I looked desperately f o r someone not dead but seriously ill

             who needed help... I could not fin d anybody................all were

             either dead o r okay with nothing in b etw een ."




1.8   To have the Inquests re-opened after such a long interval would serve

      no useful purpose, but would cause enormous distress to those whose

      task it was to rescue all the persons they did from the carnage with

      which they were presented when they were called to the stadium.

      Given that the ambulance services had no part at all in the decisions

      and actions which the Inquiry established caused the disaster, it is

      especially hard that they are expected to take part in yet another

      inquiry into the cause of the deaths o f so many people on the strength

      o f statements made by persons who were shown to have been mistaken

      about fundamental facts on which they had based their criticisms.




1.9   Moreover, in view o f the evidence o f the pathologists, supported by

      the evidence of Dr Phillips himself (at pages 323 and 327), if any of

      those who had received such devastating crush injuries had been kept



                              8
       alive by mechanical means at the scene, what comfort can it be to their

       families to know that if that had been possible (and it is submitted it

       clearly was not practicable), their sons or daughters might have been

       preserved brain dead with the aid o f machines.




1.10   Simply to quash the verdicts and leave the matter "in limbo", on the

       basis o f the complaints made against the ambulance officers, is equally

       unjust and pointless. Whatever was said by the Court, the perception

       would be that the removal o f a verdict o f accidental death, and no

       other verdict being substituted, on the basis o f the statements o f the

       two Liverpool doctors, meant that their complaints not only had

       substance but that there w as lack o f care by the ambulance officers.

       Furthermore, the object o f the memorialists’ application, according to

       the last crop o f affidavits, is to find out exactly what happened to their

       relatives so that they can properly overcome their grief, [see letters in

       exhibit JJH/2, Applicants’ Bundle pages 478 to 500]. It is hard to

       comprehend how this can be achieved by leaving the matter open with

       no investigation o f the claims by the two doctors.




1.11   It is settled law that the Inquest Jury’s task is a fact finding exercise,

       and not a method o f apportioning guilt.

       see Judgment of Lord Lane C.J. in:-

       R v South London C oroner ex parte Thom pson

                                                       (July 1982, unreported)


                                9
       as referred to in the judgment o f Neil U in:

       R v H .M . C oroner for N . Hum berside etc ex parte Jam ieson

       (9th July 1993 unreported), transcript page 16 E to G




1.12   The allegation relied on in the case o f Dr Ashton that "more lives

       could have been saved if staff and equipment had arrived earlier", was

       specifically retracted by him when he gave evidence to the Taylor

       Inquiry, see Ex "AP5" page 127 A to D. It is respectfully submitted

       that after this length o f time, a further investigation into these

       allegations can serve no useful purpose.




1.13   The allegation relied on in the case o f Dr Phillips that there was no

       defibrillator has no substance for the reasons given in evidence to the

       Taylor Inquiry, as accepted in the Taylor Report [paragraph 296], and

       the allegation about an empty oxygen cylinder was refuted by the St

       John Ambulance officer w ho had supplied it to the doctor. But even if

       there was any substance at all in these particular allegations, as Dr

       Phillips himself observed at the time (pages 323 and 327)

              ..in view o f the length o f time, he was pulseless, it would

              probably be kinder i f he died I am sure he must have been

              severely brain dam aged by that time............1f e lt it very unlikely

              that he w ould have survived and reconciled m yself by the fact

               that if he had he would have been brain d a m a g e d ."




                                10
1.14   Therefore one does ask what useful purpose can possible be served

       after four and a half years to examine in yet more detail the last

       moments o f the six deceased to see whether in fact they might have

       remained conscious for longer than a few seconds, or that they might

       have been resuscitated after a period o f time, when the evidence is that

       they had each sustained such severe crushing injuries as to render them

       unconscious, pulseless and unable to breathe for sufficiently long

       enough so that if they could have been revived by mechanical means,

       the probabilities are they would have continued to survive without any

       brain function, or, at best, with very limited brain function, and then

       only with the continued assistance o f mechanical breathing.




1.15   The question is whether, given the nature of their injuries which caused

       their deaths, the deceased were placed into the care o f SYMAS such

       that its officers were in a position to give medical assistance which may

       have saved the deceased. Then before there is any basis for a jury to

       consider whether there has been lack o f care, did SYMAS fail to give

       them that assistance as a result o f which it could be said that lack o f

       care c a u se d the death of the deceased, or a g g r a v a te d the c a m e of

       death.




                                 11
2.   W H AT IS T H E DU TY O F C A R E ON SYMAS?




     2.1   T he law

           The law on this has been extensively reviewed by this court in a

           number o f recent cases. W e respectfully refer to the follow ing

           decisions as authority for the following propositions:




           (a)   The duty o f care is not equivalent to the civil tort o f

                  negligence:

           R v Southw ark C oroner ex parte H ick s (1987) 1 WLR 1624)




           (b)   Lack o f care is not appropriate in cases o f accidental death:

           R v Portsm outh C oroner (1987) 1WLR 1640

           [Absence o f rehydration equipment which might have ameliorated

           deceased’s condition after injury caused not basis for saying cause o f

           death aggravated by lack o f such equipment]




           (c)   Lack o f care may arise when a person is under medical

                  supervision and his death can be said to have been caused by a

                  distinct act or failure to act is so closely connected to the actual

                  death as to amount to one o f its causes or one o f its causes:

           R v C oroner for East B erkshire ex parte Buckley 20.11.92

                                                   (unreported, transcript page 20)




                                   12
[Deceased died in custody at Broadmoor after being injected with a

powerful sedative, allegation that it was injected into a vein. Was an

issue for the jury to consider]




(d)    Lack o f care can relate to a failure to treat a mental as w ell as

       a physical condition, where such a failure relates to a period

       before event causing death occurs in circumstances where it can

       be said that such failure either was itself the cause or

       aggravated the cause o f death:

R v Coroner for Birm ingham e x parte S ec o f State 3 1 .7.90 ,

unreported, transcript supplied.

[Deceased hanged him self in prison. Evidence that he had suicidal

tendencies but was left on his own in a cell, at own request, rather than

in hospital wing on a ward. Jury’s verdict quashed because "free

standing" and Coroner’s direction was inadequate as it failed to direct

that there must be a causal link between the "lack o f care" and death.]




(e)    The court must look first at the physical or mental condition o f

       the deceased at the time o f death. If that condition was the

       cause o f death, the court then has to consider whether that

       condition was contributed to or aggravated by a lack o f care:

R v Coroner for North H um berside etc ex parte Jam oeson

               9th July 1993, unreported, transcript page 22G to 23D

R v Coroner for W est Y orkshire ex parte Elizabeth C lem ents



                        13
                       9th July 1993, unreported, transcript page 4G to 5B




      (e)    Lack o f care does not o f its e lf turn a death from natural causes

             in to an unnatural one:

      R v Poplar C oron er ex p arte Thom as (1993) 2 WLR 547

      [Court o f Appeal upheld Coroner’s decision to refuse to hold an

      inquest in a case where a person dying from a chronic asthmatic

      condition died on the way to hospital after the ambulance called to take

      her there took a long time coming. Cause o f death was a natural cause,

      and the fact that earlier arrival o f ambulance might have ameliorated

      the deceased’s condition not make death unnatural.] Quare whether it

      is so where deceased suffering from a normally non fatal condition

      which becomes fatal because o f lack o f care. Must be circumstances

      where an act or omission by a doctor or an ambulance man in respect

      o f a person specifically in their care, with a condition which requires

      them to do something that is within their power, could justify a verdict

      that lack o f death either caused or aggravated the cause o f death. See

      judgment o f Simon Brown L.J. at page 555 A to D and E to F.




2.2   Applying those principles to the present case, it is submitted that "lack

      of care" is not appropriate as far as the care given by SYM AS’

      ambulance men and women is concerned.




                              14
2.3   What is necessary for th e duty to have arisen at H illsb orou gh ? It

      is submitted that before one begins to assess the evidence at all to see

      whether or not there were circumstances relating to the six deceased

      which would have justified consideration o f "lack o f care", there would

      have to be evidence that:

      (a)    SYM AS could and should have reacted earlier to the disaster

             and dispatched its fleet o f ambulances before it received the call

             at 15.; © 7

      (b)    Having been summoned, SYM AS delayed, without good

             reason, in dispatching its ambulances, or the ambulances did

             not arrive as soon as was humanly possible;

      (c)    Having arrived, SYMAS failed to treat any o f        the deceased

             properly or at all. This involves two questions.First were any

             o f the deceased actually in the care o f SYMAS? Secondly, if

              they were, did SYMAS fail to give treatment, or did they give

             the wrong treatment?




2.4   Presumably it w ill not be suggested that all the victims were

      automatically [notionally] in the care o f SYM AS from the minute its

      ambulances started to arrive. It is submitted that the highest that their

      duty can be put is that they were required to do the best they could in

      the circumstances as they were presented with them. Those were:

      (a)    nearly five hundred casualties,

      (b)    all packed tightly into pens 3 and 4,



                              15
      (c)    with access/egress limited to the perimeter gates and the tunnel

             which itself was initially packed full o f people,

      (d)    many o f the victims already dead or as good as [cyanosed,

             pulseless, unconscious],

      (e)    no organisation by the police for the orderly evacuation of the
                                                                    •r*-
             injured [until Superintendent Nesbitt took charge at 15.]

      (f)    ability to resuscitate limited to one victim at a time. X        ^    ^ '




2.5   With the above conditions in mind, one looks at the specific complaints

      that are made as constituting lack o f care.




2.6   T he a lleg ed delay

      The delay in SYMAS being summoned cannot be laid at their door at

      all. Whatever the cause, can it be really said that even if the police had

      realised earlier than they did what was wrong, (and it is submitted that

      the earliest would have been about 15.00 when the perimeter gate was

      first opened), by the time the SYMAS ambulances could physically

      have arrived the victims o f the crushing would have been deprived o f

      oxygen long enough to have sustained injuries which, if not fatal,

      would have become so by the time they could have been extricated.

      This is borne out by all the evidence o f the difficulties experienced in

      trying to pull the bodies out once it was realised what had happened.

      Furthermore the condition o f those who had suffered the most severe

      crush injuries is clearly described by Dr Phillips who treated "one o f



                              16
          the first out" for some sixteen minutes before getting a pulse: by which

          time on anyone’s view, including his own, there was unfortunately

          little point in resuscitating the victim.




2.7       The "lack o f equipment"

          (a) D efibrillators:   Every ambulance officer carries a bag with

          airways and inflators expressly for the purpose o f carrying out CPR.

          Each ambulance also carries antoxin gas [a pain reliever], and the front

          line ambulances carry oxygen. They do not carry defibrillators. These

          are highly dangerous machines at the best o f times and in perfect

          conditions. For all the reasons set out in exhibit " P " it would have

          been an act o f madness to have tried to use such a machine in the

          circumstances at Hillsborough that afternoon.

          (b) O xygen: This was used by the ambulance officers             in the

          ambulances on the way to hospital with the success already outlined.

          Portable oxygen cylinders were brought by the front line ambulances

          and us£dUwhere necessary. The alleged empty oxygen cylinder [per Dr

1     /   A-shtonl/Was found to be half full by the St John ambulance brigade

          later that afternoon: the Taylor Report concluded that Dr Ashton had

          not opened the valve properly.




2.8       Lack o f T riage

          This was an allegation made by Dr Ashton based on his view when he

          eventually arrived behind pens 3 and 4 at about 15.35. The Taylor


                                   17
       Inquiry heard evidence from the ambulance officers who had arrived

       [and gone with casualties] before he arrived, that they had set up a

       system o f triage, and indeed had ejected some persons from the

       ambulance who were not critically injured to make room for those who

       were. The fact that,atf forty crush victims taken to hospital by SYM AS

       from the Leppings Lane end demonstrates that they had properly

       selected those who were capable o f being resuscitated from those who

       were either already dead or beyond help.      J ?.    QiPr Oi >Jc Cl '




2.9    O f the six deceased, only one, Paul Carlisle was taken out through the

       tunnel and treated at the Leppings Lane end. The account o f the

       circumstances in which he sustained his injuries was given by his friend

       Hollinghurst [pages 61 and 67], The deceased was treated by two

       police officers within a short time o f his being found on the floor by

       Hollinghurst, and then resuscitation attempts were taken over by "an

       unknown ambulance man". He was discovered on the ground before

       15.05 when the match was stopped [73], It is not understood what was

       the lack o f care complained o f in this case, especially as the deceased’s

       family through counsel at the Inquest thanked the unknown ambulance

       man as w ell as the two police officers for the efforts they made [page

       65 C to D |




2.10   "No ambulances"




                                18
       This was plainly wrong as the video record demonstrates. It is not

       believed that this allegation is being pursued.




W as there a lack o f care in the individual cases?

(a)    Such as to cau se death?

3.1    If the cause o f the disaster was the opening o f Gate "C", followed by

       Gates "A" and "B", with no control over the resulting influx into Pens

       3 and 4, and this does not appear to be in dispute, those actions had

       nothing to do with the emergency services.




3.2    If the cause o f death was in each case asphyxia caused by crushing,

       and it does not appear to in dispute, then, again that crushing had

       nothing to do with any action or omission by SYMAS.




 3.3   Thus these submissions are on the basis that what is being suggested is

       that in the case o f each o f the six named deceased, SYM AS’ lack o f

       care aggravated the cause o f death.




(b)    Such as to aggravate the cause o f death?




3.4    Paul C arlisle

        The circumstances o f his injuries and the subsequent treatment have

        already been outline in paragraph 2.9 above. It is submitted that there

        is no evidence at all that SYMAS failed in its duty to him. He was
      seen and treated by two police officers who attempted to resuscitate

      him, and an ambulance man took over. Alas they were not successful,

      but it cannot be said it was for want o f trying, nor that the ambulance

      man did not know what he was doing. If he left this victim to attend

      another [which must be the reasonable inference] he was fulfilling his

      duty to give treatment to those for whom it was worthwhile.




3.5   Ian G lover

      The account o f this victim ’s injuries was given by his brother John [at

      page 133]. They were to-gether in pen 3 and became crushed from

      about 14.40 onwards [page 92], John tried to resuscitate his brother

      until he was stopped by two police officers who took his body onto the

      pitch. The third brother was told by another witness that "Your Ian’s

      dead, I’ll take you to Joe" at about 15.25 [page 95] An unidentified

      doctor in the gymnasium said "there is a pulse there" but efforts to

      resuscitate him were unsuccessful. There is no evidence that this

      deceased was even seen let alone treated by SYMAS




3.6   Richard Jones

      He was in pen 3 at 14.56 [page 116]. There was no evidence at all that

      he was seen or treated by SYM AS, although he was treated by

      someone on the pitch. In his case the Coroner specifically discussed the

      question of the alleged lack o f treatment [at page 128]. It cannot be

      said that in the circumstances o f that afternoon there was lack o f care



                              20
      aggravating the cause o f death if SYMAS did not treat this victim at

      all.




3.7   M ichael K elly

      The evidence was that this victim was seen on the video at 15.08 in

      "obvious distress". The officer giving this evidence said expressly that

      he was not giving an opinion "medically" [page 192D], Subsequently

      he was treated successfully by P.C. Maughan by the goal post at the

      Leppings Lane end and then taken to the other end o f the pitch and

      given into the care o f the St John Ambulance brigade. Subsequently he

      was found at the Spion Kop end at 15.35 [pages 177 and 187G] when

      two police officers could not find any sign o f life. Although the signs

      accompanying asphyxia were "relatively mild in comparison" with

      other victims, Dr Clark had no doubt that the cause o f death was

      asphyxia. He expressly ruled out all other possible causes [page 185 E

      to F], some o f which might have indicated lack o f care, there is no

      evidence that this victim was seen or treated by SYMAS and thus there

      is no basis for the allegation that they aggravated this death by lack of

      care.




3.8   Peter T ootle

      The account o f his injuries was given by his friend Colin Frodsham.

      They were to-gether in pen 3 when they were separated by the first

      surge. Frodsham himself was rendered unconscious, and when he came



                             21
      to he saw the deceased lying on his back being attended to by an

      unidentified police officer. According to Frodsham these attempts were

      unsuccessful, and the officer left to assist another victim. Subsequently

      between 15.20 and 15.40, the deceased was found by P.C. Friend at

      the Spion Kop end with no sign o f life. Dr Slater gave evidence o f

      "extensive blueness o f the face extending to the upper part o f the

      chest      haemorrhages      present internally     indicated   traumatic

      compression o f the chest and the upper tum m y....unconscious very

      rapidly followed by death after three to five minutes."[pages 215G to

      216D] There is no evidence at all that this deceased was in the care of

      SYMAS or that he survived the first surge at 15.50. the allegation is

      not understood, especially as the family through Mr Fraser expressed

      their gratitude and recognised that everyone did all they could, [page

      222B to CJ




3.9   K evin W illiam s

      At 15.28 P.C. Craighill went into pen 3 and carried this deceased out

      onto the pitch where he tried unsuccessfully to revive him. He was

      taken to the Spion Kop end where sometime later P.C. Bruder

      observed "convulsions". As a result he to-gether with two St John

      ambulance personnel tried for thirteen minutes or so to revive him

      without success. Later in the temporary mortuary it is said that he

      started to breathe, opened his eyes and said "mum" before expiring.

      This case was obviously most distressing for all concerned not least the



                              22
           family. This was recognised by the Coroner who took extra evidence

           to deal with the possibility that this deceased might have survived.

           However, after the extra investigation, the undisputed evidence was

           that the injuries sustained by this fifteen year old boy were the worst

           that Dr Slater had observed o f all the victims he dealt with [page 268B

           to C ]. There can be no doubt that the victim died of asphyxia, and that

           the injuries he had sustained when crushed had rendered him beyond

           the help o f "anybody on this earth" [page 270D to E]. The cause o f

           death cannot be in doubt in this case, and, far from lack o f care, this

           victim received the attention o f two police officers and two St John

           Ambulance Brigade personnel. It would be absurd in this case to

           suggest that his death was aggravated by lack o f care. The sad reality

            is that had there been a hospital resuscitation unit on the pitch to render

            him immediate aid, it would have been to no avail. This was

            apparently also recognised by his parents when they expressed the

            sentiments they did through Mr Fraser at pages 253F and 267F.




4.   C O N C LU SIO N




     4.1    On a proper examination o f the facts and a correct application o f the

            law, there is no basis for suggesting that the deaths of any o f the six

            deceased were caused by lack o f care, nor that the respective causes o f

            their deaths was aggravated by lack o f care.




                                    23
             4.2    After this length o f tim e, no useful purpose would be served by

                    quashing these verdicts and ordering a new Inquest; and it would make

                    no sense at all merely to quash the verdicts and leave matters

                      unresolved.




29th October 1993

2, Crown Office Row

TEMPLE E .C .4                                                    Michel Kallipetis Q.C.
IN TH E HIGH COURT OF JU STIC E                                  C ase N o. C O /1 0 0 9 /9 2

Q U E E N ’S BENCH DIVISION

CROW N OFFICE LIST
IN THE M ATTER OF A N A PPL IC A T IO N FOR JU D IC IA L REVIEW
BETWEEN:


                                        R EG INA
                                          -and-
                        HER M A JE ST Y ’S C O R O N ER FOR
                                 S O U T H Y O R K SH IRE

                                        E x Parte
                                STR IN G ER and OTHERS


              SU P PL E M E N T A R Y SK E LETO N O N BEH ALF OF
                  SO U TH Y O R K SH IRE A M B U L A N C E SERVICE




A.    Dr Ashton


      1.    As "strong" reliance is being placed upon his statement as opposed to his
            evidence to the Taylor Inquiry, as a ground for seeking judicial review of the

            Coroner’s decision to impose a "cut off" time o f 15.15, it is submitted that
            some comparison between the allegations in his statement and the facts as

            established from other sources may help to explain why the Taylor Report
            came to the conclusions it did, and to demonstrate that he was wrong in every
            material respect.


      2.    In his statement (page 330, applicants’ bundle] as well as in his evidence to
            the Taylor Inquiry [page 129 of SY M A S’ bundle], Dr Ashton alleged that just

            after he had entered the ground a spectator came out o f the tunnel at the
            Leppings Lane end and said to a policeman:




                                            1
     "There are kids dying in there y o u ’ve got to do something. The police were
     unresponsive" to him. They checked my ticket and let me in ....I went up the

     stairs to my seat. ”
     When asked by Lord Justice Taylor whether he had taken the man seriously

     he replied:

     "Yes, / wra quite shocked, "(page 130 o f SYM AS’ bundle]
     Nevertheless he went up to his seat in the stand, from where he observed in

     his statement [pages 331 to 332 o f Applicants’ bundle]
     "A large number o f peop le on the pitch , people trying to get out o f the terrace

     onto the pitch and p eo p le continuing to come up into the stan d....T h e
     overwhelming impression was o f a large and growing number o f casualties and
     not much response. .. .fans chanting f o r assistance to be brought to the injured
     who were lying on the p itch .............../ heard the tannoy appeal f o r the doctors
     to help. I could see that the situation was really bad and could count six
     people who appeared to be dead near the goal m outh...I made my way down

     to back o f Leppings Lane end ."


     In his evidence to the Taylor Inquiry [pages 130 to 133 SY M A S’ bundle] he
     said:
     I got to the stand ju st after ten p a st three because the game had stopped          I
     could see people on the pitch lying clearly and very severely ill, distressed,
     some o f them looking as though they may already be dead- one or two a t that
     stage-
     After he heard the tannoy appeal for doctors and nurses, [15.29] he made his
     way down to the back o f the Leppings Lane entrance, getting there after 15.30

     [page 141 o f "AP5”1, 15.30 to 15.35 in his statement [page 332 o f Applicants’

     bundle | .


3.   Although in his statement as well as in his evidence to the Taylor Inquiry he

     claimed that when he got to the back o f Leppings Lane there "was only one
     ambulance" and that a "succession of ambulances did not materialise until
      15.45, [page 133 o f Applicants’ bundle], in fact the videos, and SY M A S’ logs


                                        2
showed that by 15.35 four ambulances had arrived at the Leppings Lane End
alone, o f which at least three had already departed with casualties. Dr Ashton

accepted that his statement relayed only to what he him self had seen, and on
any view no-one had a complete picture at that time [page 146 o f "APS"].


Although Dr Ashton both in his statement [page 333 o f the Applicants’
bundle], and in his evidence to the Taylor Inquiry [page 143 o f AP5"] claimed

that there was no system o f triage, in fact the Inquiry heard that there was a
clear system set up by the first ambulance personnel to arrive at the scene
[pi 17 o f "AP4"].



Although Dr Ashton claimed both in his statement [page 333 o f the
Applicants’ bundle] and his evidence [pages 133 and 134 o f "AP5"] that there
was no equipment, in fact each ambulance man carried his own CPR
equipment, ie inhalation bag and Brooks airways, and various other breathing

tubes, which o f course they were using themselves. On the video evidence,
there were numerous ambulance officers treating casualties both at the back o f
Leppings Lane and on the pitch using their equipment.


Dr Ashton him self did not actually attempt CPR on any victim, unlike Dr
Phillips and Mr Ecclestone, and "organised a system o f tnagey and "told the
police who should be dispatched by ambulance and who could wait" [page 333
o f Applicants’ bundle].


Dr Ashton also claimed that a full accident and casualty team did not arrive
until 16.15 [page 146 o f "AP5"], whereas in fact a full casualty team was at
the gymnasium by 15.50 at the latest [page 115 o f "AP4"].


All the above demonstrates how dangerous it is to rely solely on the statement
o f one person who had a limited view o f what was happening, especially one
whose allegations were not "disbelieved by the Taylor Inquiry" so that a "jury

might take a different view", but who was shown by incontrovertible evidence
       to have been wrong. Calling erroneous evidence before the Coroners’ Jury

       would have been o f no use to anyone, and certainly would not help the

       unfortunate families to understand what had happened to their deceased
       relatives.


Dr Phillips


1.    Apart from his claim that a defibrillator should have been available, SYM AS
       has no quarrel with his evidence. He was shown to have been mistaken about
       the oxygen cylinder; a mistake readily understandable given the circumstances

       and the fact that he had badly cracked his head when leaping from Pen 3 onto
       the pitch to help a victim (page 320 and 327 o f Applicants’ bundle].


2.     Contrary to what is being said, his evidence supports the Coroner’s decision

       to the hilt, because he treated "one o f the first out o f the pens" [page 321] for
       some fifteen minutes, and although he got a pulse back, he recognised that he
       probably would not have survived anyway [pages 323 and 327], Furthermore
       he could find only "dead or okay with nothing in between" [pages 323, 324,

       and 325]


Mr Ecclestone


1.    See the comments in paragraph 17 o f Page’s affidavit.




2nd November 1993                                                Michel Kallipetis Q.C.
IN TH E HIGH CO URT OF JU STIC E                                    C ase N o . CO/IOOQ/Q?
Q U E E N ’S BENCH DIVISION

CRO W N O FFICE LIST

IN TH E M ATTER O F AN A PPL IC A T IO N FOR JU D IC IA L REVIEW
BETWEEN:


                                         R E G IN A

                                           -and-
                         HER M A JE ST Y ’S C O R O N E R FOR
                                  SO U T H YORKSHIRE

                                         E x Parte
                                 ST R IN G E R and OTH ERS


               SU P PL E M E N T A R Y SK E L E T O N O N B E H A L F OF
                   SO U TH YO R K SH IRE A M B U L A N C E SERVICE




A.    What are the issues now?

      1.    Should the Coroner have called evidence as to events after 15.15 in order to
            see whether or not there might be grounds for directing the jury that they
            might:

            (a)      bring in a verdict o f unlawful killing aggravated by lack o f care by a
                     failure on the part o f SYM AS to have resuscitation equipment on the

                     pitch in sufficient time to have saved the lives o f unidentified victims
                     who, although they had received crush injuries may have been capable
                     o f being revived and thereafter have continued to survive; or
             (b)     add a narrative to some other verdict, including accidental death, that
                     in some cases life might have been saved or the cause o f death might
                     have been aggravated by the absence o f resuscitation equipment on the
                     pitch; or
             (c)     add a narrative to identify another failing by        SYM AS      as yet

                     unspecified save under the blanket heading of "shortcomings".


                                              1
     2.     Was there any evidence o f lack o f care by SYM AS, after they had arrived,

            such as to cause death or aggravate the cause o f death?


B.   The basis o f the application.


     1.     As far as we understand it, the basis o f the application is that there was clear

            evidence of woeful inadequacies etc as per grounds [Applicants’bundle page

            31-


     2.     This "clear evidence" is said to be the statements o f Drs Ashton and Phillips,
            Mr Ecclestone, and the other witnesses whose statements have been served in
            the course o f this hearing.


     3.     We deal in detail with Dr Ashton below. Simply put, his "evidence" was
            wrong when tested against the uncontrovertible evidence o f the videos and the .
            photographs, as he him self acknowledged in part when he gave evidence to the
            Taylor Inquiry. Most important o f all, his claim that more lives would have
            been saved if the emergency services had arrived earlier and had been better

            equipped, was expressly withdrawn by him in his evidence to the Taylor
             Inquiry [see paragraph 1.12 of SYMAS         main skeleton]. This application,
             insofar as it is based on that statement without reference to the evidence given
            by the witness to the Taylor Inquiry, is as flawed as the evidence on which it
             so strongly relies. Furthermore simply to assert that a jury "may have formed

             a different view", flies in the face o f common sense, and would result in
             manifest injustice unless all the evidence which refutes that Doctor’s
             allegations were also taken into account.


     4.     As far as Dr Phillips is concerned, one has great admiration for his
             spontaneous reaction which was to "jump in and help". He spent quarter of an
             hour trying to revive a victim, and although he succeeded in regaining a pulse,
             he acknowledged in his statement, as well as in his evidence, that it was, alas,




                                             2
     probably futile. The rest o f his statement, apart from the matters we deal with

     below, supports to the hilt the evidence of the pathologists.


5.   The picture which he painted in his statement, and which was painfully
     apparent from every witness, photograph and video film presented to the
     Taylor Inquiry, and indeed to the jury, was o f a mass o f people jammed so
     tightly into the area behind the perimeter fence that they could not be dragged
     out; pressed to-gether so closely and with such force that metal restraining
     barriers bent and broke under the strain; and so closely confined that many o f

     them could not move their limbs or torsoes, and, in some cases, there was
     evidence that victims died where they stood held to-gether in amalgam o f
     human bodies which had to be literally prised apart.The scene that then ensued
     was chaotic: how could it fail to be? Those trying to help the injured were
     hindered by the stream o f people pouring out o f the pens once they were
     opened. Relatives and friends o f those who were unconscious or dead were ,
     desperately seeking help, and in their desperation they often unwittingly
     hampered the efforts o f all those who were trying to revive the victims. How
     can it be said that, when arriving into this maelstrom, SYMAS personnel
     caused or aggravated the cause o f death by failing to revive an individual,
     when by the sheer weight o f numbers it was an impossible task to treat
     everyone simultaneously? Unlike many that day, who merely stood and
     watched, the SYMAS personnel are to be seen on the videos and in the
     photographs attending to victims from the time they arrived until after all the

     bodies were removed. Far from there being abundant evidence o f a woeful
     lack o f response by SYM AS, there is overwhelming evidence to the contrary,
     as the Taylor Inquiry found.


6.   If all the victims were taken to an ICU set up on the pitch, it is unlikely that
     they would have survived, or, if they did, it would be a life impaired by the
     brain damage caused by lack of oxygen over a period of five minutes. If the
     Coroner’s motive in imposing a cut off time at 15.15 was to spare the families

     the awful details o f the aftermath of the tragedy, it is hardly just to describe


                                     3
           that as a deliberate suppression o f evidence, let alone to ascribe to it the base

           intention o f reducing any financial consequences to Sheffield authorities.


     7.   It is submitted that when one faces the reality o f what happened, and more

           importantly for the purposes o f this application, what faced the SYMAS
           personnel when they arrived, there can be no basis at all for any alleged lack
           o f care other than that set out in paragraphs 2.3 and 2 .4 o f the main skeleton.


     8.   Two vital facts have been overlooked. First it takes two people to give CPR
           properly. Secondly, there is no point at all putting an oxygen mask on

           someone whose lungs are not working: it is not a substitute for a ventilator.
           What were the ambulance personnel supposed to do when they arrive but treat
           the first person they came across who was still breathing? Faced with the
           number o f casulaties, they would have been open to criticism (as indeed they
           were!), if they had not exercised their professional judgment and practised
           triage.


     9.   However, SYMAS are very anxious that no-one, especially the relatives,
           should feel that SYMAS wishes to cover up any proper allegation or supress
           evidence. We propose therefore to meet head on the alleagtions now made and
           demonstrate that they do not provide any basis for the suggestion that anyone’s
           life was lost because o f a lack o f care by the emergency services.


C.   Dr Ashton


     1.   As "strong" reliance is being placed upon his statement as opposed to his
           evidence to the Taylor Inquiry, as a ground for seeking judicial review o f the
           Coroner’s decision to impose a "cut off" time o f 15.15, it is submitted that
           some comparison between the allegations in his statement and the facts as
           established from other sources may help to explain why the Taylor Report
           came to the conclusions it did, and to demonstrate that he was wrong in every

           material respect.


                                            4
2.   In his statement [page 330, applicants’ bundle] as well as in his evidence to

     the Taylor Inquiry (page 129 of SY M A S’ bundle], Dr Ashton alleged that just

     after he had entered the ground a spectator came out o f the tunnel at the
     Leppings Lane end and said to a policeman:

     "There are kids dying in there you 've got to do something. The p olice were

     unresponsive" to him. They checked my ticket and let me in ....I went up the
     stairs to my s e a t."

     When asked by Lord Justice Taylor whether he had taken the man seriously
     he replied:

     "Yes, / was quite shocked, "[page 130 o f SYM AS’ bundle]
     Nevertheless he went up to his seat in the stand, from where he observed in
     his statement [pages 331 to 332 o f Applicants’ bundle]
     "A large number o f p eo p le on the pitch, people trying to get out o f the terrace

     onto the pitch and people continuing to come up into the stan d ....T h e
     overwhelming impression was o f a large and growing number o f casualties and

     not much response... .fans chanting fo r assistance to be brought to the injured
     who were lying on the pitch .............. / heard the tannoy appeal f o r the doctors
     to help. I could see that the situation was really bad and could count six
     people who appeared to be dead near the goal m outh...I made my way down
     to back o f Leppings Lane end ."


     In his evidence to the Taylor Inquiry [pages 130 to 133 SYM AS’ bundle] he
     said:

     / got to the stand ju st after ten pa st three because the game had stopped          /
     could see people on the pitch lying clearly and very severely ill, distressed,
     some o f them looking as though they may already be dead- one or two at that
     stage-
     After he heard the tannoy appeal for doctors and nurses, [15.29] he made his
     way down to the back of the Leppings Lane entrance, getting there after 15.30
     [page 141 o f "AP5"|, 15.30 to 15.35 in his statement [page 332 o f Applicants’
     bundle[.




                                       5
3.   Although in his statement as well as in his evidence to the Taylor Inquiry he

     claimed that when he got to the back o f Leppings Lane there "was only one

     ambulance" and that a "succession o f ambulances did not materialise until
      15.45, [page 133 o f Applicants’ bundle], in fact the videos, and SYM AS’ logs
     showed that by 15.35 four ambulances had arrived at the Leppings Lane End
     alone, o f which at least three had already departed with casualties. Dr Ashton
     accepted that his statement relayed only to what he himself had seen, and on
     any view no-one had a complete picture at that time [page 146 o f "AP5"1.


4.   Although Dr Ashton both in his statement [page 333 o f the Applicants’

     bundle], and in his evidence to the Taylor Inquiry [page 143 o f AP5"] claimed
     that there was no system o f triage, in fact the Inquiry heard that there was a
     clear system set up by the first ambulance personnel to arrive at the scene
      [pi 17 o f "AP4"].



5.   Although Dr Ashton claimed both in his statement [page 333 o f the
     Applicants’ bundle] and his evidence [pages 133 and 134 o f "AP5"] that there
     was no equipment, in fact each ambulance man carried his own CPR
      equipment, ie inhalation bag and Brooks airways, and various other breathing
      tubes, which o f course they were using themselves. On the video evidence,
      there were numerous ambulance officers treating casualties both at the back o f
      Leppings Lane and on the pitch using their equipment.



6.   Dr Ashton himself did not actually attempt CPR on any victim, unlike Dr
      Phillips and Mr Ecclestone, and "organised a system o f triage" and "told the
      police who should be dispatched by ambulance and who could wait" [page 333
      o f Applicants’ bundle].


7.   Dr Ashton also claimed that a full accident and casualty team did not arrive
      until 16.15 [page 146 o f "AP5"], whereas in fact a full casualty team was at
      the gymnasium by 15.50 at the latest [page 115 o f "AP4"].




                                     6
8.    All the above demonstrates how dangerous it is to rely solely on the statement

       o f one person who had a limited view o f what was happening, especially one

       whose allegations were not "disbelieved by the Taylor Inquiry" so that a "jury
       might take a different view", but who was shown by incontrovertible evidence

       to have been wrong. Calling erroneous evidence before the Coroners’ Jury
       would have been o f no use to anyone, and certainly would not help the

       unfortunate families to understand what had happened to their deceased
       relatives.


Dr Phillips


1.    Apart from his claim that a defibrillator should have been available, SYM AS
       has no quarrel with his evidence. He was shown to have been mistaken about
       the oxygen cylinder; a mistake readily understandable given the circumstances
       and the fact that he had badly cracked his head when leaping from Pen 3 onto
       the pitch to help a victim [page 320 and 327 o f Applicants’ bundle].


2.     Contrary to what is being said, his evidence supports the Coroner’s decision
       to the hilt, because he treated "one o f the first out o f the pens" [page 321] for
       some fifteen minutes, and although he got a pulse back, he recognised that he
       probably would not have survived anyway [pages 323 and 327]. Furthermore
       he could find only "dead or okay with nothing in between" [pages 323, 324,

       and 325]


Mr Ecclestone


1.    See the comments in paragraph 17 o f Page’s affidavit.




3rd November 1993                                                Michel Kallipetis Q.C.
                                                                           C 0/1009/92
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE                    Sworn by: A Pag**

QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION                          Qn         behalf         of;     South
                                                Y orkshire M etropoij t an
CROWN OFFICE LIST                               Ambulance           and     Paramedic
                                                Serv ic e
                                                F ir s t     ^
                                                D ated ^            Sep-hfMnhe r 1993

TN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR A JUDICIAL REVIEW


B E T W E E N :

                                   REGINA

                                    - v -

               HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE


                                  EX PARTE

                            STRINGER AND OTHERS




                             A F F I D A V I T



I, Albert Page of I                      Rotherham,        make oath and say as
follows:
1.   I   am   the   Chief   Executive   of   South   Yorkshire         Metropolitan
     Ambulance and Paramedic Service which was granted NHS Trust
     status on 1 April 1992.       Prior to that I had, since 1982, been
     the Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer for South Yorkshire
     Metropolitan Ambulance Service (which was then part of Trent
     Regional Health Authority).


2.   I swear this affidavit in opposition to the applications for
     Judicial Review of the inquests of six of the victims of the
     Hillsborough     Disaster   which   took    place      on   15       April   1989.
     Except where otherwise appears,          this affidavit              is based on
     matters within my own knowledge, information and belief.
3.   I am a Justice of the Peace, a Fellow of the Ambulance Service
     Institute, and a member of the Association of Chief Ambulance
     Officers.     Since     1986,   I    have   been       an   instructor    at    the
     National Health Service Training establishment at Harrogate on
     courses for senior ambulance officer development.                   I recently
     acted as chairman of the inquiry into the failure of a newly
     installed computer system at the London Ambulance Service.


4.   I have read the memorial and supporting documents that are
     exhibited to the affidavit of Mr Hawthorn.                     There are some
     matters in the memorial which, due to the fact that they have
     been paraphrased,       are not completely accurate;             I am anxious
     that any incorrect impression be rectified.                     I restrict my
     comments to matters which I consider to be relevant to the
     ambulance service; these comments largely relate to the claims
     concerning the involvement of the ambulance service, a lack of
     care and the cut-off point of 3.15 pm which are referred to in
     paragraph 5 of the memorial.


5.   In paragraph 9 of the memorial, it is suggested that,                     in his
     inquiry, Lord Justice Taylor recognised that a quicker response
     to the emergency by the police to ensure the attendance of the
     emergency services might have saved at least some lives, and
     that these findings raised the further question of whether the
     crush   injuries    had been aggravated           by a lack of       care.        I
     presume that the memorial is referring to paragraph 252 of Lord
     Justice Taylor's Interim Report (which I refer to below).                      This
     question was very fully canvassed before Lord Justice Taylor's
     Inquiry.    Arguments were submitted to the Inquiry by Leading
     Counsel    for SYMAS,    and by      Leading Counsel          for the police.
     Witnesses were cross examined on this point at length,                          and
     after hearing all the evidence and all the submissions,                        Lord
     Justice    Taylor   concluded       that    "it   is    unlikely   that    these
     services (ambulance and fire) could have saved lives if they
     had been called promptly, but it is possible" . This conclusion
     followed that in paragraph 251 as to the effect if any that an
     earlier call for doctors and nurses in the crowd might have


                                         2
had, namely that "probably there was little that could have
been achieved ... but there were marginal cases where earlier
attention     might   have     made       a     difference."                Both    these
conclusions    are to be read in the context of Lord Justice
Taylor's finding that the disaster occurred,                          and the       fatal
injuries had been suffered by 15.06 when the police recognised
the fact and stopped the match.


There is now produced and shown to me marked "API" a true copy
of Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report.                        I wish to refer to
the following paragraphs of the interim report:


Paragraphs 87-90         which give details of the response of
                         the St John's Ambulance Brigade,
Paragraphs 105-106       which           give      details      of    the     ambulance
                             service      response,         and give         statistics
                         relating             to   the    number       of    ambulances
                             involved and the casualties,
Paragraph 252            which states that it is unlikely that
                         the emergency services could have saved
                             lives       if    they      had    been     called      more
                         promptly, but it is possible,
Paragraphs 296-301       which include the specific finding that
                         the             ambulance          service           responded
                         promptly,            that     it brought           appropriate
                         equipment              and      that     their       personnel
                         operated efficiently.                       There is also a
                         specific finding that,                      in view of the
                         nature and extent of the crushing,                           the
                         time the             police      rescue      began and       the
                         pathetically               short       period       for    which
                         those unable to breathe could survive,
                         it is improbable that quicker recourse
                         to     the       emergency        services         would    have
                         saved more lives.




                                     3
      The BMJ Article of 30 November 1991
7.    Paragraph 10 of the memorial refers to the BMJ article of 30
      November 1991.       I saw that article in early 1992 and I wrote
      to the editor of the BMJ in relation to factual inaccuracies.
      There is now produced and shown to me marked "AP2" a true copy
      of my letter to the editor of the British Medical Journal dated
      29 January 1992.


8.    The BMJ article shows that no one who suffered a cardiac arrest
      and was taken to hospital actually survived.           Of the 14 victims
      who suffered a cardiac arrest and were taken to hospital, five
      were dead on arrival, resuscitation was attempted but failed
      on seven     of   them,   and two were    resuscitated    and    taken   to
      intensive care but then died.         The article does not support the
      conclusion that the Applicants seek to draw.


9.    The BMJ article also points out that most of the seriously
      injured arrived at the hospital within the first 30 minutes.
      I believe that this not only shows the rapid response of the
      ambulance service, but also indicates that the ambulance crews
      were selecting the more seriously injured victims and taking
      them to hospital first.


10.   The suggestion that a jury might take a different view of the
      two doctors' evidence gives me some disquiet. The two doctors
      gave interviews to the press at the time and subsequently.
      They were the only two eyewitnesses to make any criticism of
      the work done by the emergency services at the ground.              These
      criticisms    were    aired   fully   before    Lord   Justice   Taylor's
      Inquiry and found to be groundless.            In particular, Dr Ashton
      had stood and watched the scenes on the pitch but made no
      attempt to go and assist, although he apparently appreciated
      there were many injured and dying persons in need of aid, until
      the tannoy announcement at just before 15.30.           Moreover he told
      Lord Justice Taylor that he could not say that any lives would
      have been saved if the emergency services had arrived earlier.



                                       4
11.   Both of these doctors' criticisms were found to be without any
      factual basis when the detailed evidence was examined.                              It may
      be, and   R P .r ta in lv   Dr Ashton conceded this in terms, that what
      they said at the time was merely their impressions gained from
      a limited vantage point.             They both conceded however when faced
      with the facts as recorded on film and the SYMAS records, that
      their criticisms were based upon limited information.                              What use
      to a jury their evidence could now be must be questionable.
      If   their   evidence            is the    same    as    it    was    to    Lord   Justice
      Taylor's inquiry,            it has already been shown to be based on
      incomplete and inaccurate information.                          If their evidence is
      to     be different         the     jury   will     be faced         with    conflicting
      evidence from the same witness,                   and as the          court well knows
      that is not conducive to arriving at the truth.                             In order that
      this Honourable Court may judge the strength of the criticisms
      now being advanced by the two Liverpool doctors I shall deal
      with each in turn.


      Dr Phillips
12.   Paragraph 12 of the memorial refers to the evidence of Dr Glyn
      Phillips.      There is now produced and shown to me marked "AP3"
      a true copy of the transcript of the evidence that Dr Phillips
      gave to the Taylor inquiry which Counsel will refer to in more
      detail at the hearing of the applications for Judicial Review.
      As far as the specific claims made in the memorial in relation
      to Dr Phillips' evidence are concerned:
      12.1      Neither       his       statement       nor    the     transcript         of    his
                evidence demonstrate that lives could have been saved
                by what the memorial refers to as                          "proper emergency
                help".       In fact the opposite is the                    case and I would
                draw     attention         to    the    following          extracts      from    Dr
                Phillips' statement:-
                Page 9            "I    could    not    find        anybody      seriously      ill
                                  needing help.         Just dead or seemingly minor
                                  injuries and shaken people."
                Page 11           "Remembering the fan we had resuscitated                        I
                                  gave a policeman my name and address.                    I felt


                                                 5
                       it very unlikely that he would have survived
                       and reconciled myself by the fact that if he
                       had he would have been brain damaged."
12.2   His statement makes no reference to his asking for a
       ventilator.          It does, however, refer to his asking for
       a defibrillator.             Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report
       (at     paragraph           298 )       states       "I         am        satisfied          on
       overwhelming           evidence             that    to     attempt             to     use     a
       defibrillator on the pitch with people milling about
       would have been highly dangerous owing to the risk of
       injury from the electric charge".
12.3   I gave evidence to Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry,                                            as
       did     some    of     my     officers,             as    to     the           effects       of
       attempting        to    use       a     defibrillator                in    crowded          and
       confused conditions.                  In particular, we had in mind the
       situation at Hillsborough as shown on the video film.
       In    short      our       evidence           was        that        the       use     of     a
       defibrillator was discouraged unless the operator had
       a clear working area with no risk of contact between
       the     patient      and      any          other    person,           and       where       the
       operator could with confidence diagnose an arrhythmic
       beat.       The      use     of        a    defibrillator                 in    the    wrong
       circumstances could               easily kill the patient,                            a more
       detailed argument against the use of a defibrillator
       appears    in the        exhibit            referred       to    in paragraph                13
       below.
12.4   Dr Phillips claimed to have been given an empty oxygen
       cylinder.       This is dealt with in paragraphs 14 to 16 of
       Appendix       6 of     Lord          Justice      Taylor's           Interim         Report
       which concludes that Dr Phillips may have been mistaken
       as to the cylinder of which he complains being empty.
12.5   The last sentence of paragraph 12 of the Memorial is
       not     borne     out       by        the     evidence.               There          was     no
       significant lack of equipment, let alone such as would
       have contributed to the deaths of some of the deceased.




                                         6
13.   There is now produced and shown to me marked "AP4" an extract
      from the submissions made to Lord Justice Taylor on behalf of
      ■the ambulance service.        They respond to criticisms made by Dr
      Ashton     ("Dr   A")   and   Dr    Phillips    ("Dr    P" ).        The   detailed
      response     to    Dr   Phillips'        complaint     about     a    lack    of    a
      defibrillator appears on pages 4 to 6 of AP4.


      Dr Ashton
14.   The memorial's account of Dr Ashton's evidence is misleading
      and fails to take account of what he said in giving evidence
      to the Taylor Inquiry.             It also fails to take account of the
      findings of Lord Justice Taylor.               The memorial claims that by
      3.35 pm only one ambulance had arrived at Leppings Lane.                           In
      cross examination Dr Ashton accepted that the video evidence
      showed that by 3.30 pm at least four ambulances had attended
      at the back of Leppings Lane. There is now produced and shown
      to me marked "AP5" a true copy of the transcript of Dr Ashton's
      evidence to the Taylor Inquiry and I would refer to the page
      numbered 121.       I would also refer to the first four pages of
      exhibit AP4 which deals with each of Dr Ashton's complaints.


15.   In paragraph 296 of the Interim Report,                 Lord Justice Taylor
      stated - "The only attack on SYMAS came from two Liverpool
      doctors.     One claimed that ambulances did not arrive swiftly
      or with sufficient equipment              and that     there was a^ lack of
      triage.     He was proved to be wrong in all three respects.
      Unfortunately he had seen fit to go on television on 15 April
      when he said more lives could have been saved if staff and
      equipment had arrived earlier.             Apart from being proved wrong
      in fact as to the times of arrival of ambulances, he conceded
      in evidence that it was not possible to say whether lives could
      have     been     saved.       His       comments      on   television        were
      irresponsible".


16.   In the circumstances,         it is clearly wrong              to conclude,        as
      paragraph 13(h) of the memorial does, that Dr Ashton's evidence




                                           7
raises the issue that lives might have been saved by a more
timely response.


Mr Eccleston
Paragraph 14 of the memorial refers to Mr Eccleston's evidence.
He is described by Lord Justice Taylor as an impressive witness
[Appendix 6 paragraph 8] . Unlike Dr Ashton, Mr Eccleston went
to lend assistance as soon as he realised that people were
hurt.   This was when the match was stopped, namely 15.05.                        His
description of what he found when he arrived at the area behind
the goal was consistent with all the other evidence from the
video films and the other witnesses who gave evidence.                        There
is now produced to me and marked "AP6" what I am informed and
believe to be a true copy of the transcript of the evidence Mr
Eccleston gave to Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry.                      It is clear
that his recollection at the time when he made his statement
quite understandably was not entirely accurate as to the time
at which certain events had taken place.                 He makes no criticism
at all of the response by SYMAS.                  His references to lack of
equipment are references to St John Ambulance at an early stage
in the proceedings, and his reference to lack of leadership are
a reference to the police actions after the match had been
stopped.    In    my     respectful         submission    the    effect      of   his
evidence was fully considered by Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry,
and does not support the Applicants' case that the lives of
their relatives may have been saved.


It is clear that, with the possible exception of one point, to
which I refer in paragraph 24 below, Dr Phillips, Dr Ashton and
Mr   Eccleston    are    not    able   to    give   evidence      that    directly
relates to the deaths of any of the six victims whose inquests
are the subject of these proceedings.                Whilst I do understand
the feelings of the families of the six victims,                         I am also
concerned   for    the    welfare      of    my   officers      and   men.        This
Honourable court ought to be aware that the events of that day
had a considerable effect upon the ambulancemen and women who
attended the ground.           Trained and experienced in all sorts of
      emergencies as they are, what they had to endure that day took
      a   toll    upon   their    physical     and   mental   welfare   that    bare
      statistics     hardly      begin   to   describe.       Seventy-four     SYMAS
      personnel attended Hillsborough on 15 April 1989.                  The vast
      majority of them received counselling in the days following the
      disaster,     and many received         further therapy.      Whilst     I am
      unable to put a figure on the sick leave that resulted from the
      effects of the disaster on ambulance personnel,              I believe that
      a significant amount of such            sick leave arose.   Great care was
      taken to help those who were called               to give evidence and thus
      had to relive the events in             detail.    I do not want to labour
      this point because I do sympathise with the families, and I do
      understand their desire to find out what happened.                The awful
      fact, however, is that where there is no direct eye witness to
      any particular person's death,            much will remain a matter of
      inference and speculation.          To hold the equivalent of another
      Inquiry will not reveal to the Applicants any more than what
      is already known, but it will have a devastating effect upon
      those who may be called to give evidence again some five years
      later (by the time another Inquest could be arranged).                    If I
      believed that some useful purpose could be served,                  I would
      support such a course of action.               But I do not believe that
      another investigation would serve any purpose,               and certainly
      not on the basis of the ill informed criticisms which were
      fully canvassed before Lord Justice Taylor.


19.   Paragraph 15(ii).       There is no evidence at all, and certainly
      none advanced by the Applicants in their Memorial,                 that the
      emergency services were slow to respond to the plight of the
      injured.     SYMAS received the call for their services at 15.07,
      and the first ambulance was at the stadium at the Leppings Lane
      Entrance at 15.13, and another at the Penistone Road entrance
      at 15.17.     The only basis for the allegation in this paragraph
      is that of Dr Ashton, and his observations were refuted by the
      logs produced by SYMAS to Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry.                   The
      other wide ranging criticisms in this paragraph also emanate
      from the same witness, and were found to be unsustainable when


                                          9
      the evidence of the video films and the other witnesses was
      considered.


20.   In paragraphs 18 to 22, the memorial gives some detail of the
      evidence    relating   to   the   deaths     of   the   six   victims   whose
      inquests    are the    subject    of   the   applications      for   Judicial
      Review.     I shall comment on each in turn.


     Paul Carlisle
21. The Applicants have produced a report of Dr West         of the
     Department of Forensic Medicine of Guy's Hospital.      In his
     report Dr West refers to two different types of traumatic
     asphyxia. The first type is "classic" traumatic asphyxia. He
     doesn't give a label to the second type.


22.   Dr West states that most of the individuals who suffer               from the
      classic form of traumatic asphyxia do not survive if                 they are
      severely affected and not rescued rapidly.


23.   Dr West's report indicates that Paul Carlisle suffered from
      "classic"    traumatic asphyxia.         Even if he was         alive   after
      3.15pm it seems highly unlikely that he could have survived.


24.   The evidence indicates that Paul Carlisle was taken to the
      Leppings Lane area, perhaps about 10 minutes or so before Dr
      Ashton arrived in that area.           It does, however,        seem likely
      that Dr Ashton saw Paul Carlisle and decided that he was dead
      and that there was therefore no point in him being placed in
      an ambulance or taken to hospital.


      Ian Glover
25.   I can see nothing in the information contained in the memorial
      and its supporting documents that justifies the suggestion that
      Ian Glover might have survived had there been a "more timely"
      attempt at resuscitation.




                                        10
      Michael Kellv
26.   I can see nothing in the information contained in the memorial
      and its supporting documents that justifies the suggestion that
      Michael Kelly1s death was preventable and that he died because
      of some shortcomings in the care he received                       after he was
      handed over to the St John's Ambulance Service.


      Kevin Williams
27.   Dr West    puts   Kevin       Williams      in    the   category   of   "classic"
      traumatic asphyxia, and even if he was alive after 3.15pm, it
      seems highly unlikely that he could have survived.


      Richard Jones
28.   Dr West indicates that Richard Jones suffered from "classic"
      traumatic asphyxia,           and there is nothing to indicate that he
      was alive after 3.15pm.          In the light of Dr West's expert view,
      even if Richard Jones was alive after 3.15pm, it seems highly
      unlikely that he could have survived.


      Peter Tootle
29.   The memorial does not suggest that there is any evidence that
      Mr Tootle was alive after 3.15pm.                Furthermore, Dr West accepts
      that the evidence given to the inquest was consistent with a
      degree of "classic" traumatic asphyxia.


30.   Paragraph 23 (i i ).         In this paragraph, the applicants repeat
      their earlier assertions but in more positive terms.                       There is
      no evidence to support these allegations and I respectfully ask
      the Court to reject them as a basis for granting the Applicants
      the relief they seek.                While it is true that Lord Justice
      Taylor found that the police might have called SYMAS earlier
      if they had appreciated the true nature of the difficulties
      behind     the   goal   at     the    Leppings      Lane    end,   there    was   no
      suggestion ever made that              once called,         SYMAS were     slow to
      respond.     I do not understand the basis for the assertion on
      oath that "the evidence was very strong that there had been
      shortcomings      in    the    response      of    the     emergency    services."


                                             11
      Furthermore I do not understand the basis for asserting that
      such shortcomings played any part at all in the causation of
      any    of    the     deaths   of      the      Applicants'         relatives.       More
      particularly, there is no evidence to suggest that any of these
      six    lives    could    have        been      saved    by   more     prompt    medical
      attention.


31.   Paragraphs 23(iii)        and (iv).            There is no evidence to support
      the assertions in these paragraphs that there may have been
      "some failure in medical attention" nor that the deaths were
      preventable "by suitable emergency response".


32.   Paragraph      24(i).         There       is    no     evidence      to   support    the
      suggestion that the response of the emergency services was not
      adequate,      and    thus there        is no        basis   for    an inquiry      into
      whether the deaths of any of the Applicants' relatives might
      have   beNen    prevented       by    "more       prompt     and    adequate    medical
      intervention".          It is a fairly safe assumption that if SYMAS
      had been summoned earlier then its ambulancemen and women would
      have started their rescue work earlier than they were able.
      It is arguable that they may have saved more lives had they
      been on the scene earlier, but there is no evidence at all to
      support any suggestion that SYMAS was dilatory in its response
      to the emergency call: on the contrary the facts demonstrate
      the swiftness of their response.                       In those circumstances          I
      respectfully submit that the Applicants' argument rests solely
      upon the allegations made by Dr Ashton and Dr Phillips.


33.   I   respectfully       submit      that      the     basis    of    the   Applicants'
      submissions are not supported by the evidence.                             The Taylor
      Interim Report         states that          the    ambulance service responded
      quickly and efficiently and I think it appropriate that I quote
      from paragraphs 297 and 298 of that report:
      " 297. I find that all three of the emergency services named
                  above    responded        promptly when          alerted,       that    they
                  brought appropriate equipment and that their personnel
                  operated efficiently.


                                              12
        298. It       would    be    unreasonable       to        expect,                 at        any           sports
              stadium, medical facilities capable of dealing with a
              major disaster such as occurred.                          To have in advance at
              the ground,           oxygen,    resuscitators,                    stretchers,                        other
              equipment and medical                staff      sufficient to deal                                       with
              over 100 casualties is not practicable.                                       "


34.   The memorial refers to examples of "successful resuscitation"
      but   the memorial        puts    forward no evidence that                                     anyone who
      suffered    a    cardiac       arrest    subsequently                  survived.                          On        the
      contrary,   the BMJ article states that no one who arrived at
      hospital,       having        suffered       a   cardiac              arrest,                   ultimately
      survived.


Sworn at tU. cjVk ^       'Sfa& O )
in the County of South Yorkshire)
this          day of          1993 )
Before me,           '             )




      Solicitor

        o&fyjj < rlw




                                                           F : \WP \ C A L L A C H A \ S T R I N G 0 1 . A F r \ 0 8 .09. 93\EM\V5
                                              13
                         CO/1009/92
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JIIRTTC!K

QUEEN *S BENCH DIVISION

CROWN OFFICE LIST




B E T W E E N     :



                REGINA

                - v -

  HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR
       SOUTH YORKSHIRE


            EX PARTE

      STRINGER AND OTHERS




       A F F I D A V I T




     Dibb Lupton Broomhead
       Fountain Precinct
           Balm Green
            SHEFFIELD
             SI 1RZ
          0742 760351
1
                                                                  CQ/1009/92

IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE                     Sworn bv;    A Pape
                                                 On behalf    o f : South
QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION                          Yorkshire    Metropolitan
                                                 Ambulance    and Paramedic
CROWN OFFICE LIST                               Service

                                                First
                                                Dated 'V~     September 1993

IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR A JUDICIAL REVIEW

B E T W E E N :

                                REGINA

                                 - v -

             HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE

                               EX PARTE

                          STRINGER AND OTHERS




This is the exhibit marked "API" referred to in the affidavit of

Albert Page attached hereto.




Sworn this f t \ day of                  1993


Before me,




Solicitor
             HOME OFFICE


   THE HILLSBOROUGH
    STADIUM DISASTER
               15 APRIL 1989


          INQUIRY BY
THE RT HON LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR


         INTERIM REPORT


                    hrcscmcii n>Parliament
      by the Secretary <v Slate inr m e H om e Department
                 'hv c r»n»)a)ui o' H er M aiestv
                         AllgU'i! jv .s v
                                              CONTENTS
                                                                  Paragraph
INTRODUCTION
PART I - WHAT HAPPENED AT HILLSBOROUGH?
CHAPTER 1 - T H E G R O U N D A N D PRE-MATCH
A RRA NG EM EN TS
          Fixing The Venue                                                 21
          The Ground                                                       22
          The Turnstiles                                                   29
          Travel to the Ground                                             33
          Allocation o f Places and Tickets                                35
          Access from Leppings Lane                                        37
          inside the Leppings Lane Turnstiles                              40
          Policing Arrangements                                            47
          Sheffield Wednesday's Arrangements                               48
          Police Communications                                            49
C H A PTER 2 - 1 5 APRIL: THE BUILD U P TO 2.30 pm
          Early Arrivals                                                   54
          Public Houses                                                    55
          The Gathering Crowd                                              57
CH APTER 3 - TH E CRISIS AT THE TURNSTILES
        “Open the Gates”                                                   66
CH APTER 4 - THE DISASTER
C H A PTER 5 - THE AFTERMATH
          Rescue Attempts                                                  81
          First Aid                                                  87
          In the Control Room                                              91
          N o information                                                  97
          Misinformation                                                   98
          Public Announcements                                            100
          Fire Brigade                                                    101
         South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambuiance Service (SYMAS)           105
         Gymnasium                                                        107
         The D ead and the injured                                        108
CH A PTER 6 - SPECIFIC INCIDENTS

PART II - WHY DID IT HAPPEN?
CH APTER " - THE LAYOUT AT THE LEPPINGS LANE END
        The History                                                       119
         The 1981 Semi-final                                            123
         Three Pens                                                    125
         The 1985 Changes                                                 127
         New Radial Fences                                                128
         Barriers                                                   129
         The Turnstiles and Concourse                                  130
         Barrier 144                                                   133
         Effects o f the Layout                                           134
                                                                               Paragraph   Page
     CHAPTER 8 - LACK OF FIXED CAPACITIES FOR THE PENS                                      24
            Departures from the Green Guide                                          139
            Safety Certificate                                                      143
            Why was the Safety Certificate not Amended?                             147
            The City Council                                                        150
            Summary                                                                 159
     CHAPTER 9 - LACK OF EFFECTIVE MONITORING OF THE TERRACES                               28
            Who should Monitor the Terraces?                                        161
              T h e Interim Popplewell Report                                       163
              The Final Popplewell Report                                           164
              Arrangements at Hillsborough                                          166
              Case for the South Yorkshire Police                                   168
              Harris-v- Sheffield United Football Club Limited                      169
              Police Practice at the Leppings Lane End                              170
              “Find Their Own Level”                                                171
              When is an Area “ Full"?                                              175

o             Fear o f Hooliganism
              Summary
     CHAPTER 10 - THE BU ILD -U P AT THE TURNSTILES
                                                                                    182
                                                                                    183


            The Physical Layout                                                     186
              The Number o f Turnstiles                                             187
              The “ Late” Arrival o f Liverpool Fans                                191
              Traffic Delays                                                        193
              Fine Weather and Drinking                                             194
             Was Drunkenness a Major Factor in the Crisis at the Turnstiles?        196
             Reduced Efficiency o f the Turnstiles                                  198
             Were Fans Without Tickets a Major Factor in the Build-Up?              200
             The “ Conspiracy" Theory                                              203
             Liverpool Supporters at Away Matches                                  205
             No Conspiracy                                                         208
             The Police Operation at Leppings Lane                                 209
             Previous Experience                                                   213
             Policing in 1988                                                      214
             Police Intelligence in Advance                                        216
             Police intelligence on the Day                                        221
             Mr Marshall and Mr Greenwood
             Control Lost                                                          223
             Postponement o f Kick-off                                             226
             Summary                                                               228
    CHAPTER 11 - THE BLU NDER ON OPENING THE GATES                                         40
    CHAPTER 12- T H E BARRIERS IN PEN 3                                                    41
           Barrier 144
           When did Barrier 124a Fail?                                             236
             Dr Eastwood's Testing o f the Barriers
             Corrosion                                                             240
             Causation
    CHAPTER 13- T H E C R USH ING NOT RECOGNISED                                           43
           Observation from Control Room                                           244
           Officers on the Track                                                   245




                                                       1 6
                                                                   Paragraph   Page

        CHAPTER 14 - THE RESPONSE O F THE POLICE                                44
                  T he Officers in Command                              250
                  Police on the Pitch                                   253
                  Fans on the Pitch                                     255
                  False Reports                                         257
        CHAPTER 15 - THE PERIMETER GATES WERE TOO SMALL                         45

        PART III - CONCLUSIONS
        CHAPTER 16 - BRIEF SUM M ARY OF CAUSES                                  47

        CHAPTER 17 - THE FA’S CHOICE OF G R O UN D                              48

        CHAPTER 1 8 -P O L IC E                                                 49
               Choice o f Ends by the Police                            272
                  Police Planning                                       273
                  Policing on the Day                                   277


o                 The Police Case at the Inquiry
        CHAPTER 19 - THE CITY COUNCIL AND THE SAFETY CERTIFICATE
                                                                        285
                                                                                51
                                                                                52
        CHAPTER 20 - THE CLUB A N D D R EASTWOOD
        CHAPTER 21 - FIRST AID A N D EMERGENCY SERVICES                         53
               N o Fault by the Emergency Services                      296
        CHAPTER 22 - COM M UNICATIONS                                           54

        PART IV - INTERIM RECOMMENDATIONS
        CHAPTER 23 - INTRO DU CTIO N                                            55
               Limited Objectives                                       304
               Perimeter Fences                                         306
                  Reduced Numbers                                       313
                  Safety Certificate                                    314
        CHAPTER 24 - THE RECOMMENDATIONS                                        57
                  Maximum Capacities tor Terraces                          1
                  Filling and Monitoring Terraces                         4
/flTV             Fences and Gates                                         6
                  Crush Barriers                                          11
                  Safety Certificates                                     13
                  Duties o f each Football Club                          18
                 Police Planning                                         26
                 Comm unications                                         31
                 Co-ordination o f Emereenc\ Services                    35
                 First Aid. Medical Faculties and Ambulances             39




                                                         \




                                                        n
APPENDICES
1.   Plan o f Sheffield Wednesday Football Club. Hillsborough Ground
2.   Leppings Lane: the perimeter gates and turnstiles
3.   The west stand and terraces
4.   Arrangement o f barriers at west terrace
5.   T h ew estterra cesa t2 .5 9 p m
6.   Specific incidents
          Mr Hicks’ Evidence
          The Goalkeeper and Gate 4
           Oxygen
           Calling the Fire Service
           Mr Kenny Dalglish
7.   List o f parties and their representation
8.   List o f those giving oral evidence to the inquiry in order o f appearance




                                                       VI




                                                       Z    o
 The Rt Hon Douglas Hurd CBE. MP
 Secretary of State for the Home Depanment

                         THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER
                                     15 APRIL 1989

                                        INTERIM REPORT OF INQUIRY

                                                 INTRODUCTION
   1. On 15 April 1989 a football match to decide a semi-final round o f the FA Cup competition was to be
played between the Liverpool and Nottingham Forest Clubs. The neutral venue chosen was Hillsborough
Football Stadium. Sheffield Wednesday's ground. Only six minutes into the game, play was stopped when it
was realised that spectators on the terraces behind the Liverpool goal had been severely crushed. In the result.
95 died and over 40 0 received hospital treatment.

   2. On 17 April 1 9 8 9 1 was appointed by you to earn, out an Inquiry with the following terms o f reference:

      To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday football ground on 15 April 1989 and to make
      recommendations about the needs o f crowd control and safety at sports events.

   3. Two Assessors were appointed to assist me: Mr Brian Johnson QPM. Chief Constable o f Lancashire,
and Professor Leonard Maunder OBE. BSc. PhD. ScD. FEng. FI Mech E. Professor o f Mechanical
Engineering at the University o f Newcastle upon Tyne. Their help has been invaluable and I am very grateful
for their expen advice and wise counsels. While the spie responsibility tor this report is mine. 1 am comforted
in the knowledge that both Assessors agree with it.

  4. Mr Robert Whalley was appointed Secretary to the Inquiry. He and his assistants have worked
prodigiously and skilfully to give me all the advice ana support 1could have wished. 1 also wish to acknowledge
the help I have received, as always, from my cierk. Mr Ernest Pott.

   5. T h e policing arrangements for 15 April were in the hands o f the South Yorkshire Constabulary. The
efficacy o f those arrangements and their implementation was from an early stage called into question. It was
therefore decided that the investigation o f the disaster and the gathering o f evidence for this Inquiry should be
conducted by an independent police force. Mr Geoffrey Dear QPM. Chief Constable o f West Midlands
Constabulary, undertook this task. He was made responsible directly to me: he appointed Assistant Chief
Constable Mervyn Jones to take full-time charge o f the investigation. 1 am deepiy indebted to both o f them.

  6. O n 18 April I visited Hillsborough Stadium. 1 inspected the scene o f the disaster on the terraces and all
relevant p an s o f the stadium and its approaches. My Assessors and I have made funher visits during the
Inquiry. I also visited Liverpool on 21 and 29 April.

    7. T he Lord Mayor and the Sheffield City Council kindiy offered to make the accommodation and facilities
o f Sheffield Town Hall available for the hearing o f oral evidence. This offer was gratefully accepted and I would
like to record my thanks tor those facilities and tor the co-operation afforded to the Inquiry by the authorities
in Sheffield.

   S.    On 28 April 1989.1 held a preliminary hearing to announce the date when the oral evidence would begin,
to give so m e directions as to the procedure 1 intended to follow ana to hear applications from those wishing to
be represented at the hearing. 1 accorded representation to the following:
     (i)     Those bereaved or injured as a result o f tnc disaster.
     (ii)    The Football Supporters' Association.
     liii)   The Football Association.
     nv)     Sheffield City Councii.
     (V)     Sheffield Wednesday Football Club together with the Football League, the Club's casual staff and
             their insurers, the Sun Alliance.
     (vi)    South Yorkshire Constabulary.
     (vii)   South Yorkshire Fire and Civil Defence Authority.
 Subsequently, during the hearing. I further accorded representation to:
       (viii) Trent Regional Health Authority, for the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service
              (SYMAS).
 and (ix)    Dr W Eastwood, consultant engineer to Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.

    9.   Since the circumstances o f the disaster raised urgent questions o f safety, especially at football grounds,
 you indicated at the outset that you would welcome any recommendations, even o f an interim nature, which I
 m ight be able to give in advance o f the new football season due to comm ence in mid-August 198 9.1 therefore
 announced at the preliminary hearing on 28 April that 1 would conduct an oral hearing with all possible
 expedition as the first phase o f the Inquiry to discover the facts and causes o f the disaster and enable me to
 m ake any immediate interim recommendations necessary in the short term.

   IQv The West Midlands Police investigation begaja on 24 April. A '‘'Freephone" num ber wasadvertised to .;
enable members o f the public, especially those who had attended the match, to offer their evidence to the
Inquiry. Initially this number was available for three days on 28 different lines. The response from the public
was such that the lines were continued for a funner tnree days by the end o f which 2.666 calls had been
received. There were also many written offers of help. Some 440 West Midlands officers were deployed on the
Inquiry. To service this operation, special police offices were established in Birmingham. Liverpool and
Sheffield and computer technology was used to the full. In all some 3776 statements were taken. There were
also som e 1550 letters to Ministers, to the Inquiry and to me personally all o f which 1 read. The police.
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and the BBC had video cameras filming at the ground on 15 April. In
aggregate, they recorded som e 71 hours o f film covering the period before, during and after the disaster. Thus
the material gathered and potentially available for presentation at the oral hearing was enormous. From this
m ass it was essential to select only sufficient good and reliable evidence necessary to establish the facts and
causes o f the disaster.

   11. Where it seemed likely that any allegation or criticism might be made o f the conduct o f any person or
party, the Treasury Solicitor, after consultation with Counsel for the Inquiry, wrote to the panv concerned
setting out the likely grounds for complaint. This followed the practice established by the Royal Commission
on Tribunals o f Inquiry (the Salmon Commission!.

   12. The hearing began on 15 May. It continued, sitting long hours, for 31 days concluding on 29 June. In
that period. 174 witnesses gave oral evidence. Counsel's suomissions were delivered in writing on 7 July and
on 14 July 1 heard their brief oral submissions supplementing the written argument.

  13. Witnesses were not sworn. Since this is a depanmental inquiry, there was no power to administer the
oath but there was no instance o f any witness giving evidence which 1 considered might have been different
had he or she been sworn.

   14. The witnesses called were only a small fraction of those from whom statements were or could have beer
taken. Nevertheless. 1 am satisfied that they were sufficient m number and reliability to enable me to reach the
necessary conclusions. To have called more would nave prevented me from presenting an interim report in the-
required time and would not have added significantly to tne relevant evidence. 1 have, however, been able to
take into account many written statements in addition to oral testimony.

    15. Apart from the evidence called by Counsel tor the inauiry which was drawn from statements taken by
the West Midlands Police and others volunteered b> individuals, each o f the represented panies was given full
opportunity to put forward any witnesses the\ considered snould be called. A final submission was made by
Counsel for the South Yorkshire Police that since the investigation by West Midlands Police is still continuing,
all the evidence has not been assembled and n would be unsafe for me to make findings o f fact. I should
therefore make clear that the investigation continues principally to furnish as much detail as possible to HM
Coroner tor the City o f Sheffield as to the cause or deatn. the precise position at death and the care and
movem ent of each of the 95 victims individually I am assured b\ Chief Constable Dear and Assistant C hief
Constable Mervvn Jones that it is most unlikei\ an\ iiirtner evidence gathered will significantly alter or add to
the history of events which emerged at the hearing.

  16. 1 should like to thank all those who made it possibie lor tne oral heanng to take place so soon after the
event and for evidence to be efficiently presented ana tested so as to give a full and fair account o f what
happened in all its aspects without irrelevancy or duplication. 1 pay tribute particularly to the West Midlands
Police for their speed and dedication in eatherme tn-.* evidence and to all those responsible for processing it.
The most eloquent tribute to the fairness and thoroughness of the police investigation came from the Secretary
of the Football Supporters’ Association. He said there had been initial anxiety in Liverpool as to whether that
investigation would be fair and objective. His Association therefore collected 200 witness statements
themselves. Having heard the opening statement by Counsel to the inquiry based upon the evidence gathered
by the police, he found that it accorded entirely with his Association’s evidence and the initial anxiety was
wholly dispelled.

   17. Before and during the Inquiry I derived great assistance on a wide range of technical issues from the
Health and Safety Executive who providentially have a laboratory in Sheffield (the Research and Laboratory
Services Division) where tests were conducted and reports prepared swiftly and efficiently. This was done
in close consultation with Professor Maunder, i am most grateful to the Director. Dr A Jones, and to the
Deputy Director. Dr C E Nicholson, for their invaluable help.

  18. F wish to commend Counsel to the inquiry. Mr Andrew Collins QC. Mr Alan Goldsack and Mr
Bernard Phillips for their industry, care and fairness in selecting and presenting the necessary evidence; also,
Counsel for all those represented who tested that evidence fully but expeditiously. This interim Report could
not possibly have been prepared in so short a time had I not had the whole-heaned co-operation of all those
mentioned and many others.

   19. The second phase of the Inquiry will be directed to making final and long term recommendations about
crowd control and safety at sports grounds. I need to consider in depth information, opinions and arguments
from a wide range of sources and contributors both here and abroad. It was clear from the outset that this
second phase could not be carried to completion before the next football season. However, at an early stage of
the oral hearing 1 invited evidence from all who wished to contribute to it and specifically from many sporting,
local authority, emergency service and police bodies as well as technical consultants. 1asked that submissions
should be in writing and should be made promptly so that the second phase of the Inquiry could
follow immediately after the first. 1shall now proceed to consider the large body of written evidence which has
been submitted. 1shall want in some instances to have further oral evidence or discussion in conjunction with
my Assessors. We will also need to make a number of visits and inspections.

 20. I now present my Interim Repon and Recommendations. I shall prepare my Final Report and
Recommendations as soon as reasonably possible.




1 August 1989                                                                                PETER TAYLOR
                     PART I - WHAT HAPPENED AT HILLSBOROUGH?
                                                    CHAPTER 1

                            THE GROUND AND PRE-MATCH ARRANGEMENTS

 Fixing The Venue
    21.    On 20 March 1989. the Football Association (the FA) requested that their Cup semi-final between
 Liverpool and Nottingham Forest be held on 15 April at Hillsborough Football Stadium. The corresponding
 semi-final between the same two teams had been held there in April 1988. The arrangements had been
 successful in the view both o f the police and o f the host club. Sheffield Wednesday (the Club) were therefore
 willing to accommodate the 1989 match. South Yorkshire Constabulary were prepared to police it but only if
 the ticketing arrangements were the same as those tor 1988. Otherwise, the FA would ha,ve to iook.elsewhere.,
 T hose arrangements did not please Liverpool or its supporters either in 1988 or 1989. They thought the ticket
 allocation was unfair for reasons to be explained later. Reluctantly, however, the poiice requirement was
 accepted and the match was fixed for 15 April at Hillsborough.

 The Ground
   22. The Hillsborough Stadium is some 2:: miles to the north-west of central Sheffield in the district of
 Owlerton. The ground was opened in 1899 on what was then a greenfield site by the river Don. The pitch lies
 roughly east to west. A plan o f the ground and its immediate environs is at Appendix 1.

   23. The west end. with which this Inquiry is principally concerned, is known as the Leppings Lane end. The
 east end abuts on Penistone Road, the A 61. To the south is the river Don and to the north a residential street.
 Vere Road, which runs between Leppings Lane and Penistone Road North.

    24. Alongside the river is a private roadway giving access to the south stand, to the Directors* and players'
 entrances, and to the administrative block under the stand. The roadway gives both vehicular and pedestrian
 access between Penistone Road and Leppings Lane, but there are gates which can shut it o ff at each end. There
 is som e car parking along this roadway principaiiy for Directors, piaversand employees o f the Club. The south
 stand dates from 1914 and is the oldest at the ground. It is all seating with places for 8.800. 5.500 o f those are
 roofed over and 3.300 are uncovered.

  25. The north stand is also all seating and accommodates abou; y.^OO. Behind it is a gymnasium or sports
hall. There are also a first aid room and police room close b>.

  26. The east end is all terracing and is known as the Spion K.op. It was enlarged and roofed over in 1986 and
now accommodates som e 21.000 standing spectators. There are crush barriers in the kop running parallel to
the goal line but no dividing fences to prevent free movement trom side to side.

   27. At the west or Leppings Lane end o f the ground there is terracing close to the pitch. Behind it is the west
stand which provides covered seating and was built in I % 5 tor \\ orld Cup matches, some o f which were held
at Hillsborough in 1966. The covered stand accommodates 4. A 5 seated spectators. The tcrracingin front o f it
extends higher in the corners between the stanas ana its totai capacity was stated to be 1(.). 1UU. At both the K.op
end and the west end access to the pitch is barred by perimeter fencing. The tencing is about eight feet high
mounted upon the low wall at the toot of the terracing. At tne top o f the t'encmg the wire returns back at a sharp
angle for some 15 inches to make it difficult tor anyone to ciimp over towards the pitch. There are gates at
intervals along the perimeter fencing to afford access between terrace and pitch. These gates are less than a
metre wide and were designed to be opened oni\ irom the mtcn side lor poiice purposes or in an emergency.
They are marked and numbered on the pian Appendix 1.

  28. Unlike the K.op end. the west terracing has noi oni\ crusn parriers parallel with tne goal line but radial
fences at right angles to it. dividing the area into pens. Tins u n ision was begun alter an FA C up semi-final in
1981 w hen crushing occurred due to overcrowamc anu gates nad to ne opened, h proceeded in stages, the final
arrangement bem gshownon the plan Appendix 1. The first section ofthewest terracing moving south to north
contains gates 1 and 2 and is known aspens i and 2 altiiougn intact constituting only one pen. Next is pen ?
with o n e gate: next pen 4 with one gate; pen 5. w m d i is exircmeiy narrow, was intended as a steriie area to
divide pen 4 trom pen 6. This was to isoiaic nome and ;iwa\ tans on occasions when both might be
accom modated on the west terracing in seoarate pens. Final I\ mere is pen " at the north-west corner. Pens 5.6
and 7 each have a perimeter gate. At the pack oi the pen*, u n a e r tne iront of the west stand, there is a gate in
 each radial fence. When those gates are open, the back row o f the terracing is intended to permit access from
 pen to pen along the whole west side, in practice, when substan tial numbers are present, those gateways are not
 readily visible or accessible. The present layout o f the pens, fences, crush barriers and gates has resulted from a
 series o f piecemeal changes. The nature and effect o f thosechanges must be considered later.

 The Turnstiles
    29. Because o f the housing in Vere Road there is no access from the north side o f the ground. Along
 Penistone Road North there are some 46 turnstiles which usually give access both to the Kop and to the east
 end o f the north stand. They are marked 43 to 88 inclusive on the plan. The 12 numbered 77 to 88 are designed
 to feed the north stand but were not used for that purpose on 15 April in order to segregate supporters o f the
 two team s as appears later. Two o f them. 77 and 78. were however used for access to the Rop.

   30. At the so u jh sid e o f the ground there were 24 turnstiles (numbered 19 to 42 on the plan). Those
 numbered 37 to 42 led to the Kop and the rest to the south stand.

   31. In summary, the south and east sides o f the ground accommodated some 29.800 whose access on the
 day was through 60 turnstiles.

   32. The other two sides o f the ground, north and west, with a capacity o f 24.25t> were fed solely from the
 Leppings Lane entrance where there were only 23 turnstiles.

 Travel to the Ground
    33. Most supporters were expected to come by road although rail transport was available. Nottingham
 supporters travelling by train would arrive at the main iine Sheffield Midland Station whence they would be
 directed and escorted northwards by the police. They would arrive at the ground along Penistone Road.
 Nottingham supporters travelling by coach, mini-bus or car would approach Sheffield from the south mainly
 on the M 1. Again their arrival at the ground would predominantly be via Penistone Road or Herries Road.

   34. Liverpool supporters travelling by normal rail service would arrive at Sheffield Midland Station just
like their Nottingham counterparts. The police aimed to segregate the rival fans and put them into separate
coaches. Liverpool fans could alternatively travel by special train to Wadsley Bridge, a British Rail station
catering solely for football supporters and situated to the north o f the ground. A police escort was available to
conduct them on toot to the Leppings Lane entrance. Those coming from Liverpool by road would approach
Sheffield either via the M62 and down the M 1 from tne north or across the Pennines from the north west. All
such routes would bring them to the ground via one or other limb o f Leppings Lane as shown on Appendix 1.
Broadly, therefore, arrivals from Liverpool would be from the north and west: arrivals from Nottingham
would be from the south and east.

Allocation of Places and Tickets
    35. Experience in recent years has produced a policy of segregation to prevent trouble between supporters
o f rival teams. The need for this policy to be mainiained was endorsed and emphasised by the Poppiewell
Report following the Bradford City disaster in 1985. Accordingly, before the 1986 semi-final the police decided
that sections o f the Hillsborough Stadium should h e allocated so as to achieve efficient segregation of
Liverpool and Nottingham Forest fans, The section to be granted to each was determined by the direction
w hence each predominantly approached. Thus. L i v e r D o o l were allotted the north and west sides o f the ground
forw hich access was from Leppings Lane. Nottingham Forest were allotted the south and east sides with access,
from Penistone Road.

    36. T he effect o f the decision was that tor this all-ticket I un Tie. Liverpool were allotted only 24.256 places
as against 29.800 for Nottingham Forest. This, altnouen average attendance oi supporters ai home matches
was substantially higher at Liverpool than at Nottingham. Moreover, with standing tickets at £t> and seats ai
£12. Nottingham Forest had 21.0UU standing Diaces compared with Lnerpool's 1U.1UU. So. Liverpool' s
allocation was more expensive as well as smaller. Understandably Liverpool were aggrieved by the allocation
o f places and tickets. They sought with som e support trom tne nost club and the FA to nave it changed in
1988. but the police were adamant. To switch ends would, in their opinion, have involved rival supporters,
crossing each other's paths when approaching the ground thereby frustrating attempts at segregation and
creating a risk of disorder, in 1989, when the same plan was proposed. Liverpool again challenged it. The
police, however, maintained their view, adding that tnose who had attended in 19« n would be tamillar with the
arrangements and that any chance vunild lead to confusion.
 Access from Leppings Lane
    37. As the plan Appendix 1 shows, the approach to the west turnstiles is across a narrow neck or forecourt at
 a bend in Leppings Lane where, coming from the north, it turns to the south-west and crosses a bridge over the
 river Don. Forking areas for the Liverpool supporters had been arranged north and west of the ground. They
 were therefore expected to arrive on foot along both limbs of Leppings Lane and would converge on the
 forecourt at the bend. In an arc across that forecourt is a line of railings with six sets of double gates. Inside
 those perimeter gates is the short approach to the turnstiles. As shown in the photographs Appendix 2. the
 latter are in two sections divided by a fence. The northern section consists of turnstiles 1 to 16. Numbers 1 to
 10 gave access to the north stand. Thus there were 10 turnstiles for the 9.700 with north stand seats. Their
 tickets were marked “Entrance A" and were colour-coded brown. Turnstiles 1 to 10 correspondingly had the
 letter A above them and brown boards on the wall.

    38. Turnstiles 11 to 16 were for those with seats in the west stand. Thus 4.456 were served by six turnstiles.
 They were the next block to the right o f those marked A. However, instead o f these turnstiles and the west stand
 tickets being marked B as might alphabetically have been expected, they were marked C. Their colour-code on
 tickets and boards was red.

    39. On the other side o f the dividing fence in the approach area, there were only seven turnstiles to serve
  10.100 with tickets for the west terracing. Those seven turnsules were labelled A to G. This was because there
 had originally been 18 turnstiles at Leppings Lane and the sequential numbering continued from 19 upwards
 on the south side of the ground. When the number at Leppings Lane was brought up to 23 the present
 arrangements o f 1 to 1-6. A to G and then 19 upwards was adopted to avoid re-numbering all round the ground.
 However, above the lettering A to G was a large letter B. "Entrance B“ also appeared on tickets for the west
 terrace. Thus, the three blocks o f turnstiles encountered by a ticket holder at the Leppings Lane end read from
 left to right A. C. B. The colour-code for west terrace tickets and the boards beside turnstiles A to G was mauve.
 To the right o f turnstile G is a tubulai steel barrier to divide the queue tor that turnstile trom the roadway to the
 south stand.

 Inside the Leppings Lane Turnstiles
  40. Turnstiles 1 to 10 gave access to a passageway leading to t he north stand. There is an exit gate (marked A
on Appendix 1) between turnstile 1 and theadiacent housing.

  41. Inside turnstiles 1 to 16 is a concourse ieading to pens o and 7 and the steps to the west stand. There is a
wail dividingthisarea from that inside turnstiles A toG. It had been built to segregate home and away fans at a
tim e when the Club intended they should share the west terrace. That idea was not pursued but the wall
remained. There was. however, a gateway in the wall which did permit access between the two areas. An exii
gate (marked B on Appendix 1 ( was provided from the area inside turnstiles 11 to 1o.

  42. Finally, anyone using turnstiles A to G entered a concourse bounded on the left by the wall just
mentioned and on the right by the wall o f the private roadway coming trom the south stand to Leppings Lane.
There was an exit gate in the latter wall (marked C on Appcndi.v 1 1just inside turnstile G.

  43. All three exit gates. A. B and C. were o f conccrtina desie;:. They could be opened only from the inside
and were not intended for entry of spectators into the ground.

   44. Those entering through turnstiles A to C» had three options once inside the ground. They could by
m oving to the right go round the south end o f the west stand and gam entry into pens 1 and 2. They could ee
through the gap in ihe dividine wall lowards the concourse behind turnstiles 1 1 to lo and then round the north
end o f the west stand into pens r>or ?. However, mere were no conspicuous signs inviting them to take either o f
those courses. The obvious wav in was straight ahead o f the turnstiles where a tunnei under the middle of the
west stand gave access to pens 3 and 4. Above its entrance in iari:v ie’.tcrs was the word “Manding” and a larcv
letter “ B”. Thus B ticket holders were drawn towards ihe timtu-.

    45. The length of the tunnel is some 23 metres. It rises simiiir. ji urst men levels on hut finally descend •<
towards the terraces at a gradient of I tn <\ As it emerges onto me leiuiv.-, tnc v.a\ anead tsmseeied lw me racial
fence between pen 3 on the right and pen 4 on in-’ leu. A snort snuroi nrick wan proiects forward trom cacn sidv
o f the tunnel at its mouth. Those emerging are tin;s euiceu straign; lorwaru rather man to either sioe. The
photograph at Appendix 3 shows the west stand ana terraces.

  4 6 . As with the layout on the terraces, the eonuguration m tne Lcnnings Lane turnsiiies and the areas inside
them was effected by a series oi piecemcai cnanges. Again, it will pc nccessarv to analyse met r resultant effect
 Policing Arrangements
    47. At the 1988 semi-final. policing had been under the control o f Chief Superintendent Mole, then
 Commander o f F D ivision within whose area Hillsborough lies. He was still in p o sto n 20 March 1989 when
 the FA broached the 1989 semi-final, but he was due to hand over command o f F Division on 27 March to
 Superintendent Duckenfieid on the latter's promotion to C hief Superintendent. Both were present at an initial
 meeting on 22 March, but on 27 March Mr Mole bowed out and Mr Duckenfieid took over. Under him were
 Sector Commanders, all Superintendents with much experience o f policing football matches at Hillsborough
 and elsewhere, in particular. Superintendent Marshall was in charge o f the area outside the Leppings Lane
 entrance and the approaches to it. Superintendent Greenwood was in command inside the ground, but this
 included the area between the turnstiles and the perimeter fence. They thereby swapped roles from the
 previous year. Under Mr Duckenfield's overall command were some 801 officers and men on duty at the
 ground plus traffic officers and others from D Division to deal with the influx o f supporters into the city centre.
 In alfc therefore;-som e 1.122 police were deployed^Dr ihrs’match am ounting'toabow 3$“p e r c e n t a f the total
 South Yorkshire force. Included in the mounted section o f 34 were officers from Liverpool and Nottingham to
 assist respectively in marshalling their home supooners. The total at the ground was divided into serials
 consisting usually o f eight to ten Constables olus a Sergeant and an Inspector. The serials were posted to duties
 at various stations in and around the ground in three chases: before, during and after the match. All of this
 was provided for in an Operational Order which foiiowed closeiv the Order drawn up for the 1988 semi-final
 and took into account the force's “Standing Instructions for the Policing o f Football Grounds". The Order
 described the duties of each serial at each phase. It was su pp lem ented by oral briefings before and on the day of
 the match.

 Sheffield Wednesday's Arrangements
  48. The Club provided 376 stewards, gatemen and lurnstile operators for duty on 15 April. The stewards
were briefed as to their duties on the morning o f the match by police Inspectors and were allocated round the
grounds They wore yellow tabards. The Club's control room, situated below the south stand, could
communicate by VHF radio with the stewards. C'iosed circuit television was installed by the Club with
screens in their control room showingall the turnstiies round the ground. A computerised counting system was
incorporated in the turnstiles. This flashed onto a screen in the Club control room the running total of
spectators passing through the turnstiles section b\ -section. Thus, at the Leppings Lane end. there would be
separate running totals for turnstiles 1 to lOinortn stand), turnstiles 11 to 16(west stand), and turnstiles A toG
(west terraces). When the total for any section was within 15 per cent o f its permitted capacity a warning pulse
showed on the screen. For the west terracing that warning wouid occur when the numbers were within 15 per
cent o f the total terrace capacity o f 10 . 100. What the system couid not do was monitor the distribution of fans
on the terracing, pen by pen. It could give no warning tnerefore if one pen was full beyond its safe capacity.

Police Communications
    49. The nerve centre for police control is the coniroi room or nox situated at the south-west corner o f the
ground between the south stand and pen 1 ot the west terracing. The box is elevated and reached by a number
o f steps. It has windows commanding views across tne pitch and straight along the line o f the west perimeter
fence. The box is very small and has seats for only tnree officers. Superintendent Murray was in control o f it
and was advisor to Mr Duckenfieid as he had been to Mr Mole the year before. Next to him sat Sergeant
Goddard who operated the radios. The third seat was for Police (. unstable Ryan who operated the telephone
and public address systems. At the back o f the box stood Police ( onstable Bichard who was in control o f the
police closed circuit television system operated by a row oi consoles on a bench in front of him and behind the
three seated officers.

   50. There were five television screens showing \ lews of five roving cameras fixed at high points on the
stands and directed both inside and outside the ground. There was also a master screen which flicked in
rotation from one camera view to another and u men made a \ ideo recording. The cameras have a zoom
facility to close m on any point o f interest. Specifically. there were good camera views of the west terracing, of
the Leppings Lane turnstiles and beyond them of LepninLis Lane itself.

  51. T he Tannoy public address system was rciavea inmuiin sneakers fixed at vantage points inside the
ground and outside the turnstiles. It was used h> a uis*.- lockcy nouseu under the poiice control box. to reia\
music before the match, but it could be overridoen ny the police. Messages could be reiayed through ail
speakers or if appropriate to one area only
   53.    Radio contact at Hillsborough from control to serials operating both inside and outside the ground was
UHF on channel 25. There was a W1 FU ponable base station in the control box and if it failed there was a
stand-by station under the operator’s bench. Hand sets-were issued to all ranks of Sergeant and above.
Community Constables on duty would already have their own. Other Constables had no radio.
Communication was on “talk through” i.e. any message from any source would be heard by everyone tuned in
and if more than one source spoke messages could become garbled. Ear pieces were issued to some officers in
an attempt to overcome the loud crowd noise which made receipt of signals very difficult. There were other
radio channels open to Sergeant Goddard: VHF to police Headquarters at Snig Hill, channel 35 to FI
Sub-divisional Headquarters at Hammenon Road and channel 19 used bv C1D. There was also a set tuned to
Sheffield Wednesday's radio system between its control room and the stewards.
                                                   CHAPTER2

                                    15th APRIL: TH E BU ILD -UP TO 2.30pm

 Early Arrivals
    54. 15 April 1989 was a warm sunny spring Saturday. The match was a sell-out. so 54.000 ticket holders
 were expected. Others would come without tickets hoping to acquire them or even to gain access otherwise.
 The following account concentrates, as did the evidence, on the western approaches and the Liverpool
 supporters since the disaster occurred at their end. They began to arrive in the Hillsborough area quite early in
 small numbers. Some brought cans o f beer with them and were seen drinking as they walked: others took
 advantage o f the weather and sat about on walls and open spaces. When the public houses opened, many
 resorted there, drinking inside or spilling out into the sunshine. Leppings Lane and its environs comprise a
 m ixed shopping and residential area. Local, residents saw groups.of Liverpool supporters keen,t o find a public
 house or off-licence. Many were asking for tickets or "spares'-. There were a few touts selling them at inflated
 prices. From an early stage, some o f the fans were using private gardens and yards to urinate. As the morning
 wore on. numbers increased. Requests for tickets and trespass to urinate also increased. Still the prevailing
 mood was one o f carnival, good humour and expectation.

 Public Houses
   55. There were some 74 shops with off-licences in ana around Sheffield. In general, they opened at 8 am.
 Liverpool supporters did visit them but the evidence did not suggest a great amount of alcoholic drink was
 bought there.

   56. Opening time at public houses was in general 11 am. Some remained ciosed all day. O f the others, some
 72. mostly in the city, were frequented b> iocal patrons only. Some 23 public houses, however, served over a
 hundred Liverpool supporters each. Another 5i served more than 20 each. Little trouble was reported, but
 many supporters drank enough to affect their mood. At first excitement: later frustration.

The Gathering Crowd
   57. Towards the end of the morning, fans garnered on and around the brdse near tne Leppings Lane
entrance. They seemed reluctant to enter tne ground eariy. All tumstiies were open at 12 noon and one or two
as early as 11.30 am. Some 53 police had oeen depioyed to operate outside tne turnstiles and in the Leppings
Lane area. They enauired at random wnetner fans nad tickets. Those who had not were advised to go away:
nevertheless, many returned more than once. Those wno had tickets were guided in the right direction. The
poiice tried to persuade tnem to enter the ground eariy Officers, male and female, had been posted outside
each turnstile with the duty o f searching entrants ior weapons, drink or drugs. Once through the turnstile, an
entrant was liable to be searchedagain by one ot a serial of officers positioned lust inside.

   5S. At about 12 noon Chief Inspector Creaser asked Superintendent Murray whether the pens on the west
terrace were to be filled one by one successively but was told that they should all be available from the start and
the fans should find their own ievel.

  59. By 2 pm it was apparent to those inside tne around and those monitoring events in the poiice and Club
control rooms that the number ot'Nouingnam tans m tneir Diaces greatly outnumbered those from Liverpool.
The k o p and the soutn stand were filiinc uo stcadiiy. but the north and west stands were half empty. It was
noted about that time that the turnstile figures snouea oni\ 12.000 had entered as against 20.000 at the same
time the previous year, u n the west terraces, aitnougn pens 3 and 4 were filling, tne wing pens 1 .2 .0 and 7 were
nearly empty. At 2.15 pm a Tannin message askec lans in pens 3 and 4 to move forward and make room for
others.

  60. There had been tnree special trains irom Li'.erpooi in 198.S. This time, there was only one. It arrived
early. iust before 2 pm. at Wadsiev Bridge statior.. T;v.-  >passengers were met by botn mounted and foot
police officers who escorted tnem in a crocodile aow n Loppings Lane. They were orderly and passed through
the tum stiies into the ground n\ aDoui 2.2u pm uitnout incident.

  o ! . B> this time the ponce Traffic D i\ ision reported tnat tne Liverpool routes were dear, so the majority of
Liverpool ihns were in the Sheffield areu. The numners converging on the Leppings Lane entrance were
increasing rapidly. Between me perimeter gates anc tne tumstiios tne crowd became congested. There was no
ionger a separate queue at eaen turnsiiie but a single pnaiaiu filling tne whole approach area. The foot officers
outside the lurnstiies were no longer abie to searcn e\ er\one ana had difficulty in searching even selectively
    Mounted officers in and outside the turnstile area were having difficulty manoeuvring in such a dense crowd.
    The police were beset by fans bemused by the ticket and turnstile labelling asking for directions. Many had
    been drinking but up to and just after 2.30 pm the mood remained good.

       62.     Superintendent Marshall was on foot amongst the crowd. He became anxious about the numbers
    coming down Leppings Lane and spilling out onto the roadway where buses and cars were moving. At 2.17
    pm he radioed to control to have motor traffic in Leppings Lane stopped. This was eventually done at about
    2.30 pm. Up to this time, despite the large mass outside the tumstiies and the numbers still approaching, there
    was still no panic in the crowd:,no perception of crisis by the police. In the control room Mr Murray, who could
    see Leppings Lane on the video, advised Mr Duckenfieid that they would get everyone in by 3 pm. Mr
    Duckenfieid reaffirmed to him the policy about a delayed kick-off. It would be ordered only if there was some
    major external factor such as fog on the Pennines or delay on the motorway: not if spectators merely turned up
    late even in large numbers.




O




                                                         10
                                                         CHAPTER3

                                           THE CRISIS AT THE TURNSTILES

         63. In the 2 0 minutes from 2.30 pm to 2.50 pm there were crucial developments both inside and outside
     the ground. In pens 3 and 4 there was a steady increase in pressure as more fans came through the tunnel to the
     favoured area behind the goal. By 2.50 pm these pens were already full to a degree which caused senous
     discomfort to many well used to enduring pressure on terraces. The numbers at that time were clearly in excess
     o f the maximum density stated by the Hom e Office Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (1986 Edn) (the Green
     Guide) i.e. 54 persons per 10 square metres. (Although the Green Guide has no statutory or legal force, it is the
     only official advice available about safety at sports grounds.) In the wing pens 1. 2. 6 and 7. there was still
     ample room and bare patches o f concrete were visible.

        6 4 . “Meanwhile, the crowd grew at the Leppings Lane entrance. As more arrived at the back the crush at the
     front grew worse. Entry to the tumstiies became more difficult. T'neir efficiency was impaired and their rate
     reduced. Arrivals at the back exceeded deliveries through the tumstiies. so the build-up increased. The fool
     officers outside were unable to function and in danger themselves so they went through the tumstiies and but
     again through gate C where they did what they could to relieve pressure by the tubular barrier. The mounted
     officers were surrounded by the dense mass ot'people a n d became ineffective. Superintendent Marshall was in
     the midst o f the turmoil. He extricated himself a n d stood on a parapet o f the bridge to get a clear view. A
     drunken fan tried to push him off: a beer can was thrown at a mounted officer. But these were isolated acts by
     individuals: the menace came from the massive numbers singie-mmdedlv determined to be in for the kick-off
O    with time running out. At the back o f the crowd fans were frustrated by the lack of progress as 3 o ’clock
     approached. Some, mostly young men who had been drinking, tried to push and force their way forward. At
     the front, people were jammed together and against the turnstile walls. Some panicked as the pressure
     intensified. Some youngsters and women were fainting and in distress. They were helped out through the
     tubular barrier by tumstile G or were passed over the turnstiles elsewhere. Fans climbed up and over the
     turnstile building or on to the dividing fence. This was to escape the crush rather than to gain free entry since
     most o f them had tickets.

       65. At 2.44 pm Mr Marshall radioed for reinforcements, for the Tannoy to request the crowd to stop
    pushing and fora vehicle with loudspeaker equipment 10 come and request the same. Unhappily, at about 2.40
    pm. radio communication on channel 25 became defective. For a period of two or three minutes the control
    room lost contact. A communications officer came promptly ana switched to the standby station. With the use
   o f a handset at control, contact was restored. Despite tins hiatus, two o f Mr Marshall's requests were received.
   The Tannoy was used but with little effect. Reinforcements, including mounted officers from Penistone Road,
   were sent. The third request, for a Landrover. was received direct by its driver PC Buxton who arrived at 2.46
   pm and urged the crowd by loudspeaker not to push. This was no more effective than the Tannoy. The
   mounted officers besieged near the turnstiles came outsiae tne perimeter gates. An attempt was made to shut
   them against the crowd ouiside. to enable the throng inside to be dispersed or at least thinned through the
   turnstiles. The pressure from without, however, openea the gates again. Mounted officers, now reinforced to
   greater numbers, formed a cordon across the elbow o f Leppings Lane from the sw-eet shop to the bridge, again
(Wlfe'ith the object o f reducing pressure inside the gates. Tnev were successful in this for some minutes despite
^W esperate individuals forcing their way under or oei ween the norses. However, this exercise was overtaken by a
   more dramatic relief o f the pressure.

    "Open the Gates"
        66. Beiween 2.40 pm and 2.45 pm the crowd m s i d e a n d outside the turnstile approach had swelled to
    over 5.000. At the head o f the phalanx conditions h a d b e c o m e intolerable. Those who got through were short
    o f breath and sweating proiusely. Many compiainea to D o iic e o f f i c e r s on the concourse inside the tumstiies
    and asked them in forceful terms to do something. Exit g a t e s A a n d B u e r e being shaken. It was dear the crowd
    could not passthrough the turnstiles by 3 p m . Police C o n s t a b l e Buxton radioed from the Landrover to control
    asking that kick-off b e postponed. The suggestion w a s acknowledged b u t reiectea.

      67. Superintendent Marshall realised the crowd naa become unmanageable. Although loth to do so. sincc it
    was contrary to basic police strategy, he decided to request tin* e \ n gates be opened to reiicvc the pressure.
    Otherwise, he feared fatalities would occur. Other senior officers outside the ground agreed. At 2.47 pm he
    radioed control to permit the gates to be opened. A: 2.-k>> pm. whilst Mr Duckenlield was considering the
    request, gate C opened to eject,a youth who had climbed in with no ticket. Immediately, fans outside took
    aavantage and about 150 managed to get in before a mounted officer enabled the gate to be closed again. Mr
    Marshall repeated his request. Still no response trom control. He repeated it a third time, adding that if the




                                                                             31
gates were not opened someone was going to be killed. In the control room. Mr Duckenfieid had not made a
decision. Mr Murray asked him “Are you going to open the gates?”. Mr Duckenfieid gave the order and Sgt
Goddard radioed to Mr Marshall “Open the gates”. Neither the Club control room nor any poiice officers
inside the turnstiles were told of this order before or after it was given or of any action it would require.

  68. At 2.52 pm. gate C was opened wide. Fans behind tumstiies A to G and from the concourse beyond
came round to flow through it in large numbers.

   69. About two minutes later the pressure outside gate A led Sgt Higgins to radio, despite the gateman's
objection, for it to be opened. If it was not. he said. “It’ll go and someone will get killed”. Permission was given,
but this time reserve serials were alerted to monitor the inrush towards the north stand. Gate B was also briefly
opened against the gateman's wishes and about 200 of those pressed at tumstiies A to G gained entry to their
left.

   70. The largest entry, however, was through gate C. In the five minutes it was open about 2.000 fans passed
through it steadily at a fast walk. Some may have had tickets for the stands. No doubt some had no tickets at all.
The majority had tickets for the terraces. Of these, some found their way either right to pens 1 and 2 or left
through the dividing wall to 6 and 7. But a large proportion headed straight for the tunnel in front of them.
                                                    CHAPTER 4

                                                  THE DISASTER

     71. The initial influx through gate C. augmented by entrants via the tumstiies. came through the tunnel
  with great momentum. Fans spoke o f being swept through, feet o ff the ground. The 1 in 6 gradient accelerated
  their progress. Upon reaching the crowded pens, some wished to go back but were unable to d o so. The new
  arrivals found themselves pushed forward and the pressure became intense. At 2.54 pm. shortly after this
  influx began, the teams came onto the pitch. As usual, this was greeted by a surge forward. Many were now
  acutely uncomfonable and some were in distress. The mass seethed about but voluntary movement by any
  individual was difficult: hands down could not be raised and some fans found it hard to breathe. Still the flow
  continued through the tunnel causing further surges forward. There were shouts for help and for the gates.tobe.
  opened to the pitch. Police officers on the perimeter track.dtd,not immediately j-eacl. In the deafening noise
  from chanting and shouting they did not at first recognise the problem. Realisation came at different moments
  to different off;cers in di fferen t places.

     72. Gate 3 sprang open under the intense pressure from within. An officer quickly closed it. Shortly
  afterwards, it sprang again: officers tried to shut it. Those seeking to escape were urged and pushed back. Gate
  4 was opened by a policeman who noticed the crushing. People began to spill out through it and were directed
  to the wing pens where there was still ample room. Meanwhile, gate 4 was closed again and then re-opened. At
  gate 3. a Constable, now alive to the crisis, followed strictly his written orders and radioed for permission to
  open that gate. Receiving no reply, he took it upon himself to open it.

    73. Just before 3 pm. the match kicked off. At the same time, gate C. which had been closed at 2.57 pm.
  was reopened and a steady trickle continued to enter through the tunnel.

     74. To escape the crush, fans began climbing the radial fences out of pens 3 and 4 into pens 2 and 5. Others
  tried to get over the front perimeter fence but were at first turned back by police who feared a pitch invasion.
  Near the front, fans, mostly youngsters, were w-eatcened to the point oi collapse and in some instances death but
  they were held upright by pressure all round. Funner back, most were so preoccupied with the pain o f being
  pressed against barriers and with breathing probiems that they saw nothing o f the game. But at the rear there
  were m any who. although cramped, were watching the footbali unaware o f the distress at the front.

    75. At 3.04 pm. Beardsley for Liverpool struck the crossbar at the K.op end. There was a roar from the
 Liverpool fans and at the same time a powerful surge forwards in pen 3. The several surges which occurred after
 the influx from gate C carried the pressure down the pens towards the pitch. The force became such as to twist
 and break two spans o f a crush barrier towards the front o f pen 3. The evidence does not establish with
 certainty when this happened. Probably it was triggered by the surge at 3.04 pm. But 1am sure it occurred alter
 the influx ifom gate C so greatly increased the pressure in the oen. When the barrier broke those whom it had
 supported were projected towards the perimeter lence. Many fell and the involuntary rush o f those behind
 pressed them down. The crushing force was transmitted and dispersed so that all along the front of pen 3 fans
 were pressed hard up against the low wall and the wire mesh o f the fence above it.

>> 76. In pen 4 no barrier broke. Nevertheless those at the from were crushed against    and fence. Further
  back, two barriers were bowed and some individuals succumbed to the pressure around tnem.

    77. Surges on terraces are comm on. Usually, they go forward, then recede. Here, with the weight o f
 numbers, there was no receding. The pressure stayed ana for those crusned breathless by it. standing or prone,
 life was ebbing away. If no relief came in four minutes there would be irreversible brain damage: if longer,
 death.

    78. In the control room no-one noticed the o\ercrov».amg or anytnmg amiss in pens 3 and 4 until the first
 fans spiit out onto the perimeter track just before kick-o ;:. Tnen. the officers in command assumed that there
 was an attem pted pitch invasion. They called up reserve senais wauinu in the gvmnasium and all available
 officers elsewhere lo g o to the pitch, A request was maae to HO for doe nandiers.

    79. Superintendent Greenwood, the Ground C ommanacr. was by tnc players' tunnel at the kick-off. He
 noticed fans on the track and went to the west end oenina tne goal. As he approached, he did not think the pens
 overcrowded until he was very close and saw tnose pressed against tne fencc. Even then, he thought the
 situation "retrievable" if those higher up the pen reiieveo tne pressure. He climbed on the wall below the fence
 and signalled with both hands to those behind to move pack. Otner officers toined him. It was impossible.
 Those fans w h o would have wished to comply were powerless to du so. Behind them, there were still man\




                                                                        33
unaware of the crisis, watching the game. The football cont inued to joyous shouting and singing round the rest
of the ground while those crushed and trapped slowly expired.

  80.    When Mr Greenwood's signals to move back proved fruitless, he tried to radio for the match to be
stopped. At first, his message was not received by control, so he signalled with his arms towards the control
box. Mr Duckenfteld sent Mr Murray down from the box to have the match stopped via the linesman, the
agreed emergency drill. Before he could do so. Mr Greenwood ran over the pitch to the referee who stopped the
game. It was minutes past 3.
                                                    CHAPTER5

                                                THE AFTERMATH

 Rescue Attempts
    81. From 3 o'clock, gates 3 and 4 had been open and remained so. At first, fans had walked or staggered out
 winded and faint. But the final surge at 3.04 pm. and the struggle to reach the open gates, caused a horrendous
 blockage o f bodies. The dead, the dying and the desperate became interwoven in the sump at the front o f the
 pens, especially by the gates. Those with strength left clambered over others submerged in the human heap and
 tried to climb out over the fence. They were now helped by police and other fans who hauled them up and over.
 Numbers o f fans were climbing over t he radial fences into adjacent pens. At the back, many were nauled up
 into the west stand to relieve the pressure.

    82. The steps from the sump at gateways 3 and 4‘vrere so congested wrth bodies live and dead1ttoat'eaeh had’
 to be prised from the pile by the police. Initially, no officer took effective charge. A number o f individual
 officers and fans worked frantically to free those trapped but the gateways were so narrowthat only two orthree
 could get at the entwined bodies Willing hands got in one another's way. More officers arrived from the
 gymnasium and elsewhere in the ground. Many used their own initiative to help those laid out on the pitch, to
 assist in getting others over the fencing and to comfort the distressed. But some stood in groups near the
 perimeter fence not knowing what to do. They had been summoned in response to what was thought to be a
 threat to public order. What they found was a horrific scene ot carnage and some voting officers were shocked
 into impotence by what they saw.

    83. It was truly gruesome. The victims were blue, cyanotic, incontinent: their mouths open, vomiting: their
 eves staring. A pile o f dead bodies lay and grew outside gate 3. Extending further and further on to the pitch, the
 injured were laid down and attempts made to revive them. More and more walking survivors flooded out o n to
 the pitch as the players left. The scene was emotive and chaotic as well as gruesome. As the enormity o f the
 disaster was realised, many o f the tans milling aooui were bitter and hostile to the police, blaming them for
 what had happened. Officers were confronted, abused, spat upon and even assaulted. A small number o f
 hysterical fans had to be subdued.

    84. Adding to the chaos, a number of press photographers dodged about among rescue workers apparently
 avid to secure photographs at point biank range of those dying through the wire mesh and those laid on the
 pitch. Angry fans sought to assault them. Police had to intervene.

   85. At about 3.12 pm. Chief Superintendent Neshn. Commander o f the Traffic Division, arrived on the
pitch. He took charge at gate 3 and organised a chain o f officers to simplify and expedite the extraction o f
casualties from the pen. In the absence o f any mechanical means, police and tans together pulled and worked
at the wire mesh with their bare hands and their feet to breach the fencing. They succeeded in both pens,
enabling officers to get in and fans to be got out.

   86. By now. some officers o f their own initiativ e went round from the pitch to the tunnel where they met
other officers trom the turnstiles and the west stand. Toeether. they tried to persuade fans at the rear o f the pens
to go back through the tunnel. Some complied, hut main resisted, wishing to stand their ground. Casualties
were brought out through the tunnei. ana as the pressure in the pens was relieved, officers were able to get
further in and bring out more casualties, deaa and aii\e. They were laid on the ground in the concourse outside
the tunnel and attempts were made to revive ihcm.

First Aid
  S". The St John Ambulance Brigade had some 3*.• nersonnei nosted round the ground for the match - 25
adults and 5 junior cadets, f hey were auickiy on the scene when the first casualties emerged and sought to
revive them. Their Divisional Superintendent. Mr Wells, trieu un success futh to help those pressed against the
fencing by feeding oxygen to them tnrougn the mesh until thc> could be gui out.

  Stj. Dr Puree!!. Sheffield Wednesda\ s doctor, canic ironi ins seat in tiie south stand and attempted
resuscitation. Assisted by a maie nurse irom tne crowd, he m m eu irom natient to patient doing what he could,
but in most cases it was too late.

  89.    At 3.13 pm a St John's amouiance came onto ilie pitch at the north-east com er and drove to the
perimeter fence close to gate 3. There was no eali lor doctors and nurses on the public address system until
nearly 3.30 pm. Nevertheless, as tne minutes tickeo past, some o f them came onto the pitch to help o f their
 own accord when they saw the casualties and the ambulance and realised the gravity o f the situation. Many
 fans also worked prodigiously in attempts to revive the dead and the dying, in some cases their own relatives
 and friends. Artificial respiration, mouth to mouth respiration and cardiac massage were applied by the skilled
 and the unskilled but usually in vain. Those capable o f survival mostly came round o f their own accord. The
 rest were mostly doomed before they could be brought out and treated.

     90. There was an urgent need to get casualties o ff the pitch and to hospital. There were six stretchers in the
 first aid room and three in the St John's ambulance. They were quickly brought into use. Then the fans
 improvised by tearing down the hoardings around the edge o f the pitch and against the stands so that lengths o f
 board could be used as stretchers. Improvising in this way. panies o f fans and police ran repeatedly the length
 o f the pitch bearing casualties to the north-east corner. A number were dead on arrival there.

 In the Control Room
   91. Mr Duckenfieid stayed in thetontrol'room. CKiefTnspector M'cRbbbife was'there in Civilian cldxlifesas
 an observer. Mr Duckenfieid sent him down to the track to tell a policewoman at gate 1 to admit those
 displaced from the centre pens. Mr Duckenfieid did not realise there were injuries until he saw someone laid
 on the pitch. Even then, he did not realise the nature of the problem or its scale.

    92. Mr Murray returned from his attempt to stop the match and Mr Duckenfieid sent him down again to
 clear the pitch and assess the situation. A message was broadcast requesting fans to clear the pitch. This was
 because Mr Duckenfieid could not from the control room see ciearlv what was happening for the milling and
 increasing numbers.

   93. The Assistant Chief Constable (Operations). Mr Jackson, had attended the match in civilian clothes as
a guest o f the Club. He came from his seat in the south stand to ask what had happened. Mr Duckenfieid was
unable to say: he did not tell Mr Jackson that the exit gates had been opened on his authority. Mr Jackson went
down to the pitch to discover the situation.

   94. At 3.06 pm Mr Duckenfieid. still primarily concerned about public order, caused a message to be sent
to Headquarters asking for Operation Support. That was a call for all available additional police resources to
com e to the ground to strengthen the police presence.

   95. Mr Jackson was told by Mr Greenwood that there were casualties and returned immediately to control
to make sure emergency services were alerted. Meanwhile. Mr Murray had seen the plight o f those behind the
fence. He radioed to control that a fleet o f ambulances was required. He also asked for a Tannoy broadcast to
those in the pens to move back but there is no clear evidence that it was made.

   96. Only when Mr Duckenfieid received the request for a fleet o f ambulances did he realise the nature and
gravity o f the situation. Then, supported by Mr Jackson, he caused messages to be sent convening Operation
S u p p on into calls for the Major Disaster Plan.

No Information
   97. A pan from the message to clear the pitch and the belated call for medical assistance about 3.30 pm. no
 information or advice was broadcast on the pubiic address system. Mr Duckenfieid feared that the crowd
might turn hostile or might all attempt to leave togetner thereby hampering the emergency services if they were
given information about what had happened. The result was that apan from those close enough at the west end
to see the terrible truth for themseives. the majority o f the crowd were left in ignorance. Many, especially
Nottingham supponers in the Kop. still thought tnere had been a pitch invasion or other misbehaviour by
Liverpool fans. They continued singing and chanting incongruously. This infuriated some Liverpool fans who
were already distraught. A few began to run towards the Kop end, The police feared violence might result on
top o f the existing disaster. Accordingly, they deployed a large number of officers to form a line across the
width o f the pitch at the Kop end and advance up to the halfway iine sweeping any Liverpool fans back as they
moved. There the line stood as an insurance against disorder but doing nothing. Other officers were posted to
the perimeter track facing the nonh stand for the same Duroose. To those distressed and distraught who
wanted urgent action, this iarge contingent ot passive officers was seen as an affront. Feelings against the police
intensified.

Misinformation
 98. At about 3,15 pm. Mr Graham Keli>. Chief Executive of the FA. Mr K m on also o f the FA and Mr
Graham Mackreii. Secretary of Sheffield Wednesday, went to the control room for information. Mr
Duckenfieid told them he thought there were fataiitiesand tne game was likely to be abandoned. H ealsosaid a
gate had been forced and there had been an inrush of Liverpool supporters. He pointed to one o f the teievision
screens focussed on gate C by the Leppings Lane tumstiies and said “That's the gate that's been forced: there's
been an inrush”. Inevitably Mr Kelly was interviewed a little later live on teievision. H esp o k e o f the two stories
concerning the gate - the fans’ account that the police had opened it. the police assertion that the fans had
forced their way in.

  99. About 3.30 pm there was a further meeting in the Club’s boardroom. Mr Duckenfieid went there and
met Mr Kelly, the referee and representatives of the three clubs. ACC Jackson was also there. Mr
Duckenfieid indicated the match was likely to be abandoned although no firm ruling was given. He added that
he did not want people to know it was to be abandoned lest the dispersing crowd hamper the emergency
operations.

 Public Announcements
   100. Later the managers o f the two team sw ere asked to go to the control ro o m ,J h ev were invited there to
make a public announcement to cairn the crowd. Mr Kenny Dalglish agreed to do so. He told the crowd that
there were problems and asked them to assist the poiice and those rendering tirst aid. He asked for calm and his
message was well received. It was then 3.5b pm. At 4.10 pm it was announced that the match was abandoned
for that day. Again that message was received calmly by the crowd most o f whom behaved responsibly as they
dispersed.

Fire Brigade
   101. Meanwhiie the emergency services had been in action. At about 3.10 pm a request came from the
perimeter fence to control for bolt croppersto cut the wire mesh. Sergeant Goddard contacted the poiice garage
close by without success. At 3.13 pm. PC Bichard reauested Headquarters to call the fire service to bring
hydraulic cutting equipment to the Leppings Lane entrance.

   102. There was no arrangement for a fire officer to be present during the match. However, the Major
Disaster Plan required all emergency services to he .aimed. After phone messages which must be described
later, fire appliances arrived at both Leppings Lane and Fenistone Road at 3.22 pm. At both entrances their
arrival surprised police who were uninformed as to why tncy had been called or where they should go.

  103. At Leppings Lane a police Inspector told Station Officer Swain "I don't really think we need vou“.
Another police officer then asked for more resuscitators as peopie were dying so Mr Swain radioed for ten fire
appliances. Each carries oxygen and resuscitation equipment.

   104. At the Kop end. Leading Fireman Housiey arrived with an emergency tender and Station Officer
Fletcher in another appliance, each with a crew. The emergency tender came along the roadway by the south
stand but owing to its height was unable to proceed further. It therefore backed out and went to the Leppings
Lane entrance losing some eight minutes. From there. Mr Housiey and his crew went onto the pitch with
resuscitation equipment. They rendered help there and laier at the gymnasium. Mr Fletcher and his men ran
along behind the south stand earning cutting eauiDmeni ana oxygen cylinders. When lhev arrived at the
fence, the cutting equipment was not required as by then the iast o f the dead and in jured were being removed
from the pens. Mr Fletcher set up a casualty c l e a r i n g area under the D o l i c e b o x and firemen assisted in carrying
victim s as well as rendering first aid on tne pitch.

South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service (SYM AS)
   105. Before 1986 there had been no SYMAS representative routinely present at Hillsborough matches. The
Club was content, as indeed arc many other clubs, to rciy upon the St John s Ambulance Brigade and a 999 call
if necessary. From 198o onwards, after representations, the Club provided iwo seats in the south stand for
SY M A S staff at League matches. At one stage it was suggested they would be best placed in the north stand
close to the gymnasium which had been designated as tne casuaitv centre in the eveni of a major incident. The
south stand scats were allotted as they piaced the SYMAS staff cioser to the players' tunnel should a player be
injured. These seats were, however, not available a; <. up semi-finals. SYMAS rcDresentatives nevertheless
attended at the semi-finals by arrangement with tne nonce in 1        and again in 1989. The SYMAS officers
stood on the ramp leading to the pitcn at tne nonn-cast corner. They naa one ambulance outside the ground
and o n e on standby.

   106; On 15 April 1989. Officers Higgins and Eason were at tne ground with an ambulance and crew-. They
noticed fans on the track and went to tne Lcppines Lane ena wniist the game was still in progress. They began
to attend to casualties. Meanwhile, a; 2.5v pm. mere nad been a call from Police Constable Waugh at poiicc




                                                               31
Headquarters to the Hillsborough police control asking if ambulances were required. This was on the
instruction o f C hief inspector Edmundson who had heard over the radio, as had Police Constable Waugh
himself, crowd noise and snatches o f speech from Hillsborough suggesting distress and possible injuries. The
reply from the control box was: no reports o f injuries but keep standing by. At 3.07 pm after hearing from the
ground that there might be injuries, police Headquarters notified SYM AS that ambulances might be required.
Then, seconds later. Mr Murray’s request for a fleet ot ambulances was relayed to SYMAS. They reacted at
once. Ambulances began to arrive at the Leppings Lane entrance at 3.13 pm and at the Penistone Road
entrance at 3.17 pm. In all. som e 42 ambulances attended. 31 o f them from SYMAS and 1! from
neighbouring authorities. By 4.30 pm. they had conveyed some 172 casualties to the Northern General
Hospital and the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.

Gymnasium
   l'®7; The gymnasium, had been in .usei-to® se m n g meals to thejjftlice. When the Major Disaster Plan was
ordered, it was cleared and divided into two. One end became a temporary mortuary: the other was used as a
casualty clearing area for the injured. As the stretchers, designed and improvised, brought in more and more
casualties, the scene was initially and inevitabiy chaotic and harrowing. There was intense distress amongst
the injured and bereaved: relatives were reluctant to be parted trom the dead and sought to revive them. There
were people looking for missing friends and relations: there were recriminations, there were scuffles. Some o f
those involved were the worse for drink. Doctors and nurses had followed the casualties in from the pitch and
sought to attend the injured as best they could in the adverse circumstances. Those in most urgent need of
hospital treatment were taken to ambulances as they arrived, triage being employed to determine priorities.
Doctors were requested by the poiice to examine each person thought to be deceased to confirm and certify
death. A police Constable was detailed to attend and guard each o f the dead and a photograph of each was
taken by a police photographer so that relatives coming to identify bodies could be spared the ordeal of
searching amongst all who had died.

The Dead and the Injured
  108. O f the 95 who died, the evidence suggests that ai least 1o and probably 21 came through gate C after it
opened at 2.52 pm. That is established by the statements o f relatives and friends who came through with them
but survived.

   109. By commendable hard work, a team ot pathologists headed by Professor Usher completed
post-mortem examinations on all the deceased within 48 hours. They found that 88 of the victims were male
and seven female. Thirty-eight were under 20 years of age. 3 v were between 20 and 29 years and only three were
over 50. In virtually every case the cause o f death was crush asphyxia due to compression o f the chest wall
against other bodies or fixed structures so as to prevent inhalation. In all but nine cases that was the sole cause.
In one. pressure on the chest had been so great as to rupture the aorta: in six cases there were also injuries to the
head, neck or chest: in the remaining two cases, natural disease was a contributory factor. In 18 cases bones
were fractured. Thirteen o f those were rib fractures. However, one was a fractured femur, one a tractured
radius and the remaining three involved fractures of bones or cartilages round the voice box. These injuries
suggest the victims may have been trodden whiie on the ground.

  1 i 0. Blood samples were taken from the dead. No alconoi was found in any o f the femaies. O f the maies. 51
had no more than 10 milligrams per cent in their biood which is negligible: 15 had over 80 milligrams per cent
and six over 120 milligrams per cent.

  111. Although the great majority of those who died were in pen 3. at least five were in pen 4. Most deaths
occurred at the front o f the1pens but there were a tew lataimes turtner back.

  1 12. In all. some 730 people compiained o f D e in g in i u r e a inside the ground and 36 outside it. O f the 730.
about 30% are thought t o have entered t n r o u g n gate (. a t t c r 2.52 pm. The largest category o f injury was
bruising, especially to the ribs and chest.




                                                         39
                                                 CHAPTER 6

                                           SPECIFIC INCIDENTS

   113. I have given my findings as to the basic factual background and the main sequence o f events in
narrative form. There was very little conflict as to the principal events save as to some timings and numbers.
Indeed, the consistency o f the evidence has been a remarkable feature o f this Inquiry. The experiences o f most
witnesses were unforgettable and no doubt the early hearing helped to preserve accurate memory. Also, the
existence o f timed videos and photographs and o f logged and taped messages provided reliable checks by
which to prompt and test witness recollection. Accordingly. 1 have not for the most pan burdened the narrative
with citations from the evidence o f individual witnesses.

   114. However, there were several instances o f detailed evidence and assem ons being highlighted by the
media in-dramat i c and em otive terms during the hearing. Since some o f those much-publicised incidents gave
rise to unfair criticism, they ought to be the subiect of specific findings. I have therefore dealt with them
individually at Appendix 6.
                                           PART II - WHY DID IT HAPPEN?


                    "E v e n ts o f th e m a g n itu d e o f H ills b o r o u g h d o n t u s u a lly h a p p e n j u s t f o r o n e
                s in g le r e a s o n , n o r is it u s u a lly p o s s ib le to p m th e b l a m e o n o n e s in g le s c a p e g o a t . . .
                . . . D is a s te r s h a p p e n b e c a u s e a w h o le s e r ie s o f m is ta k e s , n u s iu d g m e n ts a n d
                m is c h a n c e s h a p p e n to c o m e to g e th e r in a d e a d l y c o m b i n a t i o n ."
                                                                                    Dr John Habgood. Archbishop o f York, preaching at
                                                                                   the Hillsborough Memorial Service on 23 April 1989.

   115. This disaster was the worst in the history o f British football. It happened because pens 3 and 4 became
grossly overcrowded. They were uncomlortahly overcrowded by 2.50 pm at least to a degree which required
that they should be closed to further arrivals. Even the numbers coming through the turnstiles in the last 10
m inutes would have increased the pressure beyond danger point and there would have been injuries if not
fatalities. As it was. the influx through gate C after 2.52 pm so increased the pressure in the two pens as to
cause fatal crushing.

  1 16. The overcrowding up to 2.52 pm was due to a number of factors which can be considered broadly
under three heads.
   (i) The layout at the Leppings Lane end.
  (ii) Lack of fixed capacities for the pens.
 (in) Lack o f effective monitoring of the terraces.

   117. The crushing and fatalities after 2.52 pm must be considered under a number o f headings.
 (iv) The build-up at the turnstiles.
  (v) The blunder on opening the gates.
 (vi) The barriers in pen 3.
( vii > The crushing not recognised.
(v iii) The response of the police.
 (ix) The perimeter gates were too small.




                                                                             i •
                                                   CHAPTER 7

                               THE LAYOUT AT THE LEPPINGS LANE END

   118. I have already observed that the layout o f the turnstile area, o f the terraces and o f the concourse
 between them was the result o f piecemeal changes. A brief history o f these changes is now necessary.


The History
   119. Before 1965. the Leppings Lane end consisted entirely of terracing like the Kop. In that year, the west
stand was built and the terraces remaining in front o f it were truncated to theirpresent depth, front to back. As
to width, they consisted o f a single stanaingarea with no dividing fences. Dunng the early 1970's, hooliganism
and pitch invasions made it necessary to prevent access to the playing area and the perimeter fences were
therefore, erectedan. 1977.


   120. Section 1 o f the Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975 empowered the Secretary o f State to designate a
sports stadium having, in his opinion, accommodation for more than 10.000 as a stadium requiring a
certificate from the local authority. Hillsborough was so designated with effect from 1 January 1979 by SI
 1978/1091. In anticipation o f that date. Sheffield Wednesday instructed Eastwood and Partners, a firm o f
consulting engineers, to act on their behalf especially in their dealings with the iocai authority. Dr Eastwood,
the principal of the firm, is a highly experienced civil and structural engineer and has advised several major
football clubs. He recommended that a number of additional crush barriers should be added since those
already in place were insufficient to comply with the Green Guide (1976 edition). That work was approved
and carried out during 1979.

  121. The relevant local authority at the time was the South Yorkshire County Council. It set up an Officer
Working Party consisting of representatives o f the police, the fire service, its own building surveyor's division"
and its own legal and administration department. The Working Party made inspections and consulted with the
Club and Dr Eastwood. A Safety Certificate was issued on 2 1 December 1979 for an indefinite period. It has
remained in force ever since and has not been amended.


   122. Schedule 3 o f the certificate sets out the maximum crowd capacity for various areas in the ground. The
figure for the west terrace is 7.200 and for the north-west terrace 2.900. These figures were intended to be in
accordance with the Green Guide (1976). Paragraph 15.4 provided for a maximum "packing density” o f
between 54 and 27 persons per 10 square metres depending on the condition of the terrace. Dr Eastwood had
calculated 8.000 for the west terrace on the basis of 54 per 10 square metres. He thought this a justified starting
figure in view o f his improved system o f barriers. However, he reduced it to 7.200 because there were no
gangways on the terrace and he did not think it teasible to provide any. So. the total figure for the Leppings Lane
terraces was and is 10.100.


The 1981 Semi-Final
  123. As already mentioned, there was crushing at the Cup semi-final in 1981. The match was between
Tottenham Hotspur and Wolverhampton Wanderers. The poiice debriefing minutes after the incident
prophetically refer.


  “to the late arrival o f a large number o f spectators who were still waiting to enter the Leppings Lane
  enclosure when the match started. The flash noint occurred when Tottenham scored” (at the Kop end) “after
  only three minutes. The spectators just entering pushed forward to see what was happening and caused a
  crush, which resulted in the injuries".


   124. Those being crushed called for the perimeter cates to be opened onto the track. There was no
im m ediate reaction, according to Mr \ a u \ w ho was there, but tortunately a police Inspector gave instructions
and the gates were then opened. About 250 came out onto the track. There were broken arms, legs and ribs and
38 were treated either in hospital or by tne St Jonn Ambuiance Brigade. It is ciear from the documents (ai that
the turnstile readings showed the capacity figure of 10.10U had been exceeded by over 4 0 0 (b ) that the policc
shut o f f further access to the terraces because of crushing, and (c) the poiice view after the event was that the
capacity figure o f 1U. 10U in the Safety C ertificate was too nigh. This latter view was communicated to the Club
by the C hief Superintendent then in command o f F Division but it was not pursued.
  Three Pens
     125. After this incident in April 1981 the police requested that the terrace should be divided into sections.
  The object was to improve crowd control by reducing sideways movement. Division would enable more even
  distribution to be effected w hen there was a capacity crowd. It would also enable the west end to be used for
  both home and away supporters who could be segregated in separate pens, if necessary with an empty pen
  between them.

    126. This proposal was agreed by the Club and the Officer Working Party and was approved by the local
 authority. Two radial fences were accordingly fitted in N ovember 1981. They are the fence now separating pens
 2 and 3 and that nowseparating 5 and 6. The result was to divide the whole terrace into three pens. Access from
 the concourse to them iddle pen was through the tunnel and to the wing pens round the sides o f the west stand.
 D r Eastwood suggested and illustrated an altered layout which would have provided separate access through
 separate banks o f turnstiles to the north stand, to each end o f the west stand, and to each o f the three pens.
 Whilst the main object o f this was segregation, such a layout would have’enabled eaeh>ef< those'areas to be >
 monitored numerically via the turnstiles so as to ensure its maximum capacity was not exceeded. The plan was
 not adopted. The maximum capacity for the new centre pen was calculated at 2.200. but no alteration was
 m ade to the Safety Certificate so to limit it nor was there any means mechanically o f counting the numbers
 going into that pen.

 The 1985 Changes
    127. By 1985. Sheffield Wednesday had been promoted to the First Division and was drawing larger
 crowds. The improvement o f the Leppings Lane end was raised again by the Club and Dr Eastwood prepared a
 number o f drawings. These illustrated various schemes for achieving segregation by providing more turnstiles
 in separate banks and divisions o f the concourse. The poiice wanted further divisions o f the teirace itself,
 again to improve control and segregation. There was much discussion of these schemes which included
 suggestions o f 29 and even 34 turnstiles in total. In the result, the following alterations were carried out in
 1985.

 New Radial Fences
    128. On the terraces, two more radiai fences were fitted. One divided the existing central pen into the
 present pens 3 and 4. Gates were fitted at the mouth o f the tunnel to enable cacli of those pens to be closed off.
 T h e second fence was placed in the new pen 4 so as to create the narrow pen 5 intended to be a sterile area, U nt il
 those two fences were added there existed only perimeter gates 1 .2 .4 .5 and 6. The creation o f pen 3 required a
 new gate 3 to be fitted which was done.

 Barriers
    129. The lines o f the new radial fences ran across existing crush barriers so that without modification those
 barriers would have run through the fencing. The poiice considered the barriers would be used by fans as
 convenient mounting points to scale the new fences, tnercby defeating their object. They therefore wished
 spans to be removed from the barriers. Had their wishes been met in full the result would have been an
 unimpeded run in pen 3 from the mouth o f the tunnel down ihe south side o f the new fence to the perimeter. Dr
 Eastwood dug his heels in against that proposal which he rightly regarded as dangerous. He did however agret*
 to som e modification to the middle row o f barriers in the newly created pen 3. chiefly to facilitate access.
 Likewise in the new pen 5. The 1985 modifications to tnenens are shown on the plan Appendix 4.

T he Turnstiles and Concourse
     130. At the entrance, m odification but no increase in number was made at the turnstiles. The bank 1 to 16
  was divided from A to G by the metal fence now in piacc and that division was projected across the concourse
  inside the turnstiles in the form o f a brick wall. A personnci gate was provided lor access through that wall but
  was enlarged to its present size at the request o f the poiicc. Those alterations were made in the interests ol
• segregation. The more elaborate divisions which Dr Eastwood had suggested, giving separate access to cadi
  sub-division o f the accommodation, were not pursued mr financial reasons. In May 1985 the Bradford
 disaster occurred. The south stand at Hillsborough had wooaen decking and the Club realised it would have to
  undertake expensive remedial works there. The canuiever roof o f the same stand was also discovered to
 require expensive repairs.

   131. In fact, shortly after the new dividing fence and wall had been built at the Lcppings Lane entrance and
concourse, the Club, bv agreement with ChiefSuperiniencicni Mole, ceased to accommodate home supporters
at the Leppings Lane end. There was tnerefore no longer nnv need for segregation at that end. but the wall
remained.
    132. Also in 1985. electronic counting equipment was installed at all turnstiles. This conveyed the running
 count for each bank o f turnstiles, for example A to G. to a television screen in the Club control room where the
 figures were displayed. In 1986. an electronic eye was installed in each turnstile booth to catch and record
 anyone w ho climbed over the turnstile.

 Barrier 144
    133. In June 1986. the police requested that the crush barrier nearest to the tunnel at the entrance to pens 3
 and 4 should be removed to assist the flow o f fans into the pens. They found it caused obstruction because it
 was in a good viewing position and spectators liked to stand against it in numbers thereby blocking access by
 others further into the pens. The police also suggested it might hamper effective evacuation through the tunnel
 especially in an emergency. Dr Eastwood considered the pros ana cons o f this proposal and accepted the police
 view. The Officer Working Party approved the proposal at a meeting on 7 August 1986 on site. Authority was
 giventhenandthere by MrBownes,on behalf o f the Sheffield City Council which had taken over responsibility
 for the Safety Certificate from South Yorkshire County Council on 1 April 19'86. Two spans o f the barrierwere
 therefore removed, leaving only one span in pen 4 as shown on Appendix 4.

 Effects of the Layout
     134. T he result o f these changes was to divide the terrace into a number o f small areas without providing
  any computerised or mechanical means o f limiting entry numerically into any one area if all areas were open
  for choice. Before the fences ana pens had divided the terrace, the overall figure o f 10.100 could be monitored
i via the turnstiles and in theory the crowd could even itselt'out laterally. Even then, it was not possible strictly to
  ensure com pliance with Schedule 3 Part 1 o f the Safety Certificate which prescribed a maximum o f 2.900 for
  the north-west terrace and 7.200 for the west terrace. Paragraph 3 o f Schedule 2 o f the Safety Certificate
  provides:

   “The number o f spectators admitted to the Stadium and to the several areas o f spectator accommodation
   within the Stadium shall not exceed the figures specified in Part I of Schedule 3".

   The Club had to rely upon visual monitoring.

   135. The situation became worse however with the division oi the west terrace into pens. Not only were
there more and smaller discrete areas but some were likely to attract more than their appropriate share o f the
10.100 total. It is well recognised that the area behind the goal is very popular. Moreover, the position o f the
tunnel v is - a - v is the turnstiles A to G. its labelling and the absence o f signposts advertising the wing pens would
draw to it those with terrace tickets. It was therefore highly likely that pens 3 and 4 would fill to capacity and
indeed exceed it unless preventive steps were taken. Had Dr Eastwood's plan i'or separate turnstile access to
separate sections with separate toilet and refreshment facilities been implemented, total computerised control
could hav e been kept.
                                                                               CHAPTER8

                                               LACK OF FIXED CAPACITIES FOR THE PENS

    136. In 1981, when the terrace was divided into three areas. Dr Eastwood gave the Club the figure o f 2.200
capacity for the centre pen. He based this on the Green Guide, making such allowances as he thought right. No
doubt the numbers could have been counted in via the turnstiles if only that pen was in use or if such pens as
were in use were filled sequentially, but not otherwise.

   137. After the 1985 changes. Dr Eastwood did not him self give any figures for the new pens 3 and 4.
Som eone on his staff however split the figure 2.200 into 1.200 for pen 3 and 1.000 for pen 4. Those figures did
not even taW» account o f the fact that pen 5 had been carved out o f pen 4 which was bound to have a reducing
effect on capacity. Nevertheless, the figures o f 1.200 and 1.000 were put on a drawing emanating from
Eastwood and Partners and the figures have been notionally regarded since as applicable by the Club and the
police. They are in fact too high.

  138. Dr Nicholson, at the Research and Laboratory Services Division o f the Health and Safety Executive,
has calculated that the figures for pens 3 and 4 respectively would be 1.015 and 1.036 if the strength and
spacing o f the crush barriers had complied with the Green Guide. But they did not.

Departures from the Green Guide
   139. In pen 3. four out o f five gaps in the lines o f crush barriers do not conform with paragraph 115 o f the
Green Guide (1986). In pen 4. nine out o f ten do not conform. In particular, the spans taken out o f the barriers
in pen 3 in 1985 left gaps well in excess o f the maximum o f 1.4 metres prescribed. One gap was 57%widerthan
the Green Guide maximum. Moreover, that gap was in direct diagonal line from the mouth o f the tunnel to the
barrier which collapsed. Dr Eastwood justified these larger gaps by the absence of gangways. Fans had to be
able to get in and out and standard gaps tended to get blocked up. The effect of his reasoning was that the
absence o f gangways, recognised as having a safety function, led to the sacrifice of a second safety feature,
namely gaps o f strictly limited width.

   140. Again, the removal o f barrier 144 was bound, as Dr Eastwood conceded, to affect capacity. In fact it
did more, as I shall indicate later.

   141. Capacity should also have taken account o f two further departures from the Green Guide. If. as was
the case, the perimeter gates were not regarded as exits, some 40% o f those in pens 3 and 4 were more than 12
metres from an exit (and there was no gangway) contrary to the aim o f paragraph 96. Four out o f five o f the
crush barriers in pen 3 and six out o f nine in pen 4 were below the height prescribed in paragraph 110. These
were the old barriers which had been repaired and plated where their bases had corroded and fresh concrete
had been applied, raising the level o f the steps. The point is not academic since, in the event, many fans were
bent painfully over barriers under great pressure.

   142. Dr Nicholson calculated that when all relevant factors regarding the configuration and the Green
G u id e are taken into account, the maximum capacity for pen 3 should have been 822 and tor pen 4 .871,

Safety Certificate
   143. Whatever should have been the maximum capacities for Dens 3 and 4. the fact is that no figures at all in
respect o f them were put into the Safety Certificate. Despite all the changes in layout o f the fences and barriers,
the two figures. 2.900 for the north-w:est terracc and 7.200 for the west terrace, have remained as the only
m axim a with which the Club has to comply.

  144. Section 2(1) o f the Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 19?5 provides (so far as is relevant i:

  "A Safety Certificate shall contain such terms and conditions as the iocal authority consider necessary or
  expedient to secure reasonable safety at tne stadium when it is in u s e ..

  Section 2(2) provided (so far as is relevant):

  "Without prejudice to sub-section <1 ia D O \e , a Safety Certiticaie-
  (a) shall specify the maximum num oeroi spectators to be admitted tothesiaaium :
  (b) may specify the maximum number io n s admitted to different parts o f it:
  (c) shall include terms and condm ons-
  ...   ( i ii ) as t o t h e n u m b e r , st r e n g t h   ana s i t u a t i o n o i a n y c r u s h D a r n e r s."


                                                                                      24
 Section 2(2) was repealed by the Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987. section 19. which
 gave power to the Secretary o f State to lay down, by order, terms and conditions. No order has yet been
 made and guidance from the H om e Office has recommended local authorities to approach their
 function under section 2(1) in accordance with the criteria m the repealed section 2(2). (See Home
 Office Circular 71/1987 dated 25 November 1987. Annex A. paragraph 6.)

    145. It is clear that when the certificate was first issued the South Yorkshire County Council went
 further than simply to fix the m axim um numbers for the whole Stadium. They prescribed figures for
 each p a n o f the ground not merely by the four points o f the compass but by specified sections.

    146. Section 8(1) o f the 1975 Act requires the holder o f the certificate before carrying out any
 proposals to alter or extend the stadium or any of its installations while a Safety Certificate is in
 operation to give notice of those proposals to the local authority. That obligation is specifically"
 repeated in Sheffield Wednesday's certificate at Schedule 2 Paragraph 5(2). The Club complied with
 the requirement. Having received notice o f the alterations to the pens and the barriers, the local
 authority ought, in my view, to have amended the Safety Certificate accordingly. They did not do so.

 Why was the Safety Certificate not Amended?
   147. Although Dr Eastwood acknowledged that the various changes to the layout would have had
an effect on capacity, he did not take active steps to see that appropriate amendments were made. He
says he mentioned from time to tim e that the alterations would have an effect on capacity and that he
did not realise the Safety Certificate was not regularly updated. However. 1 find two memoranda in
early 1987 highly significant. Dr Eastwood's assistant Mr Strange was concerned with queries from
the FA as to Hillsborough's capacity for a semi-final. Mr Strange recorded these questions in a
memorandum:-

   "Has any account been taken for alterations done on Leppings Lane over the last few seasons? Is the 10.200
   or so figure still correct? 1 said that in my opinion it needs to beadiusted. betterdoitnow than later."

   148. Mr Strange's next memo (a few days later) records as foliows:-

   *’Dr Eastwood says leave the capacity at Leppings Lane end as it is. providing police have gates under West
   stand open so that people can distribute througnout the terrace evenly."

Although he says the last nine words do not report him accurately. Dr Eastwood accepts the rest o f that
message.

    149. In my view the provisions as to capacity in the Safety C ertificate ought to have been reviewed and
altered. The unhappy situation is that the poiice believed even the overall figure o f 10.100 to be too high as tar
back as 1981. That was reported to the Club but apparently not to Dr Eastwood. Meanwhile, that global figure
had been rendered academic by thesub-division oi' the terrace which was not reflected in the Safety Certificate
at all. If proper maximum figures had been inserted in the certificate for each o f the pens, the Club and the
poiice might well have been prompted to find some means o f iim m ng the numbers entering those pens other
than by visual monitoring. This could have been done n> implementing one o f Dr Eastwood's pians for totally
separate sections, turnstile to viewing area. It couid nave been done .by insisting on sequential filling o f pens at
all matches: alternatively, by counting fans into eacn viewing area.

The City Council
   150. That the Safety Certificate was not amended and individual capacities not reviewed cannot be laid
solely at Dr Eastwood's door. He was. after all. consultant engineer to tne Club and responsibility for the
certificate was that o f the local authority When the south Yorkshire Count\ Council handed over to the
Sheffield City Council, the latter delegated all its cowers and dunes under the 19 7 5 Act to its General Purposes
Panel. Apparently, therefore. the decision-maKing noo> on bcnaii of the C ouncii was that Panel, although two
specific functions were delegated to the Head oi Administration and Legal Department - the power to issue a
prohibition under section i Oof the 19 "5 Act and tne power ot enir\ and search under section 11 o fth e Act.

  151. In practice. Mr Bownes. the Council's Cnie: Licensing Officer in the Administration and Legal
Department, bore the brunt of the Councii's duties unoertne Act.
    152. The Officer Working Party was superseded by a Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group, but
 apart from the change of the name the system continued as before. Mr Bownes attended the inspections
 and meetings of the Advisory Group together with the representatives of the poiice. the fire service, the
 department of health and consumer services, and the building engineer's division of the Council. The
 latter was an engineer and ought therefore to have been alive to the same issues as Dr Eastwood.

   153. The Advisory Group seems to have worked in a very informal manner. A short passage from Mr
 Bownes' evidence gives the flavour of it:-

      “Q     Who was taking the lead in the working party as you understood it?

       A     That is a good question, sir. Leads were coming from several different directions really.

       Q     Who chaired it. if anyone?

       A     Nobody as such. sir. It was an inspection rather than a meeting as 1 understand it.

       Q     Who decided what should be inspected?

       A     Effectively the group itself, sir. it seemed to me. There was also some input from the Club
             representative as to. if you like, an element o f direction as to what should be looked at.

       Q     Apart from the inspections the working party met. presumably, or did they only meet on
             inspections?

       A     No. sir. 1 have referred to three previous meetings.

       Q     Who took the chair when it met?

       A     1 suppose it could be said that I did. to some extent.

       Q     There is no point in having inspections unless you form conclusions as a result o f that inspection, is
             there?

       A     That is correct.

       Q     There must presumably have been some meeting following the inspection at which you all sat down
             together and decided w'hat. if anything, should be done.

       A     There was not. to my recollection, no.

      Q      How did you decide w-hat should be done, if anything needed to be done?

      A     There were discussions on the site, particularly in relation to barrier 144. which took place at the
            time.

      Q     Nothing more than that and no record anywnere of any decisions that were made?

      A     No. sir.”

The decision to remove barrier 144 was assenicd to on behalf o f the City Council by Mr Bownes. It was not
referred to the General Purposes Panel. Whether Mr Bownes strictly had any power to assent to it is to say the
least very doubtful. But he himself admits that he was lli-equipoed to do so. He knew very little about football
grounds. He had read the file passed on from South Yorkshire County Council and assumed all had been run
satisfactorily by them.

  1 54. It was recorded, however, in a report which Mr Bownes drafted that "the conditions (in the Safety
Certificate) give some cause for concern as they appear to be inadequate or inappropriate in some areas". The
report to the General Purposes Panel suggested tnai new batct> Certificate conditions should be drafted.

   155.     The task o f revising the Safety Certificate was begun in June 1986. In July 1987. a draft was sent to the
fire service to which they replied in August. In September! 98". the Panei was informed that the redrafting was
"progressing steadily" and should be submitted to the Panel in October. The final draft was not circulated until
30 March 19 8 9 .1 6 days before this disaster.

   156. Meanwhile, the Safety Certificate has remained unamended since 1979. The enlargement o f the K.op
in 1986 increased its capacity to 21.000. Although this was know'n and agreed by the Council it had not been
the subject o f any change in the certificate which still showed the capacity o f the Kop as 16.850. Mr Mackrell.
Sheffield Wednesday's Secretary, raised the question o f amendments to the Safety Certificate and in particular
with regard to the Kop in April 1987 with Eastwood and Partners but nothing resulted.

  157. Sheffield United Football Club was designated under the 1975 Act on 3 July 1984. A Safety Certificate
was about to be issued by South Yorkshire County Council ai the time n handed over to the Sheffield City
Council on 1 April 1986. No certificate has yet been issued to Sheffield United.

   1SB* The explanation given, for these delays was.pressure o f work. Mr„Bo».-nes as-Chief.Lieensing Officer .■>
w'as responsible for 32 other licensing systems when this one was added to his burden. He had a staff o f only
five. I fully accept that the addition of funner statutory responsibilities to the already heavy workload o f a local
authontv with curbs on its expenditure creates problems. Bui 11 is clear that the attention given 10 this
im ponant licensing function was woefully inadequate.

Summary
   159.     The Safety Cenificate contained no maximum figures for individual pens. There w'as therefore no
sanction or provision focussing attention as 10 the need lo limn entry 10 the pens by numbers. The layout ai
Leppings Lane as it evolved made electronic or mechanical control over numbers entering individual pens
impracticable if all pens were to be available. Given an im ponam match and a capacity attendance, fans were
likely to crowd into popular sections like pens 3 and 4. Those pens w-ere likely to become overfull w-ell before
warning came from the turnstiles that numbers were approaching the terrace maximum o f 10.100. Control
over numbers and the avoidance of-overcrowding therefore depended entirely on visual monitoring o f the
crowd.
                                                   C H A PT E R 9

                        LACK OF EFFECTIVE MONITORING OFTHE TERRACES

   160. Monitoring the spectators on the terraces so as to avoid overcrowding involves observing the numbers
 and their distribution in each area, making decisions as to when an area is ''full’’, taking steps to d o se it off
 and m oving spectators from one area to another, if necessary. It is a function beset by three problems. 1) Who
 should carry it out? 2) When is an area “full”? 3) Fear o f hooliganism.

 Who should Monitor the Terraces?
   161. Should it be the host club via its stewards? Should it be the police? Should it be both? Or should it be by
 arrangement, depending upon the ground or section o f the ground in question?

    162: In" principle, a football club’ which invites th e public to a match on its premises for reward’ is
 responsible for securing safety at that event. The Green G uide (1986) provides:

        “ 23. The safety o f the public inside the ground is the responsibility o f those who stage the event and
              administer the ground in which it is held, ic the ”management”. This responsibility applies in
              both normal and emergency situations...

         195. ...there are five basic duties which stewards are called upon to earn.’ out. These are:

               (a)   controlling or directing members o f the public who are entering or leaving the ground, to
                     help achieve an even flow o f people to the viewing areas and safe dispersal o f spectators on
                     the terraces or viewing slopes:

               (b)   patrolling the ground to deal with any emergencies, e g raising alarms or extinguishing
                     fires:

               (c)   manning entrances, exits and other strategic points, especially exit doors and gates which
                     are continuously open whilst rne ground is in use:

               (d)   assisting police as appropriate or as requested with crowd control: and

               (e)   undenaking specific duties in an emergency."

The interim Poppiewell Report
   163. There was considerable controversy in the course o f the public inquiry held by Mr Justice Popplewell
in 1985 as to the responsibility o f the club and the oolice. In paragraph 3.6 of his interim repon. Mr Justice
Popplewell quoted from a repon produced for the Minister o f Housing and Local Government in 1969 as
follows:-

  “T h e responsibility tor controlling crowd behaviour is di vi aed between the police and the club operating the
  ground. The broad line o f division being that police are responsible for movement of spectators in public
  thoroughfares and from public thoroughfares m io ihe ground, while tne club is responsible for the control of
  spectators once they are on the club’s p rem ises. . . "

Mr Justice Popplewell said he did not auarrel with that view ana went on to observe that m practice the poiice
have to take charge and be responsible torcontroiiing crowd behaviour. He then said (paragraph 3.8):

  "It follows, therefore, that as a matter ot practice. whiie the physical safety o f the building and the
  maintenance and good housekeeping ot'the erouna musi aiwavs be the responsibility of the club, the police
  have to take the flf/ar/p responsibility oi'organisini’ tne crowd, with all that entails, during the game ..

Mr Justice Popplewell went on to instance evacuation of the grouna as a procedure in which only the poiice
could bearthe responsibility of supervising the organisation ot me crowd.

The Final Poppiewell Report
  164.      He harked back to this sumcct in ennmer 4 oi'his Final Report. Tnere. he came aown more firmi> in
favour o f holding the club responsible tor rrowa saten. At paragraph 4.13 he said "Because, as a matter of
 practice, police officers have regularly attended in large numbers ai football grounds, it has somehow been
 assumed by the clubs that the responsibility tor control o f what goes on inside the ground has passed from
 them to the poiice. A police presence is there to assist in the enforcement o f law and order. Those responsible
 for organising a private function, however, have the primary’ and continuing obligation and responsibility to
 ensure reasonable safety for those who are invited on to their premises." Mr Justice Popplewell ended that
 section as follows: “It cannot be too strongly emphasised that it is upon the club, or the occupier o f the ground
 who is putting on the function, that the primary and continuing obligation rests."

     165. There remains, however, the question whether there are some grounds or parts o f grounds where the
 club may need to rely upon the police <whom they pay 10 attend) to control filling of pens and monitoring them
 for overcrowding. In other words, whilst the duty in iaw to ensure safety'- rests upon the club, they mav need,
 and by agreement be entitled, to employ the poiice to act as their agents in certain circumstances. T'n;< very
 difficult and grev area as to club and poiice responsibility will need to be reviewed in greater depth at stage two
 o f this inquiry.

 Arrangements at Hillsborough
   166. What is clear, however, is that d c fa c to the poiice at Hillsborough had accepted responsibility for
 control o f the pens at the Leppings Lane end. The evidence o f the senior officers who had been concerned with
 policing at Hillsborough over the years was aii one way on this point. Only Mr Duckenfieid. who had not
 policed at Hillsborough for some 10 years prior to 15 Apni. took a different view.

    167. Mr Lock is now security officer at Sheffield Wednesday and was formerly a police Superintendent at
 Hillsborough matches occupying Mr Murray’s roie. He claimed there had been a formal although unwritten
 agreement between the Club and the poiice in about 1982. whereby the poiice agreed to steward the Leppings
 Lane end o f the ground. Such a formal agreement is denied by other senior officers and 1 do not accept that any
 formal agreement was reached. Nevertheless, a practice or arrangement did develop which was known and
accepted by both Club and poiice. Its effect was that throughout the ground the stewards were responsible for
 manning exits and entrances, for controlling entry into the stands, for assisting spectators to their seats in the
stands and for helping to control the exits after tne match. They were also responsible at the Kop end on the
terraces for keeping gangways clear and helping to control the crowd which usually consisted o f home
supporters. At the Leppings Lane end. however.-there were no gangways on the terraces and the crowd
consistea usually (and always since 1987) ot away supporters. Mr Mole and other senior officers accepted that
it w ouic r.a. ? been unreal and unreasonable to expect stewards to go onto those Leppings Lane terraces. They
would not nave been eftecuve there: moreover, they could well have been in some danger from hostile away
supporters. The police accepted, therefore, that the proper filling of the pens and monitoring them for
overcrowding could and would not be carried out by stewards. Many stewards have tended to be either
extremely young or somewhat elderly. They are paid only a modest sum (£9 at Hillsborough >and they are not
suitable either by physique or by training to cope on a crowded terrace with no gangways.

Case for the South Yorkshire Police
  168. Notwithstanding the overwhelming evidence from senior poiice as already mentioned and from the
Club. Counsel for the South Yorkshire Police continued throughout the nearing to contend that the Club and
not the poiice were responsible for filling and monitoring the pens and that this was well known to both parties.
He maintained that the police were there essentiaiiv to secure* and preserve iaw and order. Quite apart from the
poiice evidence to the contrary at this Inquiry, tne official stance o f the South Yorkshire Poiice has not always
been to that effect.

Harris -v- Sheffield United Football Club Limited
     169. in March 1986. the South Yorkshire Poiice Authoritv obtained a judgement against Sheffield United
Football Club for money due for police services Drovidedat Sheffield United's matches. The defence had been.
in t e r a h a , that the police were not providing "special police services”. They were doing no more than
performing their normal poiice duties o f securing ana preserving law ana order amongst a crowd. The poiice
argument was that they had additional duties. In ms ludeement. Borenam .1 summarised the instructions for
policing as providing ior:-

 ”(a) the maintenance of enforcement o f law and oraer:

  ( b) the entorcement of the Club's ground regulations, many o i which are concerned with law and order:

  (C) t h e s a f e t y a n a c o m f o r t o f t h e s p e c t a t o r s , o f f i c i a l s a n d D i a y e r s . ”
 He referred to the argument o f Counsel for the South Yorkshire Poiice as foiiows:-

   “Thirdly, here the police were not discharging their own duty to the public: they were in fact discharging the
   Q u b ’sduties to the spectators whom the Club invited to the ground. The Club chose to invite large numbers
   to their private premises; it was the Club's duty to provide for their safety, health and comfort. They could
   have employed a security firm as banks and others have to do to protect their interests: they chose to request
   the police to perform those duties knowing that the poiice expected payment. Fourthly, the poiice within the
   ground provided services which it was not within the scope o f their public duty to perform. For instance,
   they assisted in crowd management and in the enforcement o f such ground regulations as refused entry to
   those who tried to enter without paying or prohibited spectators encroaching on parts o f the ground which
   their entry fee did not entitle them to enter, it may be. submits Mr Bentiev. that the maintenance of iaw and
   order was the predominant aim but there were other services performed."

 The learned Judge found:-

   “ln addition to what may be called their iaw and order role the poiice were expected and did take pan in
   crowd management, ensuring the safety o f spectators, the enforcement of the C lu b s regulations and to be on
   hand to assist in the event o f som e emergencies such as fire or accidental injury."

 Police Practice at the Leppings Lane End
   170. At League matches at Hillsborough, the D o lic e practice was to decide in advance how many and which
 pens would be used. If a modest crowd was anticipated only one or two pens might be needed. It was better to
confine the fans to limited spaces (a) to prevent them running about and (b) to reduce the number o f poiice
required. The practice was then tofiii the pens one by one. This involved making a.judgement as to w henapen
was full. There would then be a poiice decision to close that pen and fill another, it was regarded as impractical
and unsafe for police officers (just like stewards) to go onto the Leppings Lane terraces with away supporters.
This meant that monitoring the numbers in any p e n had to be d o n e f r o m vantage points outside it. Here, the
poiice were much better placed than the stewards. There was a good v i e w from the control box and the
television screens there. There were officers on the perimeter track. No stewards were placed there because
having both poiice and stewards interfered with the v i e w i n g . There were also police in the west stand who
could look down on the pens. Intelligence from ail these sources could g i v e the police a good a p p r e c i a t i o n o f
the state o f the terraces. When it was necessary to shut o f f access to the pens officers on the concourse could be
informed by radio and could take the necessary steps.

“Find Their Own Level”
   171. At Cup semi-finals, a different approach was adopted. All the pens were opened from the start and the
policy was “to let the fans find their own level". This phrase was repeated again and again by policc officers at
the Inquiry. What it meant was that no specific direction was given to tans entering through the turnstiles.
They were free to go wherever they wished on the terraces, if they became uncomfortable or wished tor any
other reason to move their position, then theoretically they could move elsewhere. In this way it was hoped that
the fans on the terraces would level themselves out and that distribution would be achieved without policc
intervention. On these occasions, the gates at the top of the radial fences were locked in the open position, it
was sought to argue, therefore, that there was freedom of movement from one pen to another enabling fans to
“find their level".

   172. This argument was bad both in theory and in practice, in theory, the whole object of the radial fences
had been to achieve even distribution by directing fans into desired positions. To say then that they could move
freely from one pen to another would defeat the ob.iect and enable fans to go from a less popular to a more
popular area without inhibition, in practice this did not happen because the position and size o f the gates was
such that once a substantial number ot spectators were in. the gates were unnoticeabie and inaccessible
especially to those towards the front who might nav e most need o f them.

   173. The same argument was deployed to suggest that indi v ictual maximum capacities tor individual pens
need not be assessed since the presence of the onen radial cates stili meant that the terracc was one area. In
practice this simply was not so. The pnotograpn at Appendix 5 taken trom the north stand at 2.5V pm snows
very clearly the congestion in pens 3 and 4 contrasted with tne sparseness in pen 6. This gives the lie to the
suggestion that the fans could, if uncomfortable. "find their own level".

  174. The effect o f this policy was that whereas at League matches the poiice had to make a positive decision
when to close one pen and open anotner. at scmi-finais. where overcrowding was much more likely, the police
 left it to the fans themselves to “find their own level”. Effectively, they were left to monitor their own comfort
 and safety so as to avoid overcrowding. The police w'ould only intervene when there was some oven sign that an
 area was “full”.

 When is an Area “Full**?
    175. Over the years, spectators on terraces have come to accept conditions which are often very
 uncomfortable and not infrequently downright dangerous. They are subjected to buffeting and squeezing to
 get in and out o f the terraces. They are packed tightly and exposed to surging and swaying during the match.
 They put up with these conditions because they are devoted to the game and because there is little they can do
 about them. They believe the discomfort will pass and nothing very untoward will happen. Usually that is the
 case and they are reassured bv it. Most clubs nave not. until very recently, consulted their supporters as to their
 grievances or suggestions. The practice has been to pack them in on the assumption that if they are prepared to
 put up with it the conditions must be tolerable. A l t h o u g h crowd figures at football grounds have been reduced
 in recent years, this has been due principally t o t h e increased proportion o f seating as against standing
 accommodation. Terraces have still been packed.

    176. It is said that many fans enioy these teatures o f terrace viewing. Clearly close proximity, shared
 discomfort, weathering sways and surges together and chanting the same songs and slogans e n m a s s e d o evoke
 good humour and have produced a spirit or cult of the terraces which many enioy. Equally there are many who
 simply endure these things for the football, for a cheap tickct or indeed for the chance of getting in at all. And
 before Hillsborough most fans on the terraces, even if they enioy the huriy-burly. had not realised the narrow
 margin o f safety between an uncomfortable crusn and a latai one.

     177. The Green Guide sought to improve safety and comfort by laying down criteria for maximum
 capacity, ie defining what is "full”. The standard set was 54 persons per 10 square metres in favourable
 conditions but fewer, down to 27. in less favourable conditions. The tendency may have been to aim off too
 little from the higher figure for shortcomings in the lavoui. Certainly the figures considered appropriate in
 pens 3 and 4 at Hillsborough were too high, as already indicated.

    I7S.    Even taking the highest figure suggested in the Green Guide, the problem remained that those
 supposed to be monitoring pens visually had and have little idea o f what 54 persons per I u square metres look
 like. Mr Duckenfield s opinion was that when a pen was full to capacity, the spectators would be “shoulder to
 shoulder and chest to back". That view may derive from seeing the sort.of density crowds regularly endure
 without injury resuiting. But it is much more dense tnan the Green Guide maximum.

   179. The South Yorkshire Fire Brigade provided the Inquiry with piv .ograpnsofpeopie standing in an area
of 10 square metres at various densities of packing. Togetner with m> A s s e s s o r s and others. I took pan in a
similar experiment at the Health and Safety Executive's .v.-'riield laboratory. We stood in a room o f measured
area at densities o f 54. 80 and 100 per 10 square metres. It was clear from the photographs and from our
experiment that the maximum density set out in the Green Guide left considerably more room than those
monitoring the terraces would have left before declaring an area "fulP.

   180. The tendency has been to allow the pens to fiii until the fans complain or snow signs o f discomfon. If
the density at the front appeared less than at the pack. the Tannoy would invite the fans to move forward to
make room for more. The evidence before the Incuiry ana many anecdotal letters 1 have received cleariy snow
there have been frequent occasions wnen tn-.-'pa^Kinj: (in terraces, not oni> at Hillsborough, has caused
discomiort and sometimes, for brief periods, tear. I sually the surge recedes, the sway returns, the pressure
eases and the incident passes unrecorded.

  I   SI. After the crushing at the I9&1 semi-imai. Hillsborough was not chosen again by the F.A until 198".
There was evidence that the centrai pens were uneomfortahh overcrowded on that occasion and again at the
1988 C up semi-final, although entr\ to tne tunnei was blocked o ff by poiice shortly before kick-off in 1988
because the pens were deemed to be "full”.

Fear of Hooliganism
   182.     C)ver the last jew years, hooliganism a: and associated with toot bail matches nas strongly influenced
the strategy o! the poiiee. In their pians and management tne\ iia\e concentrated on averting or containing
threats to public order. This is understandable and indeed commendabic. But it has led to an imbalance
between the need to quell a mmont> oi troublemakers and the need to secure the safen and comt'ort of the
maiority. In the poiice Operational order, tne empnasis was upon prevention of disorder and in panicular
prevention ofaccess to the field ofpia\. Tnere was no express requirement that officers on the perimeter track
or in the west stand should keep watch for any possible overcrowding on the terraces. Indeed, the view was
expressed in evidence that packing fans close together on the terraces assisted in controlling the unruly since
the less room they had the less scope there was for misbehaviour.

Summary
   183. Although the police had accepted d e f a c i o responsibility for monitoring the pens, their policy on the
day was to leave fans to “find their own level” and to concentrate their own attention on possible disorder.
Whilst in theory the police would intervene if a pen became “full”', in practice they permitted the test of
fullness to be what the fans would tolerate.

  184. By 2.52 pm when gate C was opened, pens 3 and 4 were over-full even by this test. Many were
uncomfortable. To allow any more into those pens was likely to cause injuries: to allow in a large stream was
courting disaster.
                                                         CHAPTER 10

                                         T H E B U IL D -U P AT THE TU R N STILES

        185. The decision to open gate C. and subsequently gates A and B too. was forced on io the police by the
     crowd conditions which developed outside the turnstiles. The crush was so severe that injuries were being
     suffered and deaths were feared unless the pressure could be swiftly relieved. Why the crowd pressure had built
     to such intensity was one o f the principal issues during the hearing. The suggested causes must be considered in
     turn.

     The Physical Layout
        186. I have already described and illustrated the approach to the turnstiles (Appendices I and 2). At
     Penistone Road and at many other grounds, turnstiles are in a straight line, adequately spaced and with a
     sufficient waitingarea for queues to form. Not.sa.at Leppings Lane. The building line, the bridge overthe Don
     and the bend in the road, left a wedge-shaped approach to perimeter gates set in an arc. and across a short
     forecourt, to turnstiles also set in an arc. The pairs o f turnstiles were close together and the forecourt, especially
     as divided by the metal fence, provided little space tor a waiting crowd.

     The Number of Turnstiles
        187. The decision to fill the whole o f the nortn stand from the Leppings Lane end required the 23 turnstiles
x   there to admit 24.256 spectators. O f those, the seven turnstiles (A to Gl serving the terraces had to admit
C
)   10.100. i e an average o f iust under 1.450 through each turnstile. At the Penistone Road end. 29.800 were
     served by 60 turnstiles, or just under 500 per turnstile.

        188. The Green Guide recognises (paragraph 47) that the rate at which spectators can pass through
     turnstiles depends on a variety o f local circumstances but states "in general based on observation and
     experience, it is unlikely that the maxim um notional rate per turnstile would exceed 750 per hour". Since the
     semi-final was an all ticket match requiring no cash transactions, the Club considered that a higher rate of
     about 1.000 per hour per turnstile could be expected. Even at this higher rate, which assumes the turnstiles
     working at m aximum efficiency non-stop, it would have taken nearly I h o u r s to admit all those with terrace
     tickets. At 750 per hour, it would have taken nearly two hours.

       189. The Green Guide provides (paragraph 44 )>

       “Turnstiles should be o f such numbers as to admit spectators at a rate whereby no unduly large crowds are
       kept waiting for adm ission..

       190. The Officer Working Party had discussed in 1985 the need, and Dr Eastwood s various schemes, tor
    im provem ent o f the turnstile arrangements. The mathematics are elementary, Both the police and the Club
    should have realised that the Leppings Lane turnstiles and the waiting area outside them would be understrain
    to adm it all the Liverpool supporters in time. Success depended on the spectators arriving at a steady rate from
    an early hour and upon the maximum tum stiie rate being maintained. In fact neither o f these requirements,
®   which are inter-linked, was fulfilled. That they mignt not be so was in my view foreseeable.

    The “Late" arrival of Liverpool Fans
       191. Between 2.30 pm and 2.40 pm the crowd waiting tor the turnstiles swelled to over 5.000 and became
    unmanageable. The case made for the police was that large numbers o f Liverpool supporters arrived iate: a
    high proportion o f them were drunk and unco-operative: a high proportion had no tickets: all o f them were
    hell-bent on getting in on time. They say this was unforeseeable and explains why they lost control.

       192. Whether those who arrived between 2.3'.> pm and 2.4u pm were "late" was much debated. The ticket
    simply requested its holder “to taKe up [hisj position 15 minutes before kick-ofT'. That may have been
    intended to persuade those with stand tickets to take their seats, but it would not be unreasonable tor a
    standing spectator to arrive at the turnstiles between 2..'it nm and 2 4u pm. W hcther they were "late" or not.
    however, there was certainly a large concentration of Liverpool tans arriving at aooui 2.3U pm and after.

    Traffic Delays
      193. It is unlikely that traffic conditions had an\ significant effect on this. True, there were delays on the
    Liverpool traffic routes. There were roadworks on tne M62 which was the recommended route. At various
    points the carriageway was reduced from tour ianes or tnree lanes to two. but no serious delays were reported.
 On the M63 there were longer delays due to a contraflow and at its junction with the A560 there was heavy
 congestion due to volume o f traffic. However, the Liverpool routes were clear by 2.20 pm and those witnesses
 w ho complained o f delays en route had nevertheless managed to be in range o f the ground in ample time.

 Fine Weather and Drinking
    194. The likeliest explanations for the sparse Liverpool attendance in the ground before 2.30 pm were four­
 fold • the warm weather, drinking, disinclination to enter the ground early and prolong the standing, and a
 tendency o f Liverpool supporters to cut it fine.

   195. The poiice emphasised that at the ! 988 semi-final there was no comparable build-up o f “late" arrivals.
They claim, therefore, that they had no reason to foresee it in 1989. However, in 1988. although the weather
was fine, it was 1 1°F cooler than in 1989. 15 April was the so n o f fine spnng day which tempted fans to sit or
stand about in the sun with a drink. If you had a ticket it would seem more pleasant and sensible to relax in that
way than to enter the ground early and stand bn the terrace for an extra“hour: Pre-match entertainment in the
ground had been advenised but did not take place. Even if it had. it may not have been an encouragement to
m any fans to enter so early.

 Was Drunkenness a Major Factor in the Crisis at the Turnstiles?
    196. O f those who arrived at 2.30 pm or after, very many had been drinking at public houses or had
brought drink from home or an off-licence. 1 am satisfied on the evidence, however, that the great majority
were not drunk nor even the worse for drink. The poiice witnesses varied on this. Some described a high
proportion as drunk, as “lager-louts” or even as "animals". Oi hers described a generally normal crowd with an
unco-operative minority who had drunk too much. In my view some officers, seeking to rationalise their loss
o f control, overestimated the drunken element in the crowd. There cenainlv was such an element. There were
youngsters influenced by drink and bravado pushing impatiently at the rear o f the crowd thereby exacerbating
the crush. But the more convincing police witnesses, including especially Detective Superintendent McKay
and C hief Inspector Creaser as well as a number of responsible civilian witnesses, were in my view right in
describing this element as a minority. Those witnesses attributed the crush to the sheer numbers o f fans all
anxious to gain entry. There was no criticism o f the crowd by any o f the witnesses in the period up to 2.30 pm
or even 2.35 pm. What happened then was noi a sudden deterioration in the mood or sobriety o f those
assembled there. No doubt those coming behind would have had more to drink and would have included the
unruly minority., But the crisis developed because this very large crowd became packed into a confined
turnstile area and its very density hampered its passage through the turnstiles.

    197. Superintendent Marshall and other officers criticised the crowd as unco-operative because police
exhonations to stop pushing and to ease back were not heeded. How could they be? In that crush most people
had no control over their m ovem ents at all. Two incidents involving police horses illustrate the point. One
horse was found afterwards to have cigarette bums on its rump. Clearly that was the despicable work o f a
hooligan whether in drink or not. However, there were also eyewitness accounts o f a horse being physically
lifted o ff its feet by the crowd. That occurred, as the police accepted, without malice or intent but as an
involuntary consequence o f crowd pressure which those by the horse's flanks could not resist any more than the
horse itself.

Reduced Efficiency of the Turnstiles
   198. The labelling o f the turnstiles in the order A. C. B was confusing. A fan with a B ticket who went by
m istake to the wrong side o f the metal fence would have had the greatest difficulty in getting back and round to
the correct side. The colour coding was inefficient because the coloured wooden panels were affixed to the
turnstile walls so low that they were not easily visible through a crowd. The information on the ticket printed by
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club was misleading and its layout unhelpful, as Mr Mackrell frankly conceded.

   199. The result was that in the early stages, poiice officers were pestered by fans for help as to where they
should go. Later, as the crowd became more dense, tans, were presenting their tickets at the wrong turnstiles.
There were also Liverpool supponers who had acquired ucKcts for the Kop end but sought entry at Leppings
Lane. They caused delays in the turnstiie operation when entry was refused and after a while the poiice
instructed the operators to let them through. There was lurtner delay oecause the crush made it difficult for
fans to get into the turnstile entrances. Uncc mere, the pressure irom oenind was such as. on occasions, to jam
them in the doorway or against the paddle of the turnstile. Finally, there were tans without tickets who sought
to enter by offering payment, by seeking to go over or under the paddle or by sliding through with a ticket
holder. All o f these activities slowed down the turnstile rate wmch at the worst period was only about 600 per
hour per turnstile. The waiting crowd therefore expanded and as the minutes passed frustration grew. Visitors
 who had paid for tickets and travelled from afar realised they were making little forward progress. Frustration
 increased pressure and induced panic at the front. Determination to get into the match was intensified by
 determination to get.out o f the crush.

 Were Fans Without Tickets a Major Factor in the Build-Up?
   200. It has become a fact o f football life that fans do turn up at all-ticket matches without tickets. It is not
 possible to givean accurate figure or even a reliable estimate o f the number without tickets on 15 April. Police
 estimates varied from about 2 0 0 to about 2.000. There were certainly frequent requests for tickets or “spares”
 during the hours before the build-up. Many o f those warned o ff by the police were seen to return to the area.
 Som e were hanging about on the bridge. Again, however, the police witnesses who most impressed me did not
 consider the number o f ticketless fans to be inordinately large. This accords with two other sources of
 evidence.

    2 0 1. First, there was a wide range o f witnesseswho observed inside the'eroufid that the Liverpool end was at .
 a late stage well below capacity save for pens 3 and 4. The north stand still had many empty seats and the wing
 pens were sparse. The match being a sell-out. there were clearly many ticket holders to come and they could
 account for the large crowd still outside the turnstiles. Had the Liverpool accommodation been full by 2.40
 pm. one could have inferred that most or much ot the large crowd outside lacked tickets.

   202. Secondly, such figures as are available from the Club's electronic m e t r ringsvciem and from analyses
by the HSE suggest that no great number entered without tickets. They s.            that    -.umber who passed
through turnstiles A to G plus those who entered through gate C roughly equa;:;-j the :;T--ce capacity figure o f
 10.100 for which tickets had been sold. The Club's record showed 7.038 passed through turnstiles A to G.
However, the counting m echanism on turnstile G was defective, so the HSE did a study using the video film
and projecting figures from the other turnstiles, This gave an assessment o f 7.494. with a maximum o f 7.644
passing through A to G. Again, using the video, the HSE assessed the number who entered the ground whilst
gate C was open at 2.240 with a maximum o f 2.480, Accordingly, the HSE's best estimate o f the total entering
through gate C and turnstiles A to G was 9.734 with u maximum o f 10.124.1 recognise that these can only be
rough checks because, for example, some with terrace tickets were allowed through turnstiles 1 to 11>and there
would be other similar factors which have not formed pan o f the assessment. Nevertheless, the figures do
suggest that there was not a very significant body of ticketless fans in the crowd which built up.

The “Conspiracy” Theory
  203. On behalf o f South Yorkshire police, the theory was advanced that the "late" arrival o f so many
Liverpool supporters was planned to buck the system. The suggestion was that fans without tickets conspired
to arrive late and create such trouble as would force the police to admit them to the match. The slender
evidence upon which this theory rested came from two sources: overheard conversations in public houses and
the antecedent history o f Liverpool supporters at away matches,

   204. One witness said he heard three Liverpool supporters saying, in effect, that they would manage to get
in without tickets by causing trouble so that police would open a gate, and that they had done this before.
Another witness heard two o f a group o f Liverpool supporters say they had no tickets, that they would go to the
ground just before kick-off, that no-one would stop them getting in and that they had not been stopped vet,
Statements were put in relating to two other small groups talking in similar terms,

Liverpool Supporters at Away Matches
   205. The South Yorkshire police prepared a dossier ot reports on the behaviour o f Liverpool fans at away
matches with the object ofsh ow in ga pattern of troublesome behaviour by large numbers either without tickets
or with forged tickets. Without setting out the wnoie history, it can be summarised as follows,

   206. On three occasions Liverpool fans without tickets were aliowed into all-ticket matches upon payment.
( At Watford on 13 February 1988. 1.50n were admitted: at Southampton on 24 September 1988. 150 were
admitted: at Southampton again on ;2 December              750 were admitted.) At Norwich on I April 198^.
Liverpool supporters arrived without t.ctcetsbut 1.2“2 tickets nad been returned and tanstrom noth Liverpool
and Norwich were allowed to buy them torcash. A similar situation occurred at Wimbledon on 13 May 198°.
There were six other occasions from 19so to date, including the C up finals o f 19&t> and 198 V. when numbers ot
Liverpool supporters turned up without tickets orotnerwise behaved badh,

  20", Four points must be noted, however. ( in non^ ol the occasions when ticketless fans were admitted tor
payment was the match a sell-out. There was tneretore room in the ground on each occasion. At a sell-out tans
 might not expect to be allowed in. even for payment. Secondly, no trouble o f the kind alleged was encountered
 at the 1988 semi-final when Liverpool visited Hillsborough. Thirdly. Liverpool visited Hillsborough again in
 January 1989 without any trouble. Finally, no forged tickets were in use on 15 April apart from three crude
 photocopies.

 No Conspiracy
    208. I have already found that there was not an abnormally large number o f fans without tickets on this
 occasion. With one or two exceptions, the police witnesses themselves did not subscribe to the “conspiracy"
 theory. 1 am satisfied that the large concentration at Leppings Lane from 2.30 pm to 2.50 pm did not arrive
 as a result o f any concerted plan. There were. 1 accept, small groups without tickets who were willing to exploit
 any adventitious chance o f getting into the ground. They, together with the minority who had drunk too much,
 certainly aggravated the problem faced by the police. But that main problem was simply one o f large numbers
 packed into the small area outside the turnstiles.

 The Police Operation at Leppings Lane
   209. The Operational Order for 15 April followed closely that laid down for the 1988 semi-final. The
 em phasis was on maintaining law and order. Side roads were to be blocked off to prevent damage in residential
 areas. Pairs o f officers were to patrol streets to prevent “clash o f rival supporters". Officers were to watch public
 houses, shops and supermarkets “where looting could take place". Outside the turnstiles, officers were toensure
 supporters entering did not have banners, weapons, missiles or alcohol.

   210. Unfortunately, hooligan behaviour has made all these steps necessary. But the only written provision
 aim ed at effecting controlled entry to the turnstiles was one enjoining officers “to ensure orderly queues are
 form ed”. There was no provision for controlling the entry o f the crowd into the turnstile area.

   2 11. As long ago as 1924. the Departmental Committee on Crowds stated:-

   “T he control o f crowds should begin at a point some considerable distance from the entrance to the ground.
   T h e advantages o f an arrangement o f this kind a r e ... in preventing congestion at the entrances to grounds."

This was particularly important at Leppings Lane where the turnstile area was so small and awkwardly laid
out. If a large crowd was permitted uncontrolled entry through the perimeter gates, the forming o f queuesai the
turnstiles and control by officers, whether on foot or mounted, would become impracticable. Those waiting ai
the turnstiles would become a single growing mass. Once that happened, it would be difficult to retrieve the
situation.

  2 1 2 . Whether steps were taken and what steps to avoid this happening was left to oral oriefing and a d h o c
instructions on the day.

Previous Experience
  2 13. The senior police officers said it had never happened before so there was no reason to foresee it . In fact,
the o n ly two previous occasions when the Leppings Lane terraces had been used to fill the whole o f the north
and west sides o f the ground were at the two semi-finals, in 1987 and 1988. In 1987. the match was on a Sunday,
scheduled for 12 noon, and kick-off was postponed fora quarter ot an hour because o f late arrivals.

Policing in 1988
   2 14. As to 1988. there was a very iarge and consistent body o f evidence that, on the day. the police in
Leppings Lane conducted an efficient filtering exercise designed to keep awa\ those without tickets and
control the flow o f fans towards the ground. 1 do not believe that so many witnesses without either opportunity
or reason to put their heads together could be mistaken aboui what they experienced on that occasion. \ et. the
police maintain that no filtering exercise other than on a random basis was conducted in 1 a n d that their
policy and practice then were no different from those ot 1

  215. The answer to this conflict must. I think, be that whilst the policy ma> have been no different, in
practice the policing in 1988 was more efficient and was not put to the same test and strain as a year later. There
was not so large a swell in numbers approaching the ground from 2.30 pm to 2.5U pm as in 198^.
Nevertheless, there had been warning signs in 1988. Detective Superintendent McKay gave the following
evidence:
   “Q Were you aware o f a build-up of numbers last year towards the latter stages at the turnstiles?

   A    Y e s . . . There was a huge build-up around 10 minutes to 3 when many, many Liverpool supporters
        cam e at that time. They had been drinking, the ones that 1 saw and there was quite a sizeable crush
        built-up - sizeable queue.

   Q    Q ueue or crush?

   A    Compacted queue, built-up in the area by the turnstiles which 1 believe are marked A to G. That crowd
        reached back almost to the gates. It never got any bigger than that and the turnstiles operated relatively
        freely and they dealt with that crowd. Fans were still arriving at about 10 past 3 but by then t h e . ..

   Q    T his crowd that you have described o f the late arrivals at about 10 to - was it an orderly crowd?

   A    Oh no. Wo. The orderly crowcfrhad gone in. and .when Lsay they were not an orderly crowd, obviously
        m ixed amongst those people were . . .

   Q    O f course, but taking it generally?

   A    But by and large they had taken a lot o f drink on board and they were in such numbers that excluding
        them from the ground was completely out o f the question.

   Q    Were they standing in an orderly queue or was there som e pushing and shoving?

   A    There was a lot o f pushing and shoving. There was an urgency to get into the ground.

   Q    But fortunately it does not appear to have been in nearly such numbers as this year.

   A    It wasn't."

Poiice Intelligence in Advance
  216. Apart from that experience in 1988. the tendency o f Liverpool supporters to arrive late was not
unknown. Witnesses said that they get through the turnstiles at their home ground. Anfield. quite quickly and
tend therefore not to arrive early. Indeed, a general recent tendency to pc none arrival was noted by the
Sheffield City Council Advisory Group, with police present, on 23 March 19t- . The minute reads:-

  “As far as the turnstile question was concerned, a pattern has developed o f people arriving som e 15 minutes
  before the start o f the game hoping to gain admission. This trend may be due to the banning o f alcohol at
  sports grounds which could lead to people going elsewhere for refreshment prior to the football match. As
  the available turnstiles operated quite effectively tor the mau--.ty o f the time, and that the late arrival
  problem could perhaps only be dealt with by education o f the spectators" (su'l.

  217. In so far as Liverpool supporters' behaviour at away matches may have been indicative o f what police
problem s might arise on 15 April, most o f the facts should have been availableat the planningstage. As in other
forces. South Yorkshire Police had a liaison officer whose job was to seek, receive and collate relevant
information as to the visiting supporters. The Association o f C hief Police Officers' Guide to Policing Football
highlights the importance o f such liaison:-

  “ It is important that the officer responsible for policing the match determines the pre-match planning in the
  light o f the intelligence at hand. Whilst that intelligence can oe obtained from a variety o f sources, the prime
  source for football intelligence is the Police National Intelligence System which is based on the network of
  police liaison officers. Summaries completed by poiice officers of the home club force are forwarded to tne
  visiting club's liaison officer making available intelligence about tans' behaviour at both home and away
  fixtures. This information will be collated and made available for future matches involving that club“.

  218. The FA had also laid down in a memorandum issued in the 1985't) season measures to be adopted b\
the away club which included the following: -

  ‘i t is the responsibility o f the away club to advise the home d ub o f the recent behaviour o f their supporters
  at away matches, irrespective o f whether the benaviour has resulted in disciplinary action by the Football
  Association or not '.

  2 1 °. It does not seem that information o f this kind was passed to the Sheffield Wednesday Club or played
 any part in the South Yorkshire Police plans. Had the latter been informed o f the history contained in the
 dossier and summarised above it may well have influenced poiice strategy in Leppings Lane.

   220. There is presently a proposal that a national computer-based police football intelligence system should
 be set up to make the necessary information readily available.

 Poiice Intelligence on the Day
   221. The unfilled space in the Liverpool areas inside the ground, the figures tor entry available from the
 Club’s computer and observations on the video screen should have enabled those in the control room to
 m onitor the numbers arriving and still to arrive at Leppings Lane. Radio contact with mobile (Tango) patrols
 detailed to monitoriicensed premises in the district could have indicated the numbers still to come. But at 2.30
 pm when Mr Murray told Mr Duckenfield they would "get them all in by 3 o'clock" he seems not to have
 appreciated that in addition to those visible at the turnstiles there were many more still to come. Certainly. Mr
 Marshall outside the turnstiles was not toldand'could not otnerwise have known that there1were still many
 Liverpool ticket holders to arrive.

 M r Marshall and Mr Greenwood
    222. The division o f command between these iwo officers did not help. Mr Marshall was in charge of the
 serials outside the perimeter gates in the Leppings Lane area and in the roads beyond. In practice he operated
 inside and just outside the turnstile area. Mr Greenwood's area as Ground Commander extended from the
 pitch to the perimeter gates. He in fact stationed himself near the players' tunnel. He was wholly unaware of the
 growing problems at the turnstiles and was in no position to exercise control over his officers who were under
 pressure there. No-one in the control room thought to tell him.

 Control Lost
  223. In the result, the large concentration o f arrivals from 2.30 pm to 2.40 pm pressed unrestrained into
the turnstile area through the perimeter gates which were fully open. When that area was full, later arrivals
swelled the crowd out to the forecourt and even into the road. As already recounted, the foot officers at the
turnstiles became trapped and endangered and retired through the turnstiles. The mounted officers could not
operate amidst such a dense crowd in a confincd-space. They came out o f the turnstile area. There were then
the belated attempts to close the perimeter gates and prevent more fans joining the mass until it had a chance to
dim inish through the turnstiles: still later the attempt to put a cordon o f horses across the entrance.

  224. Despite knowledge o f the difficult layout, the very iarge number o f fans to be got through so few
turnstiles and the tendency o f fans to arrive in the iast half hour, no contingency pians were made to avoid a
crush such as occurred. Even on the day. the need to close Leppings Lane to traffic before 2.30 pm and the
other available intelligence already summarised, shouid have prompted those in command to take precautions
against such a crush, i f some o f the perimeter gates had been ciosed and cordons o f mounted and foot officers
had been placed a little distance from those gates, the flow o f fans into the turnstile area could have been
controlled before that area became engulfed. It was the crush itself which produced the frustration and the
panic and brought out the worst in those who had drunk too much. Earlier control o f entry would have
prevented the crush and maintained the good mood which had prevailed until 2.30 pm.

  2 25. It should moreover have been obvious by 2.40 pm. it' not earlier, that a large part o f the crowd could
not be admitted until well after 3 pm. Had a decision to postpone kick-off been made and announced much of
the frustration and with it the impetus crushing me crowd would have been reduced. A combination ol
controlled filtering and a postponed kick-off would probably nave obviated the need to open the gates.

Postponement of Kick-off
    2 26. At various stages in his evidence. Mr Duckenfield gave three accounts o f why he thought it too late to
postpone kick-off. Once n was that one ot the teams nad aireaay come onto the pitch. Then it was that a group
o f photographers at the tunnel had wrongly led him to mink that the teams were coming out. Finally, hedianot
know w'hy he thought the teams were coming out. They did not in fact come onto the nucn until 2.54 pm. two
m inutes after gate C was opened. Police C onstabie Buxton haa asked for a postponement o f kick-off betorc
gate C was opened. It should not. however. na\ e needed a police t. onstabie in the thick o f the crowd (and there
were others o f like mind) to think o f postDoninc the kick-off. The need should have been clear in the control
room.

  22"7. The truth was that Mr DucKenfiela applied inflexibly tne poiicy he had discussed with Mr Murray.
K ick-off would not be postponed unless mere were some maior cause for delayed arrivals re a inm on the
motorway or fog. 1 accept that the thinking behind this poiicy was not callous or punitive. If kick-off is
postponed whenever a proportion o f fans choose to leave the public houses late, the practice may grow and
kick-off times would become meaningless. But. a commander must deal with the problem o f the da>. Faced
with a situation which was becoming dangerous, crowd safety should have been his paramount consideration.
K ic k -o ff should have been delayed.

Summary
   228.    The layout o f the turnstiles and the number they were required to serve left no margin o f safety against
an uneven flow o f fans. Because police strategy in advance and on the day did not cater for it. the arrival o f a
large number o f supporters between 2.30 pm and 2.40 pm created an unmanageable crush. The presence o f
a substantial minority o f fans who had drunk too much aggravated that problem. Having lost control and
rejected the option o f postponing kick-off. the police were faced with a serious danger o f deaths or injuries.
They were teft therefore with no alternative bui to open the gates. Superintendent Marshall was right at that
stagetoask for it and Mr Duckenfield was right to agree. But the possible effects of so dramatic a step required
other action.
                                                 CHAPTER 11

                               THE BLUNDER ON OPENING THE GATES

   229. The decision to order the opening o f the gates was not accompanied or followed by any other order to
deal with the consequences. When gate C was opened, a steady stream o f about 2.000 fans poured through it
over som e five minutes. Clearly they were going to go into the ground somewhere and unless they were diverted
their likeliest route was through the tunnel for reasons already given. N o warning was issued from the control
room that the gate was to be opened. Serials on the concourse were not alerted. Neither the Club control room
nor the C hief Steward at the Leppings Lane end was warned. Not even Mr Greenwood, the Ground
Commander, was informed. From 2.47 pm when Mr Marshall made his first request until 2.52 pm when Mr
Duckenfield acceded to it. there were five minutes in which orders could have been given as to how the influx
was to be absorbed. It was not done. In evidence. Mr Duckenfield began by saying that no officer made any
wrong decision but he laterconceded hrhad erred tn this regard. He saidfaedidnot. consider where,the people.
would go when the gate opened. Even after it opened, when he could see the influx on the television screen, no
order was given to steer the fans to the wing pens. Mr Duckenfield said it did not cross his mind to detail
officers on the concourse to shut o ff the tunnel. Those officers could not have known from their position how
full pens 3 and 4 were. That was a matter for the control room to monitor from its own observations and using
intelligence from around the ground.

  230. Since pens 3 and 4 were full by 2.50 pm. the tunnel should have been closed o ff whether gate C was to
be opened or not. The exercise was a simple one and had been carried out m 1988. All that was necessary was
for a few officers to act as a cordon at the entrance to the tunnel and divert fans elsewhere. Unfortunately, the
1988 closure seems to have been unknown to the senior officers on duty at the time. It did not figure in the
debriefing notes. It therefore had no influence on the planning for 1989.

  231. Planning apart, however, it should have been clear in the control room where there was a view o f the
pens and o f the crowd at the turnstiles that the tunnel had to be closed. If orders had been given to that effect
when gate C was opened, the fans could have been directed to the empty areas of the wings and this disaster
could still have been avoided. Failure to give that order was a blunder o f the first magnitude.

   232. Significantly, when permission was given to open gate A. Mr Duckenfield did order serials to go to that
part o f the concourse to monitor the influx towards the north stand. He did this because he feared that if fans
went to the north stand without tickets, they would not get seats and. there being no perimeter fences at the
north side, they might invade the pitch. This illustrates again the preoccupation with avoiding pitch invasion
as against safety and the risks of overcrowding. Because those entering through gate C could not get onto the
pitch, it was not thought necessary to alert officers to monitor them. The possibility o f overcrowding simply
was not considered.
                                                        CHAPTER 12

                                                THE BARRIERS IN PEN 3

    Barrier 144
       233. T he removal o f barrier 144 in 1986 should have reduced the notional capacity o f pen 3 as already
    m entioned. But it did more. In the absence o f barrier 144. the influx o f fans after 2.52 pm met no retarding
    structure as it came into pen 3. The pressure created was free to push fans straight down by the radial fence to
    the lowest line o f barriers. The pressure diagonally from the tunnel mouth down to barrier number 124a which
    collapsed was unbroken by any intervening barrier. 124a was also vulnerable to pressure straight down the pen
    through the gap in the barrier above it created in 1985.

      234. Inspector Bullas. positioned in the west stand, described what he saw looking down on the pens
    around 3 pm.

       “... I saw from the direction o f the tunnel a kind ot movement down the terracing... the type o f thing that you
       see on the nature programmes, the molten lead flowing down the side o f the mountainside, them olten lava ...
       a “river of people"... going directly towards the pitch but there again spreading... out."

      235. Dr Eastwood conceded in evidence that the removal o f barrier 144 was likely to have contributed to
    the collapse o f 124a. Later, he sought to resile from that answer, but 1 think his earlier admission was correct, li
O   was argued that if bam er 144 had remained, the influx from gate C would have built up further back and the
    tragedy might have occurred in the tunnel or might have broken barrier 144 itself. This is speculative and 1
    think unlikely. What remained o f barrier 144 in pen 4 did not cause a build-up: nor did it collapse. But its
    remaining in position may well have accounted for no Darner funner down pen 4 collapsing and for the lesser
    carnage in that pen.

    W hen did Barrier 124a Fail?
      236. Counsel for the South Yorkshire Police sought to argue that this barrier collapsed or may have
    collapsed at about 2.47 pm. His purpose was to suggest that the opening o f gate C was not causally linked with
    the crushing and fatalities resulting from that coliapse. 1 nave already found that whilst the evidence does not
    permit the time o f collapse to be fixed with cenaintv. it was after 2.52 pm. 1 now give my reasons:

      (a) I have several times watched the BBC video tape on which Counsel relied. I do not find the incident he
          identifies at 2.47 pm suggestive o f a c o l i a D s e at that time:

      (b) the evidence o f fans who were near or at the oarricr was overwhelmingly to the effect that the collapse
          occurred at or after 3 pm:

      (c) the biggest group o f witnesses was that which related the collapse to the surge following Beardsley's
          "near-miss" at the Kop end at 3.04 pm:

      ( d ) the appearance on video and photographs o f fans in the area o f barrier 124a after the incident at 2.47 pm
            and before the final crush is not consisteni with it having collapsed soearly:

      (e) it is highly unlikely that if so catastrophic an event had occurred as early as 2.47 pm. the police on the
          track and elsewhere would have taken umn ncarh 3 o'clock to realise something was seriously wrong.
          Indeed, if Counsel for the South Yorkshire Poiice were correct in his timing o f the collapse, the failure of
          the poiice to respond for so long would'expose tnem 10 even graver criticism than that made in this
          Report.

    Dr Eastwood's Testing of the Barriers
      23". Two sections o f barrier 124a in De n 3 coiiansca as a result o f the overcrowding. That coliapse caused a
    number o f deaths. Dr Eastwood and his staff naa u n u c r t a K e n tne periodical testing o f crush barriers required
    by tne Green Guide and by the Safety C cniricaie, Barrier 124a nad neen tested in July 198b and passed.

      238.    The test had been carried out in accordance with Dr Eastwood's interpretation o f Annex C' to the
    Green G uide. That requires an evenly distriDutec lorce ot'iS.UkS 'metre width to be applied for 3 five minute




                                                                       lol
periods, the interval between applications to be as short as possible. A record has to be kept o f the amount of
deformation during each loading and o f the percentage o f recover.'. If the recovery is less than 50% after the
third application o f force, the barrier has failed the test. If recovery is between 50% and 75%. there must be a
re-test. The question is: 50% or 75% o f what? Is the recovery to be in relation to the position o f the barrier
before the first application o f force or before the third? If the former, a span o f 124a recorded 53% at the 1988
test and should have been re-tested. If the latter, it recorded 100% and passed. Unfortunately the Green Guide
is unclear as to the correct interpretation. Dr Eastwood took the latter view and so passed the barrier. He
justified his interpretation in evidence. He said failure to recover to the original position could be due to a
“shake-down” effect related to som e giving in the ashes under the concrete or to some other extraneous factor
nither than to any defect in the material o f the bamer itself.

  239. I think, after consulting Professor Maunder, that safety ought to have dictated recovery should be by
reference to the position o f the barrier before the first application o f force. 1 accept, however, that the Green
G uide is ambiguous and Dr Eastwood's interpretation is tenable. It has some support from the British
Standards tests on steel structures. Clearly, however, for the future, the Green Guide should be clarified on this
point.

Corrosion
  2 40. Inspection o f barrier 124a. and indeed other barriers at Hillsborough, by the HSE showed
considerable corrosion o f the metal at vulnerable points where water could accumulate. Dr Eastwood agreed
that if a significant degree o f corrosion was observed on visual inspection, a barrier should be condemned.

  241. The Green Guide does not specifically refer to corrosion. Paragraph 39 provides, i n t e r a lia :

  “Crush barriers and balustrades should be examined for deformation or any other oven signs o f weakness".

Paragraph 6 o f Annex C provides:

  “If during any test, even though the barrier... satisfies the above loading requirements, doubt should arise
  for any reason (including such matters as cracking o f the terracing or distonion o f connections) as to the
  safety o f the barrier... a detailed investigation should be carried out. Unless the results o f this investigation
  remove the doubt as to safety o f the barrier... (it >should be deemed to have failed the test".

  242. Since corrosion is a likely cause o f deterioration, a revision o f the Green Guide should make specific
reference to it.

Causation
  2 4 3 . Tests done by the HSE suggest that although barrier 124a passed the loading test in 1988 and probably
would have been able to sustain a force which did not exceed the test load, it was unable to resist the load
im posed upon it by reason o f the numbers in pen 3. the excessive gap in the barrier higher up the pen and the
absence o f barrier 144. Corrosion probably played a pan. but the effective cause o f the collapse was the
excessive and unanticipated pressure to which the barrier was exposed.
                                                     CHAPTER 13

                                       TH E C R U SH IN G N O T RECO GNISED

    Observation from Control Room
       244. As the stream from gate C flowed through the tunnel, the officers in the control room could be expected
    to keep a d o se watch on pens 3 and 4. They had a direct view o f them from an elevated position through their
    window. Although they had no field-glasses, there was the zoom facility on the TV camera. The radio was by
    then working again and although reception was difficult due to crowd noise and possibly excessive air traffic
    on channel 25. attempts could have been made to alert officers on the perimeter track to watch for
    overcrowding and repon their observations. In the event, pens 3 and 4 became more and more crowded, surges
    took place, fans were showing and signalling distress. None o f this was seen or recognised in the control room.

   Officers on the Track
     245. The 20 officers detailed to the perimeter track were distributed round the pitch so that some five
   officers were at the west end. Their written instructions made no reference to the avoidance or detection o f
   overcrowding. The same applied to the officers in the wesi stand. Mr Greenwood admitted that his oral
   briefings also contained no mention o f monitoring the pens tor overcrowding.

       246. The Operational Order for 1988 had instructed officers to forbid anyone “access to the track from the
   .terraces without the consent o f a senior officer (except to receive medical attention)". At the end o f the 1988
(^Jlem i-final. there was a minor pitch invasion. Accordingly, that prohibition was emphasised in the 1989
    Operational Order by being put into capital letters. The combination o f no instructions as to overcrowding and
    a strong prohibition on opening the gates was likely to make police recognition o f crushing slow and their
    response reluctant. Small wonder that the growing pressure and congestion between 2.50 pm and 2.59 pm
    went unheeded or ccrtainly unremedied. Even when officers recognised there was a problem, the rule required
    consent o f a senior officer before a gate could be opened.

     247. "Senior officer" meant an officer o f Inspector rank or higher. The Inspector in charge o f the 20 officers
   on the track was Mr Darling. He stationed him self by the players' tunnel, the most central position for
   supervising his men. In evidence he said:

     "I would only take action if I thought crowding had got to such a stage that the tans were in danger. I’d then
     inform ground control and I would expect someone deployed to the back o f the stand.”

     That underlines the inhibition against opening perimeter gates. So did the evidence o f one Constable who
   said it had been so drummed into officers not to open the gates that when he saw distress in pen 4. he "debated"
   with him self before opening the gate, thinking: "If I'm wrong. I'm going to get a right bollocking for this."
   Naturally, one would hope that com m on sense and humanity would make some officers cut through the rules
   and open a gate if fans were clearly in distress.

     248. This is what happened, but not until officers recognised the distress and even then not immediately,
Q    ence. gates 3 and 4. having been opened, were shut again before they were finally opened and at first those
  seeking to ciimb out over the fence were pushed back. This reaction ot the police did not go on for as long as
  som e witnesses believed. They probably misinterpreted the hand movements from Mr Greenwood and others
  aimed at persuading fans to move back and reiieve tne pressure as attempts to stop those climbing out at the
  front.

    249.     Nevertheless, there was a period during which the failure to recognise the problem and the inhibition
  against tackling it caused vital time to be lost.
                                                     CHAPTER 14

                                        THE RESPONSE OFTHE POLICE

 The Officers in Command
   2 50. Even when realisation o f the problem came to officers on the track, it was some minutes before it
 reached the control room. When spectators first appeared on the track, the immediate assumption in the
 control room was that a pitch invasion was threatened. This was unlikely at the beginning o f a match. It
 becam e still less likely when those on the track made no move towards the pitch. Mr Motson. the BBC
 commentator, recognised and said, well before the match was stopped, that the trouble seemed to be
 overcrowding and not misbehaviour. Still, the assumption to the contrary persisted in the control room. Until
 M r Murray radioed for a fleet o f ambulances, about 3.06 pm. Mr Duckenfield continued to treat the incident
 as a threat to the pitch and to public order. The message calling up all available officers mentioned a pitch
 invasion. Operation Suppon was initiated and dog handlers were requested.
    2 51. Until Chief Superintendent Nesbit arrived, there was no effective leadership either from control or on
 the pitch to harness and organise rescue efforts. N o orders were given for officers to enter the tunnel and relieve
 pressure. Some officers did this on their own initiative. Apart from the Tannoy request to clear the pitch, no
 attem pt was made to clear and mark off a casualty area where first-aid could be given without hindrance by
 fans and photographers milling about between the bodies. There was no co-ordination o f the early provision o f
 first-aid or o f stretcher parties or o f the rescue effort through gates 3 and 4. N o request for help was broadcast to
 doctors and nurses in the crowd until about 3.29 pm when it was too late. Probably, there was little that could
 have been achieved in most cases however soon doctors had been summoned, but there were marginal cases
 where earlier attention might have made a difference.
  2 52. The plight o f those behind the fencing and the existence o f injuries were known to officers at the scene
from 3 pm. But the Major Disaster Plan was not started until 3.06 pm at earliest when the ambulance service
was called. N o request for cutting gear or for the fire brigade was made until 3.13 p.m. Again, it is unlikely that
these services could have saved lives if they had been called prompt ly, but it is possible.
Poiice on the Pitch
    2 53. Despite the initial lack o f leadership, many officers did all they humanly could to rescue and revive the
victim s. Many supporters who gave evidence paid tribute to these efforts. It is also fair to say that the number
o f officers who could at first be usefully involved at the two open gates was necessarily limited.
   254. C h ief Superintendent Nesbit’s action in deploying a line o f officers across the middle o f the pitch has
already been mentioned. 1 can well understand the resentment it caused. However, the police assertion that a
rush by som e fans towards the Kop end raised fears o f conflict are well bom e out by the video tape. In my
judgem ent. C hief Superintendent Nesbit was well justified in using some o f the many officers called up
pursuant to Operation Support to prevent possible violence. To have had open fighting in a ground where
so m e 9 0 spectators already lay dead would have been an unthinkable and obscene development.
Fans on the Pitch
   2 55. Many fans who escaped onto the pitch alive were in a state o f collapse or close to it. Most o f those who
retained their strength strove magnificently to assist the victims. They helped pull them clear: they helped with
first-aid: they helped carry the improvised stretchers.
  2 5 6 . There were fans, however, who were distraught, angry, drunk, or all three. Their conduct in abusing,
assaulting and spitting at the police was disgraceful, the more so since earlier police failures had little to do
with those officers now doing their best for the injured. In addition, there were abuse and assaults on
am bulance men and firemen in the course o f their rescue work. This was probably because their similar
uniforms caused them to be mistaken for police. However, although the abuse was widespread, the number o f
assaults and spittings was on the evidence comparatively small. In deploring them, one must recognise the
uniquely horrifying experience which those responsible had just suffered and were still suffering.
False Reports
   25 7 . Before this Inquiry began, there were stories reD orteti in the press, and said to have emanated from
police officers present at the match, o f "mass drunKenness". It was said that drunken fans urinated on the
police while they were pulling the dead and injured out. that otners had even urinated on the bodies o f the dead
and stolen their belongings. Not a single witness was called before the Inquiry to support any o f those
allegations although even' opportunity was afforded for any of the represented parties to have any witness
called whom they wished. As soon as the allegations 1 nave mentioned were made in the press. Mr Peter
Wright. Chief Constable o f South Yorkshire, made a dignified statement dissociating him self from such grave
and em otive calumnies. Those who made them, and those who disseminated them, would have done better to
hold their peace.
                                                    CHAPTER 15

                                THE PERIMETER GATES WERE TOO SMALL

    258. The perimeter gates in the pens were not designed as exits. They were intended to afford access by the
 police to cope with any local disorder or with an emergency. The kind o f emergency contemplated was not
 m assive crushing but. for example, the collapse or illness o f an individual. Emergency evacuation o f the pens
 had been considered by the Officer Working Party. Although fire risk was minimal since the terraces, west
 stand and tunnel were o f concrete construction, the fire brigade were the principal arbiters o f evacuation
 procedure. They aimed to be able to empty the pens in six minutes. The plan was to evacuate spectators via the
 tunnel. If for any reason that option became impracticable, e e due to a bomb threat, then the alternative route
 would be along the back of the terraces, through the gates in the radial fences and round the sides o f the west
 stand. The fire brigade were satisfied that each o f these routes would enable the pens to be evacuated in less
 than six minmes. without relying on the gates to the pitch,,Those gates would also be available, but their use
 was excluded from the calculation o f evacuation time.

   259. The need to provide for speedy and large scale evacuation from the front o f the pens to the pitch was
 not anticipated. The Green Guide (! 986) provides as follows:

   “ 209. Access to the pitch must be made as difficult as possible in normal circumstances while at the same
   tim e ensuring that the police have effective access to the terraces for the purpose of crowd control and
   enabling the pitch to be used (where appropriate) m the event o f serious emergency . . .

   214. . . . at some maior soccer stadia, where restriction on crowd movement forms a necessary p an o f the
   safety measures, it may be necessary to have a fence which prevents access to the pitch in normal
   circumstances . . . b u t allows for access in emergency.

   215. For most major stadia, whether used for association football or other sports, the pitch perimeter fence
   will be required either to prevent access to tne pitch as m entioned above, or at least to discourage attempts
   by spectators to enter the playing area. Gates or other access points (minimum width 1.1 metres) should
   nonetheless be provided for use m a n emergency .... Provision o f such gates or access points is particularly
   important to allow full access to the piaying area tor track) where it is likei\ to be usee as a place o f safety in
   an emergency.        Such gates or access points should be properly stewaraed and                            clearly
   marked so that immediate access to the piaying area or perimeter track can be ensured".

   260. Gate 3 was .82 metres in width: gate 4 was ,~ 9 metres in width. There were therefore clear departures
from the Green Guide standard.

   261. The Safety Certificateprovided (by Schedule 2 Paragraph 2 4 ) as follows:

  The (club) shall arrange for the Stadium to be inspected by a suitably qualified Chartered Engineer. . . at
  least once each period o f 12 m o n t h s . . . and . .. shall as soon as possible after each inspection supply to
  the . . . C ouncilaC enificatebythesaidC haneredE ngineerastothecurrentcom piianceornon-com pliance
  with . . . the appropriate provisions and recommendations o f the (Green (G uide o f all structural parts o f the
  Stadium . . .

   262. It was argued that there was no breach of the Safety C ertificate since the Green Guide specifically
provides for flexibility However, in m> view the Safety Certificate cannot and certainly should not be
interpreted so liberalh as in effect to leave sucn basic requirements as the size o f exit gates to the total
discretion o f the club and its advisers. One o f the matters for consideration at stage two of this inquiry will be
whether, and in wnat respects, the Green Guide neeas to be clarified and toughened.

   263. Dr Eastwood explained the small width of the cates by reference to the dilemma facing the oolice. They
wanted a gate sufficieni tor its intended purpose ic police access and small scale emergencies, On the other
hand, they did not want a flood gate o f such size as to endanger tne prime principle o f preventing pitch
invasions. In the light o f Hillsborough, this is perhaps tne most poignant example o f the difficulty o f achieving
a balance between stopping hooliganism and ensuringcrowu satety

  264. Even if the width o f gaies 3 and 4 had commied with the present Green Guide standard, they would
have been wholly inadequate to relieve pressure ana release spectators swiftly on 15 April. Moreover, the
Green G u ide says nothing about the number ot gates reauired for a pen of given size. Whilst the Club.
D r Eastw ood, the Officer Working Party and the local authority can be criticised for failing strictly to conform
to the Guide, the real failure was common to all those who have been responsible for considering safety on the
terraces. The anxiety to protect the sanctity of the pitch has caused insufficient attention to be paid to the risk
o f a crush due to overcrowding. Certain it was. that once the crush occurred on ,15 April gates 3 and 4 were
w h o lly inadequate for rescue purposes.
                                    PART III - CONCLUSIONS
                                                CHAPTER 16

                                      BRIEF SUMMARY OF CAUSES

  265. T he immediate cause o f the gross overcrowding and hence the disaster was the failure, when gate C was
opened, to cut o ff access to the central pens which were already overfull.

  266. They were already overfull because no safe maximum capacities had been laid down, no attempt was
made to control entry to individual pens numerically and there was no effective visual monitoring o f crowd
density.

   267. When the influx from gate C entered pen 3. the layout o f the barriers there afforded less protection
than it should and a barrier collapsed. Again, the lack of vigilant monitoring caused a sluggish reaction and
response when the crush occurred. The small size and number o f gates to the track retarded rescue efforts. So.
in the initial stages, did lack o f leadership.

  268. The need to open gate C was due to dangerous congestion at the turnstiles. That occurred because, as
both Club and police should have realised, me turnstile area could not easily cope with the large numbers
demanded o f it unless they arrived steadily over a ienginy period. The Operational Order and police tactics on
the day failed to provide for controlling a concentrated arrival o f large numbers should that occur in a short
period. That it might so occur was foreseeable and it did. The presence o f an unruly minority who had drunk
too much aggravated the problem. So did the Club's confused and inadequate signs and ticketing.
                                      T H E FA’s CHOICE O F G R O U N D

    269. The FA were strongly criticised by the Football Supporters’ Association and others for having
im posed the Hillsborough venue on Liverpool for a second year running. The Liverpool supporters had to
travel much further to Sheffield than their Nottingham ri vals. The police required that if the match was to be at
Hillsborough at all. Liverpool would have to have the west and north side accommodation. The disadvantages
o f that and the disparate numbers o f home supporters o f the two clubs have already been set out. Liverpool had
had to knuckle under to the arrangement in ! 988. They resented having it imposed in 1989. To hold the match
at Old Trafford would have been a perfectly good and acceptable alternative. Indeed, the FA nominated Old
Trafford as the venue for the replay should there be a draw at Hillsborough.

   2 70. Mr Kelly, the FA's Chief Executive, sought to give reasons for preferring Hillsborough, but the only one
which seemed to have any validity was that the 1988 match had been considered a successfully managed event.
He admitted that a telephone call from the Chief Executive o f the Liverpool Club protesting and putting
Liverpool’s case had not been mentioned to the FA committee which finally decided the venue. Mr Kelly
frankly conceded that “there was an element o f unfairness" to Liverpool in choosing Hillsborough for a second
tim e. I think the decision was ill-considered. No doubt in future the FA will be more sensitive and responsive
to reasonable representations,

  271. However, it was not suggested that the choice of venue was causative o f this disaster. The only basis o r
which that could be said would be that, because o f its layout, the Leppings Lane end was incapable o f being
successfully policed for this semi-final. 1 do not believe that ,to be so.
                                                  CHAPTER 18

                                                     POLICE

 Choice of Ends by the Police
    272. There was much bitterness amongst Liverpool supporters that they had to make do again for the
 second year with the Leppings Lane end. But. cogent as their compiaints were, they amounted to reasons for
 choosing a different ground altogether. Given Hillsborough as the venue. I think the police were right to
 allocate the sections o f the ground as they did. The direction of arrival and the need for segregation made it
 sensible and to reverse the 1988 arrangements would have m ade for confusion. As with choice o f venue. I do
 not consider choice o f ends was causative o f the aisaster. Had it been reversed, the disaster could well have
 occurred in a similar manner but to Nottingham supporters.

 Police Planning
   273. T he Operational Order for 1989 left much unsaid. Apart from the lack o f any provision for late or
 congested arrivals, or any provision for the avoidance o f overcrowding on the terraces, there was a number o f
 other omissions. For example, there was no specific deployment o f officers to man the perimeter gates. The
 Order did not detail the duties o f the mounted officers deployed at the Leppings Lane entrance, who included
 Liverpool officers to assist in marshalling their own fans. The duties o f Superintendents (especially Mr
 Greenwood and Mr Marshall) were not defined so as to acmeve clarity and efficiency. By an oversight, the
 provision requiring mobile (Tango) patrols to assist the emergency services was omitted from the text.

    274. The 1988 Order was never substantially reviewed save 10 reduce the number o f officers deployed in
 shopping areas and to emphasise in capital letters the embargo on fans having access to the pitch. Satisfaction
 with the 1988 event led to complacency. That some tnought the pens overfull in 1988 and that the tunnel was
 closed o ff on that occasion did not figure in or influence the pian for 1989.

   275. Mr Duckenfield was promoted and put in charge o f F Division only 21 days before this semi-final. The
pre-planning was already in progress under Mr Mole who had been in command both in 1987 and in 1988. It
might have been wiser to have left Mr Mole in charge o f this operation. On the other hand, it is quite
understandable that Mr Duckenfield should have been expected to take command o f events in his Division
from the date o f his promotion. In view o f his lack o f experience at Hillsborough and o f a semi-final match,
however, it was imperative that he be fully briefed and that he should also brief himself.

   276. He was not informed o f the crushing incident in 1981 nor did he make inquiries which would have
revealed it. He did not know the arrangement as between Club and police for monitoring the Leppings Lane
terraces. He did not visit and tour the ground before approving the Operational Order. Although he attended a
match on 2 April, there was only a small crowd present and he left control o f the game to the Superintendents.

Policing on the Day
  277. O ne o f the regrettable features o f the football scene as it has developed is the enormous expenditure o f
money, tim e and effort in employing large numoers o f poiice all over the country to guard against the son o f
disorder and misbehaviour which have become endemic. Poiice management o f a game o f football has become
a military operation. The problems faced and the responses received must be disheanening and may have
tended to harden police attitudes to supporters m general.

  278. It is fair to state that over many years the South Yorkshire Police nave given excellent service to the
public. They have handled crowd problems sensitively and successfully at a large number o f football games
including major matches, during strikes in tne coai industry and the steel industry, and in other contexts.
Unfonunatelv. their policing on 15 April broke down in the ways already described and. although there were
other causes, the main reason for the disaster was tne failure ot policc control.

   279. In all some 65 police officers gave oral evidence at tne Inquiry. Sadly 1 must repon that for the most
part the quality o f their evidence was in inverse proportion to their rank. There were many young Constables
who as witnesses were alen. intelligent and open. Un the aay. tney and many others strove heroically in ghastly
circumstances aggravated by hostility to rescue and succour victims. They inspired confidence and hope.

  2 80. By contrast, with some notable exceptions, liu* senior officers in command were defensive and evasive
witnesses. Their feelings o f grief and sorrow were onvious and genuine. No doubt those feelings were
intensified by the knowledge that such a disaster nad occurrea under :r.eir management. But. neither tneir
handling o f problems on the day nor their account o f it in evidence sm w ed the qualities o f leadership to be
expected o f their rank.
   281. Mr Duckenfield leant heavily on Mr Murray's experience. Between them they misjudged the build-up
at the turnstiles and did little about it until they received Mr Marshall's request to open the gate. They did n o t,
for example, check the turnstile figures available from Club control or check with Tango units as to the
numbers still to come. They did not alert Mr Greenwood to the situation at the fringe o f his area o f command.
They gave no instructions as to the management o f the crowd at Leppings Lane. Inflexibly they declined to
postpone kick-off.

  282. When Mr Marshall's request came. Mr Duckenfield's capacity to take decisions and give orders
seem ed to collapse. Having sanctioned, at last, the opening o f the gates, he failed to give necessary
consequential orders or to exert any control when the disaster occurred. He misinterpreted the emergence o f
fans from pens 3 and 4, When he was unsure o f the problem, he sent others down to “assess the situation*'
rather than descend to see for himself. He gave no information to the crowd.

   283. Most surprisingly, he gave Mr K.elly and others to think that there had,been an inrush due to Liverpool
fans forcing open a gate. This was not only untruthful. It set off a widely reported allegation against the
supporters which caused grave offence and distress. It revived against football fans, and especially those from
Liverpool, accusations o f hooliganism which caused reaction not only nationwide but from Europe too. I can
only assume that Mr Duckenfield's lack o f candour on this occasion was out o f character, He said his reason for
not telling the truth was that if the crowd became aware o f it there might be a very hostile reaction and this
might impede rescue work. He did not wish to divulge what had happened until he had spoken to a senior
officer. However, reluctance to tell Mr Kelly the truth did not require that he be told a falsehood. Moreover,
although Assistant Chief Constable Jackson was at hand. Mr Duckenfield did not disclose the truth to him
until much later.

  284. The likeliest explanation o f Mr Duckenfield's conduct is that he simply could not face the enormity o f
the decision to open the gates and all that flowed therefrom. That would explain what he said to Mr Kelly, wha t
he did not say to Mr Jackson, his aversion to addressing the crowd and his failure to take effective control of the
disaster situation. He froze.

T he Poiice Case at the Inquiry
  285. It is a m atterof regret that at the hearing, and in their submissions, the South Yorkshire Police were noi
prepared to concede they were in any respect at fault in what occurred. Mr Duckenfield. under pressure o f
cross-examination, apologised for blaming the Liverpool fans for causing the deaths. But. that apan. the police
case was to blame the fans for being iateand drunk, and to blame the Club for failing to monitor the pens. It was
argued that the fatal crush was not caused by the influx through gate C but was due to barrier 124a being
defective. Such an unrealistic approach gives cause for anxiety as to whether lessons have been learnt, it would
have been more seemly and encouraging for the future if responsibility had been faced.
                                                      CHAPTER 19

                             THE CITY COUNCIL AND THE SAFETY’CERTIFICATE

        286. The performance by the City Council o f its duties in regard to the Safety Cenificate was inefficient and
     dilatory. The failure to revise or amend the cenificate over the period o f three years preceding this disaster,
     despite important changes in the layout o f the ground, was a serious breach o f duty. There were, as a result, no
     fixed capacities for the pens. The cenificate took no account of the 1981 and 1985 alterations to the ground.

       287. A number o f breaches o f Green Guide standards were permitted and persisted f^ th e spacing o f the
     crush barriers, the width o f perimeter gates and the gradient in th „■ tunnel (1 in 6 as against the Green Guide
     maximum o f 1 in 10).

       288; The Advisory Group lacked a proper structure: its procedure was. casual and unbusinesslike. Its
     accountability to the General Purposes Panel was ill-defined. D ecisions were taken informally and too much
     was left to Mr Bownes. In panicular. the decision to remove barrier 144 was not referred to the Panel and ought
     not to have been made.




C)




                                                               II
                                                   CHAPTER 20

                                       THE CLUB AND DR EASTWOOD

   2 89. It should be recorded that in general the Club has over the years adopted a responsible and
conscientious approach to its responsibilities. It retained the services o f Dr Eastwood as consultant engineer
a nd abided by his advice. For his part. Dr Eastwood is skilled and experienced in this field, as already
indicated, and he sought I have no doubt to act efficiently and professionally in his advice and practical work.
T h e Club also retained Mr Lock who had acquired great experience and knowledge o f Hillsborough during his
police service. A number o f witnesses described Hillsborough as a very good ground, “one o f the best in the
country". The poiice agreed that relations between them and the Club were good. Over the last four years, the
Club had spent some £ 1'h million on ground improvements.

  2 90. Nevertheless, there are a number o f respects in which failure by the Club contributed to this disaster.
They were responsible as occupiers and in vitors for the layout and structure o f the ground. The Leppings Lane
end was unsatisfactory and ill-suited to admit the numbers invited, for reasons already spelt out. The Club was
aware o f these problems and discussed solving them in various ways between 1981 and 1986. in the result,
there remained the same number o f turnstiles, and the same problems outside and inside them. The plan for
this semi-final, involving as it did the loss o f 12 turnstiles tor the nonh stand and large numbers to be fed in
from Leppings Lane, was one agreed between the Club and the police. The Club knew best what rate of
adm ission the turnstiles could manage and ought to have alened the police to the risks o f the turnstiles being
swamped.

   291. The alterations inside the turnstiles and on the terraces clearly affected capacity, but no specific
allowance was made for them. In that respect, both Dr Eastwood and the Club should have taken a more
positive approach. Either a scheme such as one o f those Dr Eastwood put forward should have been adopted
giving more turnstiles and total separation o f areas or at the very least the capacity o f the new pens and o f the
terraces as a whole should have been treated more cautiously. The police view in 1981 that 10.100 was too high
a figure was known to the Club (although Dr Eastwood says not to him ). Vet. despite that and the sub-division
into pens, the figure remained.

   2 9 2 . Although the police had assumed responsibility for monitoring the pens, the Club had a duty to its
visitors and the Club's officials ought to have alened the pol ice to the grossly uneven distribution o f fans on the
terraces. The Club operated and read the ciosed circuit television and the computer totaliser. Liaison between
Club and police on the day failed to alen the latter to the number o f Liverpool supporters still to come. The
onus here was on the Club as well as on the police.

  2 9 3 . The removal o f barrier 144 was the responsibility o f the Club although it clearly acted on the advice o f
Dr Eastwood and the Advisory Group which m this instance was misguided.

  2 9 4 . Likewise, the breaches o f the Green G uide were matters which the Club should have appreciated and
remedied.

    2 95. Lastly, as already indicated, the poor signposting on the concourse tended to produce under-filling of
the w in g pens and over-filling o f pens 3 and 4. Poor signposting outside the turnstiles and the unhelpful format
o f the tickets also led to confusion aggravating the buiid-up in the turnstile area.
                                                 CHAPTER 21

                                FIRST AID AND EMERGENCY SERVICES

No Fault by the Emergency Services
   296. 1 say at the outset of this chapter that no valid criticism can be made of the response by the St John
A m bulance Brigade, by SYMAS or by the fire brigade on i 5 April. Indeed, no represented party ventured any
criticism o f them. The only attack on SYMAS came from two Liverpool doctors. One claimed that ambulances
did not arrive swiftly or with sufficient equipment and that there was a lack of triage. He was proved to be
wrong in all three respects. Unfortunately he had seen fit to go on television on 15 April when he said more
lives could have been saved if staff and equipm ent had arrived earlier. Apart from being proved wrong in fact
as to the tim es o f arrival o f ambulances, he conceded in evidence that it was not possible to say whether lives
could have been saved. His comments on television were irresponsible. The other doctor complained o f the
absence o f defibrillators; 1 am satisfiedon overwhelming evidence that to attempt to use a defibrillator on the
pitch with people milling about would have been highly dangerous owing to the risk o f injury from the electric
charge.

  297. I find that all three o f the emergency services named above responded promptly when alened. that
they brought appropnate equipment and that their personnel operated efficiently.

  298. It would be unreasonable to expect, at any sports stadium, medical facilities capable o f dealing with a
major disaster such as occurred. To have in advance at the ground, oxygen, resuscitators. stretchers, other
equipm ent and medical staff sufficient to deal with over 100 casualties is not practicable.

  299. What is required is a basic level o f provision for first aid. for professional medical attention and for
am bulance attendance, together with a system o f co-ordination with the emergency services which will bring
them to the scene swiftly in whatever numbers are required. What will amount to an appropriate basic
provision for the futures? the equipment in a first aid room, requires expen evaluation and advice.

   300. On the day. there was no clear understanding between the Club and Dr Purcell as to his role. He
believed he was primarily there to attend to the players-; The Club regarded him aiso as the "physician available
to attend at the first aid room if required", as laid down in the Safety Cenificate.

  301. There was insufficiently close co-operation between the poiice and the emergency services. It is clear
that SY M A S and the fire brigade should have been called earlier than they were. However, in view o f the nature
and extent o f the crushing, the time when police rescue began and the pathetically shon period for which those
unable to breathe could survive, it is improbable that quicker recourse to the emergency services would have
saved m ore lives.

    302. Finally, there was evidence that an advem sing board had to be knocked down at the nonh-east corner
o f ihe ground to allow an ambulance onto the pitch and that at the top o f the ramp leading to the pitch the
access for ambulances was inadequate. There was aiso evidence that the pre-match arrangement for
am bulances to use the two gates from Penistone Road at the nonh-east end o f the ground as in and out routes
was frustrated bv the presence o f vehicles lust inside the ground. In the event, none o f these matters affected
operations. The hoarding was quickly knocked down. The difficult access to the ramp was negotiated and
am bulances used one entrance satisfactorily by backing out when loaded.
                                              CHAPTER 22

                                         COMMUNICATIONS

   303.      One problem which impeded police control and the gathering o f intelligence was the intermittent
failure o f communication by radio. There was the period o f two or three minutes when the control room was
out o f radio contact. Even when that was remedied, it was only by using a hand set in the control room. This
meant that control could not override any other messages. No effective radio communication seems to have
reached control from the perimeter track at the relevant time. Mr Greenwood s request for the match to be
stopped and various messages from Constables reporting the distress in the pens did not register. Likewise,
communication from Leppings Lane to control was unreliable. Undoubtedly these breakdowns made it more
difficult for those in command to make proper assessments and exercise effective command.
                         PART IV - INTERIM RECOMMENDATIONS
                                       CHAPTER 23 - INTRODUCTION

 Limited Objectives
   304. It is important to stress the limited objectives o f the interim recommendations I can make in this
 Report. My purpose is to propose instant measures capable o f being implemented forthwith and where
 possible before the commencement o f the 1989/199U season. They are designed to prevent overcrowding and
 crushing on terraces in the short term and to improve safety procedures. They do not and cannot meet all the
 problems or address all the issues o f post-Hillsborough football. Wider issues such as membership schemes,
 identity cards, all-seater stadia, super-stadia and long term recommendations fall to be considered in m y Final
 Report. So do a number o f other specific matters such as a comprehensive review o f the Green G uide, the
 problem, ofexcessive pre-match drinking, fans without tickets and ticket touts. I mention these matters lest it
 be thought 1 have decided no recommendations need be made concerning them. T have nor; B w before
 deciding what if any recommendations to make about tnese and other matters, more evidence and study is
 required.

   305. Accordingly, the main thrust o f these interim recommendations, as a holding exercise, is to reduce
 numbers on the terraces, to increase vigilance and to achieve a proper balance in crowd control between
 prevention o f disorder and maintenance oi'safety.


 Perimeter Fences
    306. It would be impractical and unwise to recommend works o f construction or radical structural changes
 now. before completing the extensive study and consultation which will form stage two of this Inquiry. Hast>
 interim recommendations of that kind might w ell prove to be ill-.iudged after further study and require to be
 changed in a matter o f months.

   307. In particular. 1 do not at this stage make any recommendation as to removing perimeter fences or
replacingthem with structures o f different design. Understandably, there wasa wave o f popular feeling against
such fences in the immediate attermatn o f Hillsborough. The horrifying spectacle of people being crushed
against the fencing focussed blame for the disaster on the fences themselves. There were pleas to dismantle
them and em otive references to the fans being treated iike "cagca animals". Some clubs removed their fencing
straightaway. It was therefore very tempting to consider at an early stage making a recommendation that the
fences should be removed. 1 confess to being so ternmed.

  308. Regrettably, only a month after Hillsborougn. there- were incidents which showed that violence and
hooliganism are still liable to erupt at footbali grounds. On 13 May at Selhurst Park. Birmingham City
supporters invaded the pitch and fought with supporters o f the home club. Crystal Palace. Five police officers
and 16 supporters were iniured and required treatment at a iocal hosmtal. On the same day at a match between
Bristol City and Sheffield I ;nited. spectators spilt onto the pitch and there was fighting on the terraces. At the
Cup Final between Liverpool and Everton on 2u May there was a pitch invasion, albeit a comparative!;,
benign one.

  309. Even the Football Supporters’ Association i FSAi felt it neccssary to say in their final submission.

       •‘With some reservations, the FSA accept that perimeter fences arc necessary for crowd control."

   3 10. Bearing in mind those matters, and the neeo to consider lurtncr expert evidence. 1 have decided that n
would be unwise and premature ror me io make an;, recommendations now eitncr to remove or to preserve or
to alterthe structure ot perimeter fences. 1 shall make recommendations about tncm in my Final Report.

   311. For the present. I would emphasise that, aitnougn the lencing prevented escape, the real cause o f the
Hillsborough disaster was overcrowding and it is against tnat dancer tnat m> interim recommendations arc
primarily directed. Whilsi declining to recommend tne removal ot tne fences. 1 do consider that the gates to the
pitch should be kept open whilst tne terraces are occupied. This will have. 1 nope, three beneficial effects.
( obviously, an open gate is a more read\ escape rouie than one which nas to be locked, Secondly, tne sight of
open gates will be reassuring to spectators on the terraces. Thirdlv m e exisience ot gaps in the fencing b>
reason o f the open gates will concentrate me minds o: poiky officers or stewards on the track to the need for
careful m onitoring of those on the terraces
  312. It will of course be necessary to have a police presence sufficient to prevent pitch invasion for improper
reasons through the open gates. However. 1am encouraged to think that this is not an insuperable problem by
the fact that, for example at Anfield. Liverpool's ground, there were no gates in the perimeter fencing before it
was taken down. There were instead gaps or “access points" as they are called in the Green Guide (paragraph
215). Their existence did not. so far as 1 am aware, prevent the authorities from maintaining order. Also, the
gates were open throughout the replay of this ill-fated semi-final at Old Trafford on 7 May 1989.

Reduced Numbers
   313. In the assessment of figures for capacity, the criteria in Chapter 16 of the Green Guide were not at
Hillsborough, and may not elsewhere, have been applied with sufficient rigour. Therefore, in addition to
reminding and enjoining local authorities and clubs 10 make all necessary deductions when assessing the
figure for maximum capacity in accordance with the Green Guide. 1 recommend reducing that figure by a
further 1'5% as an interim measure;

Safety Certificate
  314. The Safety Certificate procedure should, if it is properly administered and enforced, go far towards
achieving crowd safety. Whether it succeeds depends upon the vigilance and commitment of the local
authority issuing the Certificate. I do not know whether the poor performance of the local authority at
Hillsborough was typical. Arguments have been put to me suggesting the need for some national oversight or
inspection of local authority certification procedures. This raises complex issues which 1shall want to consider
further at stage,two of the Inquiry. For the present. 1 make recommendations as to the content of Safety
Certificates and arrangements for issuing, monitoring, enforcing, reviewing, amending and renewing them.
                                 CHAPTER 24 - T H E R EC O M M EN D A TIO N S

   315. The recommendations which follow are the minimum necessary to ensure that existing football
grounds can for the present be safely used, based upon the evidence which 1 have heard at Sheffield and other
information I have received. They complement the recommendations which Mr Justice Popplewell set out
after his inquiry at Bradford.

   316. Those which are asterisked should be earned out before the ] 989/90 season starts. The rest should be
started forthwith and completed as soon as possible.

Maximum Capacities for Terraces
★   1. Where a viewing terrace is divided into pens or areas which are self-contained, the Safety Certificate
  shouldspecifythemaximum number of spectators to be admitted to each such pen or area.

     A pen or area is to be deemed ’‘self-contained” notwithstanding that it has a gate or gates affording access to
     another pen or area and whether such gate or gates be open or shut.

★     2. Each figure for maximum capacity should be assessed in accordance with Chapter 16 of the Green
     Guide (“the Green Guide figure” ) subject to the fol lowing quaiifications:-

     (a) in arriving at “the Green Guide figure”, proper and realistic allowance must be made for all factors
         which should reduce the permissible density in accordance with the range of maximum figures specified
         in paragraphs 221 and 222 of the Green Guide:

     (b) after assessing “the Green Guide figure", a deduction of 15% should be made to improve the safety
         margin.

★      3. Arrangements should be made:-

     (a) to limit the number of spectators enterine eacn self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity
         figure assessed in accordance with Recommendation 2 above either electronically, mechanically, by a
         ticketing arrangement, by counting or otherwise, and

     (b) to close off further access to such pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.


Filling and Monitoring Terraces
★     4. There should be a written agreement between the club and the poiice setting out their respective
    responsibilities for crowd safety and control and in particular for the filling of each self-contained pen or
    other terraced area and the monitoring of spectators in each such pen or area to avoid overcrowding. Any
    variation of the aereement in respect of an individual match should be agreed in writing in advance.

★     5. At each match, there should be on the perimeter track, for each self-contained pen or other terraced
     area, a steward (if the club is monitoring that area) or a poiice officer (if the police are monitoring it) whose
     sole duty is to check crowd conditions in that area for possible overcrowding or distress throughout the
     period the area is occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed should be in addition to any other steward
     or poiice presence. He should have ready access to the poiice officer authorised under Recommendation 9
     below, and by radio to the control room.


Fences and Gates
     6. All poiice officers and stewards with duties in relation to the terraced areas and especially those with
   duties under Recommendation 5 above, should be fully briefed and trained with regard to the recognition of
   crowd densities, to the recognition of signs of distress and to crowd dynamics. Training should include
   demonstrations at the ground and photographs, designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise
   different crowd densities.

*•     ?. All gates in radiai or perimeter fences of pens or other self-contained areas should be painted in a
     different colour from the rest of the fence and marked “Emergency Exit".
 *     8. Where there are perimeter fences, aii pates to the pitch should be kept fuiiv open during the period
      when spectators are on the terrace.

 *      9. There should be in respect of each gate in a perimeter fence (or group of gates if they are dose together)
     a poiice officer authorised to decide whether or not to aiiow spectators through a gate to relieve overcrowd ing.
     The officer so authorised in respect of each gate should be identified for each match and known to be so by ai 1
     stewards and poiice officers in that vicinity. He should be able to make radio contact with the control room
     either himself or via an officer close at hand.

 *      10. Suitable and sufficient cutting equipment should be provided by the club at each ground where there
     are perimeter fences to permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release numbers of spectators if
     necessary. Agreement should be reached as to whether the equipment should be used by poiice. the fire
     brigade or stewards. Whoever is to use it should be trained to do so. Whether to use it should be a decis ion of a
     nominated senior police officer at thegrouncL


 Crush Barriers
 *     11. Aii crush barriers should be visually inspected immediately for signs of corrosion. Any barrier found
    to be affected by a significant degree of corrosion should be repaired or replaced.

*       12. The layout of barriers in each pen or terraced area should be reviewed immediately to ensure that it
     complies with the criteria contained in Chapter 9 of the Green Guide. If it does not. the assessment of the
     maximum capacity figure for that pen or terraced area, in accordance with Recommendation 2 above, should
     reflect the fact.


Safety Certificates
      13. There should be an immediate review of each Safety Certificate by the responsible local authority,
    which should consult the club in respect of which the Certificate is issued, the poiice. the fire service, the
   ambulance service and the building authority:. Such a review should include an inspection of the stadium. Its
   object should be to ensure that the operative conditions of the Certificate are complied with and to add or
   substitute any condition shown to be necessary as a matter of urgency following the findings and
    recommendations in this report.

       14. Any local authority within whose area there exists a sports stadium designated under the 1975 Act for
     which no Safety Certificate has yet been issued should proceed forthwith to remedy the situation.

       15. Every Safety Certificate should be reviewed by the local authority at least once annually and each
     Certificate should require to be renewed annually.


        16. Each local authority should review its arrangements for issuing, monitoring, enforcing, reviewing,
     amending and renewing Safety Certificates. Such review should require that there exists or is provided an
     accountable administrative structure whereby the functions of the local authority are regularly and
     effectively supervised by senior officers and elected members and decisions are properly taken in accordance
     with the local authority's rules.

        17. To assist the local authority in exercising its functions, it should set up an Advisory Group consisting
     of appropriate members of its own staff, representatives of the poiice. of the fire and ambulance services. «f
     the building authority, of the club and of a recognised supporters* club. The Advisory Group's terms of
     reference should encompass aii matters concerned with crowd safety and should require regular visits to the
     ground and attendance at matches. The Advisory Group should have a chairman from the local authority,
     and an effective procedure. Its resolutions should be recorded and it should be required to produce regular
     written reports for consideration by the local authorin.


Duties of each Football Club
★    18. Each turnstile should be inspected and its potential rate of flow measured. Thereafter, regular
   inspections should be made to ensure that each turnstile remains capable of admitting spectators at the rate
   anticipated.
        ★      19. The correlation between each viewing area in the stadium and the turnstiles serving it should be such
             as to ensure that all the spectators intended to be admitted to that viewing area can pass through the
             turnstiles within one hour. If that cannot be done, the capacity of that viewing area should be reduced
             accordingly.

        ★      20. Turnstiles should be closed when the permitted capacity of the area served by them is about to be
             reached and arrangements should be made to ensure quick and effective communication with turnstile
             operators for this purpose.

               21. Closed circuit television should be so installed as to enable crowd densities outside the ground, within
             concourse areas and in pens and other standing areas, to be monitored before and throughout a match.

        ★      22. All signposting for spectators both outside and inside the ground should be comprehensively
             reviewed. It should, in relation to the arrangements for each match, be jinambiguous. eye-catching, simple
             and clear and should be designed to ensure the rapid movement of spectators to their appropriate viewing
             area.

        ★      23. Information on tickets should be unambieuous. simpie and clear and should correlate absolutely with
             the information provided in respect of each match both outside and inside the ground. Retained ticket stubs
             should contain information necessary to guide spectators once inside the ground.
o       ★    24. Information on tickets requesting spectators to be in position by a particular time should be reviewed
            by clubs in conjunction with the poiice to ensure that it corresponds with the planned arrangements for
            admitting spectators to the ground.

              25. Each club should consult with a recognised supporters' club as to the provision of pre-match
            entertainment aimed at attracting spectators to the ground in good time.


    Police Planning
    ★    26. The Chief Constable of each poiice force in whose area there is one designated stadium or more
        should nominate a chief officer to liaise with the management of each football club and local authority
        concerned in respect of the safety and control ot crowds.

    ★         27. The Operational Order for each match at a designated stadium and the pre-match briefing of ail
            officers on duty there should alert such officers to the importance of preventing any overcrowding and. if any
            is detected, of taking appropriate steps to remedy it.

    ★         28. The Operational Order for each match at a designated stadium should enable the poiice to cope with
            any foreseeable pattern in the arrival of spectators at a match and in their departure. It should provide for

o   ★
            sufficient reserves to enable rapid deployment of officers to be made at any point inside or outside the ground.

              29. The option to postpone kick-off should be in the discretion of the officer in command at the ground.
            Crowd safety should be the paramount consideration in deciding whether to exercise it.

               30. There should be available in the poiice control room the results of all closed circuit television
            monitoring outside and inside the ground and the record of an v electronic or mechanical counting of numbers
            at turnstiles or of numbers admitted to any area oi tne ground. Officers in the control room should be skilled
            in the interpretation and use of these data.


    Communications
        31.      There should be sufficient operators in tne Doiice control room to enable all radio transmissions to be
      received, evaluated and answered. The radio svstem should he such as to give operators in the control room
      priority over, and the capacity to override, otners usinc the same channel. Additional channels should be
      used, where necessary, to prevent o\ercrowaini> of the airwaves. Consideration should be given to
      sound-proofing the control room against excessive crowd noise.




                                                                    ■7 9
      32. To complement radio communications, there should be a completely separate system of land lines
    with telephone links between the control room and key points at the ground.

      33. Within the control room, there should be a public address system to communicate with individual
    areas outside and inside the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole ground, important
    announcements should be preceded by a loud signal to catch the attention ot' the crowd despite a high level of
    noise in the ground. This arrangement should be prominently advertised on every programme sold for every
    match.
      34. Use should be made where possible of illuminated advertising boards to address the crowd.
    Consideration should aiso be given to the use by police officers of a simple code of hand signals to indicate t«
    the control room the existence of certain emergencies or requirements.

Co-ordination of Emergency Services
★    35. The police, fire and ambulance services should maintain through senior nominated officers regular
   liaison concerning crowd safety at each stadium.
★     36. Before each match at a designated stadium, the police should ensure that the fire service and
    ambulance service are given full details about tne event, including its venue, its timing, the number of
    spectators expected, their likely routes of entry and exit, and any anticipated or potential difficulties
    concerning the control or movement of the crowd. Such details should be readily available in the control
    rooms of each of the emergency services.
★     37. Contingency plans for the arrival at each desienated stadium of emergency vehicles from all three
    services should be reviewed. They should include routes of access, rendezvous points, and accessibility
    within the ground itself.                                                     ~
★     38. Police officers posted at the entrances to the ground should be briefed as to the contingency plans for
    the arrival of emergency services and should be informed when such services are called as to where and why
    they are required.

First Aid. Medical Facilities and Ambulances
★    39. There should be at each stadium at each match at least one trained first aider per 1.000 spectators. The
    club should have the responsibility for securing such attendance.
      40. There should be at each stadium one or more first aid rooms. The number of such rooms and the
    equipment to be maintained within them should be specified by the local authority' after taking professional
    medical advice and should be made a requirement of any Safety Certificate.
★    41. The club should employ a medical practitioner to be present at each match and available to deal with
    any medical exigency at the ground. He should be trained and competent in advanced first aid. He should be
    present at the ground at least an hour before kick-off and should remain until half an hour after the end of the
    match. His whereabouts should be known to those in the poiice control room and he should be immediately
    contactable.
★     42. At least one fully equipped ambulance from the appropriate ambulance authority should be in
    attendance at all matches with an expected crowd of 5.000 or more.
      43. The number of ambulances to be in attendance for matches where larger crowds are expected should
    be specified by the local authority after consultation with the ambulance service and should be made a
    requirement of the Safety Certificate.
APPENDICES
                                                                                                                                                                              Appendix 1:

                                                                                                                                                                              Sheffield W ednesday Football Club
                                                                                                                                                                              Hillsborough Ground.




                                                                                                              G y m n a s iu m




                                                                                                                                                           Lighting
                                                                         Lighting                                                      Police              T cw er
                                                                                                                 First Aid             Room
                                                                         Tow er                                  Room

                                                                                                        N O R T H STAND
                                                    Access
                                \ G ate A
                                                                                                                                                                      CCTV'


                          runsiiesG

                   V n
                                  ?       Porta -
                                  [Gale /C ab-n
                      Turnstiles -vB
                           \ A-Qj^                                           It4
                                             Gate            Tunnel
                   ,y \          .G ate C




                                                                                                                      ~   1~
                                                                                                                                                        Lighting
                                                                                                                                                        Tdver



                                                              Lighting             Police           CCTV              CCTV
                                                              Tower                Control
                                                                                                         SO U TH STAND
                                                                                                                                                nn m_
                                                                                             i-i _i^i                                           30*32


                                                                                                               ‘Directors Entrance J


                                                                                                             Lighting'
                                                                                                             Tower
SCALE
                          5 0m etres

        50   100     150 leel
                                                              IngkurfC uninjboh
**
     Q
     Z>
1—




          Appendix V   1 lie m-s( sfnnd niul Ic i r m t s .
A ppendix 2:
Leppings Lane: the perimeter gates and turnstiles.




                                             R U ,
                                                                      o                                                        o                                     A ppendix 4:




                              W E S T ST AN D


                                                                               BARRIERI



                                                                                    1   **'                                                           \     \
                                                         BARRIER   No 124a




S O U TH STANDI                                                                                                                                                 NORTH STAND




                  Barriers... Pre 1979                     1981 - 2 radial fences             • • • • 1985 - Removal of some   1986 - Removal of Barrier
                                                                                                             posts and rails          No. 144 and $ome on
                  1979....Additional barriers              1985 - 2 more radial fences                                                S West Terrace




             Arrangement of Barriers at West Terrace
             PreDared bv Tnp Health & Saieiv c».ecuiw-
Appendix 5:   I lie wesl terraces at 2.5‘J p.m.
                                                   APPENDIX 6

                                             SPECIFIC INCIDENTS

M r Hicks' Evidence
   1. Mr and Mrs Hicks' two daughters died in the disaster. They had arrived early en famille but had tickets
for different sections. The two daughters had standing tickets: they went into pen 3. Mrs Hicks had a seat in the
north stand. Mr Hicks took up a standing position in pen 1just below and to the west o f the police box at about
2.15 pm From there, he had a view o f the centre pens. He kept an eye on them as they filled up since he knew his
daughters to be there.

  2. His evidence was that by 2.50 pm he couid see people were in distress. At about 2.55 pm he and others
called to a senior poiice officer at the top of the steps to the control box to draw his attention to the crushing. Mr
Hicks was only about 10 feet from the officer. He described him as wearing a flat cap with gold or silver braid
and a light coloured anorak. Mr Hicks believed he was the officer who stopped the match. Mr Greenwood, who
did stop the match, was certainly not wearing a light coloured anorak, as can clearly be seen on the video.

  3. Mr Hicks says that he and others shouted several tim es to this officer in attempts to alert him to the
distress in the pens. There was no reaction although Mr Hicks believes the officer must have been in earshot.

   4. That officer descended from the steps and two cameramen whom Mr Hicks believed were from
television came and appeared to direct their cameras towards the pens. Another senior officer appeared two
steps down from the platform. He was a stocky figure: he also wore a flat cap but with black braid. Mr Hicks
says that he and two or three others tried several times to capture this officer s attention without success. Then
Mr Hicks savs he shouted “For Christ’s sake! Can't you see w hat’s going on? We can. and you have cameras". The
officer is said to have replied dismissively "Shut your fucking prattle".

  5. W hen the disaster occurred the two Hicks girls were crushed. Victoria was put in an ambulance and Mr
Hicks accompanied her to hospital where she was found to be dead. Sarah died at the ground.

   6. Mr Hicks was an impressive witness and. despite his grievous loss, remarkably stoical. He gave his
evidence clearly and without rancour. He was certainly mistaken about Mr Greenwood being one o f those on
the steps and it has not been possible to identify either officer from Mr Hicks' descriptions. He may well also
have been imprecise as to timings. Nevertheless. I see no reason to doubt that what he described did occur in
relation to two officers. As Mr Hicks generously said himself, the dismissive abuse from the second officer
(although reprehensible) may have been due to his being preoccupied with trying to see what was happening at
pens 3 and 4 around kick-off time.

The Goalkeeper and Gate 4
   7. Mr Bambrock. a Liverpool supporter, said he went through the tunnel. He would have liked to have
turned back when he saw how crowded the pens were. He went with his father and 13 year old brother Stephen
towards the front o f pen 4. He saw the teams come onto the pitch. Conditions at the front were, he said, alright
until about 2 minutes to 3. Then the pressure in the pen increased and he and his father became separated. His
feet cam e off the ground. He shouted to police officers through the fence to get them out and help them. The
police did not react. The Liverpool goalkeeper. Bruce Grobbelaar. spoke to a policeman on the track. The gate
was then opened by a blonde policewoman and about 25 to 30 people went through it. They included the
witness's father and his brother Stephen who had a broken arm. A police Constable shut the gate. It was then
reopened by the same policewoman, the wuness thought, and he got out.

  8. Mr Eccleston. a male nurse and an impressive witness, was sitting in the north stand. He noticed pens 3
and 4 were full and realised something was wrong when fans started coming over the perimeter fence but did
not invade the pi tch. He said the Liverpool goalkeeper appeared to notice this too.

  9. Mr Grobbelaar was out o f the country during the Inquiry and was therefore not called. However, he
m ade a statement which was put in as his evidence, in the course o f it he said:-

  “K ick-off happened and we got into our stride pretty quickly - we forced a com er pretty early on and the ball
  cam e down to my end - I rolled it out to the full back once and play went on until Peter Beardsley hit the
  crossbar o f the Nottingham Forest goal from a comer and came back into play. 1 remember just after that
  there w«re shouts and screams from the crowd just behind me. it was different: not the ordinary crowd noise
  and 1 turned around to look. What amazed me first was the concentration and squash o f fans in th e centre
 section, the end areas still had plenty o f space, li was only then 1 became conscious that the crowd was
 squashing forward and wasn’t able to go sideways and that's when 1 noticed the fencing alongside them
  hnlriing them in. 1 saw fans being pulled up into the stand above the terraces. 1 saw fans climbing over into the
 em pty areas at the side and 1 saw fans climbing out over the from onto the pitch which was particularly
 difficult because o f the spikes on the top o f the fencing but they were getting out. '
     “Play was still going on and 1 was in a terrible position trying to concentrate on play and having my
 attention taken by what was happening behind me. The ball came down to our end and Nottingham Forest
 w on a corner, it was taken and we cleared our box area and as play was going forward over the centre line I
 heard a shout. ‘Bruce - please help' - a desperate shout from a fan squashed up against the fencing to the
 right o f my goal as I looked at Leppings Lane terraces. He screamed. ‘Please get the fucking gate open - Help,
 help'. All the people who could speak were pleading for help. There were two policemen near the gate right
 alongside the fan who had shouted to m e and so 1 shouted to them. ‘Get the gate open’. 1 was still trying to
 concentrate on play and was still having my attention taken by what was happening behind m e - there were
 l o t s o f fans on the pitch, behind,the goal area by them too. 1 called again to the policemen. ‘Open the fucking
 gate' and one just turned away from me and looked back at the crowd but the other went to the gate and
 opened it and it was like taking the top o ff a shaken coke bottle - people were everywhere on the play area
 around my goal. Play was still going on and it came down towards me again for the left hand comer. It was
 a Nottingham Forest throw-in. away to my left, the ball was out o f play and a fan came up to me on the
 pitch and said. ‘Bruce, they’re killing u s\ i said ‘Who's killing you?', and he said ‘They’re crushing us-our
 fans’. 1 said ‘Go and get some help', and then a policeman came on and spoke to this fan. I don’t know
 w h o the fan was. and then he led him off. It was about this time 1 saw a policeman running onto the pitch
 from m y right across my box and to the referee who biew up. recovered the ball and told all players to clear
 th e pitch."
    10. It is clear from the video that Mr Grobbelaar's recollection o f the sequence o f events, even with regard
to the game, is inaccurate in a number o f respects. For example, the two Nottingham Forest com er kicks
occurred minutes before Beardsley struck the bar. Funner, it seems highly probable from other evidence that
gates 3 and 4 were open continuously well before Mr Grobbelaar says the fan asked him to get the gate open. It
seem s surprising too that with all the noise Mr Grobbeiaar would hear the precise words o f an individual fan.
let alone respond twice to them, whilst the game was in progress.
    11. As to Mr Bambrock’s account, the evidence o f PC Fiona Richardson was that she was the only
policew om an on the track in the early stages although others came from the seated area as the incident
developed. PC Richardson began at gate 1 and. although she did go and help people out through gate 3. she
d id not go to gate 4. and did not open it twice or even once. The two officers who spoke o f opening gate 4 were
both male.
    12. I think Mr Grobbelaar did becom e conscious o f distress in the crowd behind him and did speak to a
p o lice officer at some stage, probably eariier than he now thinks. Not to reach that broad conclusion wo.uld
in v o lv e attributing his whole account to invention or fantasy and 1 see no grounds for doing so. However, his
detailed account was not tested in cross-examination and its inconsistencies and errors when compared with
oth er incontrovertible evidence would make it unsafe to derive more than the broad conclusion stated above.
T h e incident shows how honest w itnesses can become confused and their evidence flawed when recollecting
even ts experienced under tension or emotion.
    13. As to the opening o f gate 4 there was an apparent conflict o f evidence. PC Illingworth said that about
fiv e minutes to 3 he opened it and guided fans emerging through it to gate 5. PC Hooson said that it was he
w h o opened gate 4 just before kick-off. 1 am satisfied from the evidence o f a number o f fans that, like gate 3.
gate 4 was opened more than once. The probability is. therefore, that whilst PC Illingworth was shepherding
fans to gate 5, gate 4 had been closed again until it was re-opened by PC Hooson two or three minutes later.
Oxygen
    14. It was alleged by a doctor that an oxygen cylinder provided to him on the pitch was empty. Dr Phillips. 2
Liverpool supponer. had been in pen 3 with his brother and others. He came under pressure and climbed into
p e n 2. When the disaster occurred and gate 2 was opened, he went through it. injuring his head as he did so. Hr
c a m e onto the pitch sometime after 3.10 pm and started resuscitation procedures. He was given an oxygen
cylinder. He believes this was from St John Ambuiance. It was. nc thought, too early to be the fire service. Tru*
cylinder was switched on but Dr Philiips says it gave no oxygen since it was empty. There was one oxygen
cylinder on the St John’s ambulance which came to the scent. Mr Wells, tne Divisional Superintendent o f St
J oh n , took that cylinder onto the pitch. He said u was effective. In panicuiar. he recalls going to a patient being
treated by Dr Phillips and says that oxygen was flowing into that patient. Moreover. Mr Wells tested the
cylinder afterwards and found it was still half full. It nas a capacity that will last for 5 hours 40 minutes or a
high setting.
   15. There was evidence from Assistant C hief Fire Officer Hornsby that a Maxaman resuscitator had failed
to work properly. It was delivering an oxygen flow appropriate to a "child" setting rather than a full ‘‘adult"
flow. On examination, it was found that a retaining nut in the control knob had worked loose, possibly due to
vibration in transit, and this had affected the flow o f oxygen.-The device had last been tested on 10 April 1989.
   16. 1 accept the eviccnce o f Mr Wells that the Si John Ambulance cylinder was charged with oxygen and
working properly. In my view. D r Phillips may have been mistaken as to the cylinder o f which he complains
being empty. He agreed he was under great pressure, in an awkward situation: his head was injured and he
becam e very angry at what he regarded then as wholly the fault o f the police. He conceded that if the cylinder
was not empty there was a possible alternative - that the master tank top valve was shut. It seems unlikely that
he could have been referring to the fire service resuscitator as he was clear that the bottle he received was a
sim ple piece o f equipment not designed to breathe for the patient but merely to supply oxygen.
   17. I conclude that on a balance o f probabilities the evidence does not justify a finding that an empty
cylinder was brought to the scene.
Calling the Fire Service
   18. PC Bichard's call to police Headauarters ai 3.13 pm for the fire service to bring hydraulic cutting
equipm ent to cut metal fences (see paragraph 101 supra) was heard by C hief Inspector Edmundson. He went
into the adjacent operations room to give instructions for the message to be passed to the fire service. There, a
temporary control room assistant was already speaking to the fire service about a house fire. Mr Edmundson
interrupted the call and asked the assistant to tell the fire service that cutting equipment was wanted at
Hillsborough. There followed a conversation between the assistant and Miss Davies at the fire service in the
following terms:-
  Police          Can we have cutting gear for Hillsborough, please - straight away?
  Fire Control    Just a minute. Right - what’s the address?
  Police          Cutting equipment for Hillsborough football ground - straight away.
  Fire Control    Hillsborough football ground?
  Police          Yes. Hillsborough football ground.
  Fire Control    What road is that on? D o you know?

  Police         There has been a major accident, all the ambulances are up there.
  Fire Control    What road is it on?
  Police          I have no idea: Hillsborough football ground.
  Fire Control   What road is it on? D o you know?

  Police         “Hillsborough football ground - what road is it on?" (this was said to som eone in Police
                 Force Control) - "Penistone Road” (to Fire Control).
  Fire Control   Penistone Road.
  Police         Penistone Road. OK.
  Fire Control   Penistone Road, just a minute - what's exactly involved?

  Police         It's football, a big match. Liverpool v N otts Forest.
  Fire Control   Yes. but why do you want us: you said it was an RTA [Road Traffic Accident].
  Police         No. no. no: major incident inside tne ground.
  Fire Control   Major incident inside - do you know exactly what it is?
  Police         No. 1 don't: they want all the cutting gear.
  Fire Control   For whai - do you know ?
  Police         Hang on a sec.
  A t that point Chief Inspector Edmundson intervened and sooke tor the police. The conversation
concluded:-
  Police         (Male voice) - Hello!
   Fire Control    Hello! N ow you wnt som e cutting g ea r-w h a t exactly is it for?

   Police          There has been a major accident at Hillsborough football ground where the semi-final is:
                   the crowds have forced their way in. they have broken fences and gates down. I don’t know
                   exactly what it is but there are people trapped.

   Fire Control    Right! OK - leave it with us.

   That conversation took 1 m inute 13 seconds, it was published in a number o f newspapers with strong
 critical com m ent mostly against the fire service. The thrust o f the criticism was that valuable time was wasted
 by the fire service asking unnecessary questions as to where and why cutting equipment was required.

   19. There was a meeting o f the emergency services in August 1988 to discuss procedure in the event o f a
major disaster arSheffieid Wednesday'S'ground, it was pointed om-and minuted that “It wasimperative.that
the Police Control give the exact location of any fire or incident and as much detail as possible. N o senior fire
officer is on duty at the m a tc h .. . Fire service will attend via Penistone Road or Leppings Lane as directed by
the police.”

   20. The message from PC Bichard contained all the necessary information - Leppings Lane end. hydraulic
cutting equipment, to cut metal fences. Regrettably, it was not passed on by Headquarters in those terms. Miss
D avies had rightly been trained to require a precise location and needed to know the problem which would face
the fire service so that the appropriate response could be made, in fact, there are several football grounds in the
Hillsborough district although clearly Sheffield Wednesday’s ground is the principal one. In the result,
although C hief Inspector Edmundson clarified, to an extent, the nature o f the problem, the locus which
emerged in the course o f the conversation (Penistone Road) was not that contained in the original message
from ground control ( i e “Leppings Lane end.”) Whilst on the face o f the conversation the fire service may seem
to have been slow in the uptake or perhaps pedantic, in my view the police ought to have been more specific.
They had the necessary information to be so.

  21. I am satisfied, however, that the delay o f 1 minute 13 seconds over the call, and even the delay
occasioned by the cutting equipment going to Penistone Road rather than Leppings Lane, did not affect the
outcom e. Even had those with cutting equipment gone directly after a briefer ’phone call they would not have
arrived at a stage early enough to make cutting the fencing a helpful exercise.

M r Kenny Dalglish
  22. When the Liverpool manager went to the control room and agreed to make the announcement
broadcast at 3.56 pm. he says in a statement that he could not get the Tannov to work. Spectators could see
him trying to address them and indicated to him manually that nothing could be heard. An officer pressed
buttons on the machine and Mr Dalglish says he tried again with similar lack of success. He was then taken
under the police box to the room used by the disc jockey to broadcast pre-match music. There, the microphone
worked and he broadcast his message.

   23. Mr Dalglish was not called. There was no other evidence about this incident. 1 accept it occurred as he
described. Why the Tannoy could not at that time be successfully operated from the police box is. however,
strange and unexplained. Unlike the radio, it had operated satisfactorily from the police box at the critical
tim es save that its messages may not always nave been heard above the prevailing noise. It had worked at about
3 .3 0 pm when it called for medical staff. 1 can see no grounds for criticising the police in regard to this incident
and certain it is that the brief delay in relaying Mr Dalglish's message can have had no significant effect.
                                               APPENDIX 7

                           LIST OF PARTIES AND THEIR REPRESENTATION

1.    Nlr Andrew Collins QC. Mr Alan Goidsack and Mr Bernard Phillips o f Counsel, instructed by the
      Treasury Solicitor, appeared on behalf o f the Inquiry.

2.    Mr Benet Hvtner QC and Mr Timothy Ring o f Counsel, instructed bv the Hillsborough Steering
      Comm ittee, appeared on behalf o f the bereaved and injured.

3.    Mr John JacKSon o f Counsel, instructed by Messrs Hill Dickinson, appeared on behalf o f the Football
      Supporters' Association.

4.;   Mr John D yson QC and Mr David Gibson-Watt o f Counsel, instructed by Messrs Freshfields. appeared
      on behalf o f the Football Association.

5.    Mr Richard Maxwell QC and Mr Michael Murphy o f Counsel, instructed by Messrs Keeble Hawsons.
      appeared on behalf o f Sheffield City Council.

6.    Mr Edwin Glasgow QC and Mr Stuart Catchpole ofC ounsei. instructed by Messrs Davies Arnold Cooper,
      appeared on behalf o f Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.

7.    Mr William Woodward QC and Mr Patrick Limb o f Counsel, instructed by Messrs Ham m ond Suddards.
      appeared on behalf o f the South Yorkshire Police.

8.    Mr Franz Muller QC and Mr Andrew Robertson o f Counsel, instructed by Messrs Crutes. appeared on
      behalf o f the South Yorkshire Fire and Civil Defence Authority.

9.    Mr Michel Kallipetis QC. instructed by Messrs Dibb Lupton Broomnead. appeared on behalf o f Trent
      Regional Health Authority.

10. Mr Roger Toulson QC. instructed by Messrs Reynolds Porter Chamberlain, appeared on behalf o f D r W.
    Eastwood.
                               A PPEN D IX 8

LIST OF THOSE GIVING ORAL EVIDENCE TO THE INQUIRY IN ORDER OF APPEARANCE

                           Stephen Martin FOSTER
                           Michael Joseph BRADLEY
                           Peter William JACKSON
                           Alison Jane BENNETT
                           Daniel Joseph HENNESSEY
                           Keith GOLDING
                           Ian John CLARKE
                           D avid PERRY
                           D avid Anthonv CRUICE
                           Patrick C U N N IN G H A M
                           Keith LEONARD
                          Wavne David W INDEVER
                          Garv GAINS
                          Mark Ian HUGHES
                          D avid HUGHES
                          Anthonv BARNBROCK
                          David C U N N IN G H A M
                          Peter DARCY
                          Ian Kenneth DEVINE
                          Peter Joseph GARRETT
                          D avid Peter LOWE
                          Geoffrey Nigel M OODY
                          Christopher MORAN
                          Rov PARRY
                          John Stewart PHIMESTER
                          David POSTLETHWAITE
                          Thomas Kenneth HILTON
                          Nicholas BELL
                          Stephen Mark WESTERGREEN
                          Trevor HICKS
                          Ian William BURKE
                          William Hamilton COMERFORD
                          Diane Susan CONNOLLY
                          Peter JefFrev GARRETT
                         David HARTLEY
                         Thomas Bentley MATTHEWS
                         D avid Thomas JONES
                         Paul M cCa f f r e y
                         David Stephen MOORE
                         Maxwell ROSS
                         Anthony Christopher SMITH
                         Steven ALLEN
                         P. MAHER
                         Michael Gerrard HILL
                         Neil FITZM AURICE
                         Angela HOCKENHULL
                         Lee Edward OXLEY
                         Constance SWEET
                         Janet Ann ELLIS
                         Frederick Jam es ECCLESTON
                         Adam James PEMBERTON
                         John Randolph Tom BARTHOLOMEW
                         Judith WATSON
                         Duncan STURROCK
                         Susan DAWES
                         Albert LINDLEY
                         PC Ian BROW N


                                   68
                                APPENDIX 8

LIST OF THOSE GIVING ORAL EVIDENCE TO THE INQUIRY IN ORDER OF APPEARANCE

                          C hief Superintendent Brian Leonard MOLE
                          C hief Superintendent David Godfrey DUCK.ENFIELD
                          Assistant Chief Constable Walter JACKSON
                          Superintendent Roger MARSHALL
                          Superintendent Bernard Dean MURRAY
                          Superintendent Roeer GREENW OOD
                          Bruce David GROBBELAAR*
                          Chiei'Supermtenaent John Arthur NESBIT
                          Superintendent John Harris BROUGHAM
                          Detective Superintendent Graham McKAY
                          Inspector Paul HAND-DAVIS
                          Chief Inspector Roben Wallace CREASER
                          Inspector Peter Colin DARLING
                          Inspector David BULLAS
                          Inspector Gordon SYKES
                          Inspector Roben PU RDY
                          Inspector Stephen ELLIS
                          Inspector John Joseph BENNETT
                          Sereeant Stephen John PAYNE
                          PC Graham D U FFY
                          PC D. EVANS
                          PC Andrew BEST
                          PC Brian Roben HUCKSTEPP
                          PC Alistair J ohn TAYLOR
                         Sereeant John MORGAN
                         WPC Alison TAGG
                         Sergeant Lionel PROCTOR
                         WPC Jane Bonhwick BURNLEES
                         Sergeant Philip Sidney SMITH
                         PC Stephen Frank FRY
                         PC F. N. G R U N N ILL
                         WPC Elizabeth Javne WILSON
                         Sergeant William Cameron CRAWFORD
                         PC Paul BRANSTON
                         WPC Jacqueiine BU RTO N
                         Sergeant Roben B U R N S
                         WPC Heien Kay PEARSON
                         PC Alexander AITKIN
                         Sergeant Paul BU RM AN
                         PC Stephen Andrew SHEARWOOD
                         Sergeant Edward HIGGINS
                         Sergeant Peter CHAPM AN
                         PC Peter Edward SMITH
                         PC Gerrard St Clare FINNEGAN
                         PC David Alfred ILLINGWORTH
                         WPC Fiona RICHARDSON
                         PC James Oscar PACKER
                         PC Michael BU X TO N
                         Detective Sergeant Paul MORTON
                         Detective Sergeant D avid GUTCHER
                         PC Michael Vincent RYAN
                         Sergeant Michael G O D D A R D
                         Peter WELLS
                         PC Trevor BICHARD
                         John Edmund TOWLER
                         Frank GODLEY
                         Philip Martin SAXTON
  PC Harold GUEST
 Inspector ian TUR NER
 Chief Inspector McROBBIE
 PC Kenneth ROOK
 FC OP Susan Elizabeth DAVIES
 Station Officer J SWAIN
 Station Officer FLETCHER
 A .C O . A. D. HORNSBY
 Leading Fireman HOUSLEY
 George LLOYD
 Raymond John LLOYD
 Brian S.AYLES
 Randolph SAYNOR
 Stephen Michaei COPELAND
 Albert RHODES
 Steven Charles RHODES
 Wavne Austin HALL
 Allan John HASKINS
 Stuart Roland THORPE
 Kenneth CASTLEY
 John Philip CASTLEY
 Albert Ronald MARSH
 Roben William COBB
 Brian RIDGE
 Richard William BEADSLEY
 Malcoim BAIN
 Stepnen Craie CARDWELL
 Gary VAUX ”
 Alan Keith SEAMAN
 Frederick M A D D O X
 Dr William PURCELL
Station Officer Patrick HIGGINS
Station Officer Paul Anthony James EASON
Control Superintendent Raymond CLARKE
 Deputy C hief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer Alan HOPKINS
Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer Alben PAGE
Lawrence YOXALL
David John WALKER
Maurice KAY QC
Dr Andrew Jolvon BYRNE
Graham KELLY
Dr John ASHTON
Dr Naderassen Carpoosamy CURPEN
Kenneth EVANS
Glen KIRTON
Dr Wilfred EASTWOOD
Dr Glyn PHILLIPS
Ferenc MORATH
Andrew SANDERSO N
PC Philip HOOSON
PC Garv CAM MOCK
David BOWNES
inspector Clive William CALVERT
Graham Henry MACKRELL
inspector Steven R oben SEWELL
Douglas John LOCK
Garry TAYLOR
David George Lawrence WATTS
Superintendent Terence Willis STUART
PC Brian WAUGH



           70
      In addition, statements of evidence trom many others were admitted to the inquiry. Some 80 letters were
    received trom Members o f me H ouse of Commons and three rrom Members of the House o f Lords. Some
    1.470 letters from the general public w ere received. Organisations who have submitted evidence addressed to
    Part II of the Inquiry will be specifically listed in the Final Report.

    * Statement read to the inquiry




o




                                                                    71




                                  PftniMl in the UmtKl Kingdom lor     Her Minuv > Suimmtv Office
                                      I )d 0503228   « '«   < ■'»   O No. K406270 IJ U O ) M X
HMSO publications are available from:
HMSO Publications Centre
(Mail and telephone o m en only)
PO Box 276. London SW8 5DT
Telephone orders 0 1-873 9090
General enquiries 01 -873 0011
(queuing system m operation tor both numbers)

HMSO Bookshops
49 High Holbom. London. WC1V 6HB 01 -873 0011 (Counter service only)
2S8 Broad Street. Birmingham. B 1 2HE 021-643 3740
Southey House. 33 Wine Street. Bristol. BS1 2BQ (0272) 264306
9-21 Princess Street. Mancnester. M60 8AS 061 -834 7201
80 Chichester Street. Belfast. BT1 4JY (0232) 2384S1
71 Lothian road. Edinburgh. EH3 9AZ 031 -228 4181

H M SO 's Accredited Agents
(see Yellow Pages)

And through good booksellers




ISBN 0 10 1076525
2
                                                                          C O /10 0 9 792

          'HE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE                      Sworn bv:   A Pace
                                                         On behalf   of; South
          IN'S BENCH DIVISION                            Yorkshire   Metropolitan
                                                         Ambulance   and Paramedic:
             FFICE LIST                                  Service

                                                         First
                                                         Dated        September 1993

                  TTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR A JUDICIAL REVIEW

      B E T W E E N

                                         REGINA

                                          - v -
v._
                      HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE

                                        EX PARTE

                                   STRINGER AND OTHERS




      This is the exhibit marked "AP2” referred to in the affidavit of

      Albert Page attached hereto.




o
      Sworn this a 1      day of                  1993


      Before me,




      Solicitor

          G f t k   * L ( .




                                        q ' l
                                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE
                                              AND PARAMEDIC SERVICE
                                                AMBULANCE SERVICE HEADQUARTERS
                                                       r A i K r i e L D . .U O O R G A T E R C A O .
                                                             n O T H E n r iA M S 6 0 2B Q
                                                ■’ S : £ 9 ; iC * .,£ s tC T H S R H A M (C70S) 82SS0S
                                                                             - TC*) &29642 hO
                                                                        . -s r o ii 830JJ8 C O N TR O L

                    OUR f i e f            AP/JR/119                                                      Mr. A. PAGE.JP. F A S. I.
                    YOUR REF                                                                                    CHIEF METROPOLITAN
                    P i a a t s a s* to-                                                                        am bulance   OFFICER




29th January 1992



The Editor,
British Medical Journal,
Tavistock Square,
London.
WC1H 9JR



Dear Sir,

Re:   The Hillsborough Tragedy - Article in BMJ

I have seen the article which appeared in the BMJ on 30th November 1991.                                                     I
am concerned that the article could be considered to be critical of the
South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance and Paramedic Service (SYMAPS).

The tragedy has already been the subject of a great deal of public
investigation and comment which I do no£ wish to add to unnecessarily.  I
shall not, therefore, respond to a number of points with which I would
otherwise take issue, but 1 must point out the error relating to the claim
that there was no notification to the Northern General Hospital that a
major incident was taking place.

Notification of a major incident was given to the Northern General Hospital
at approximately 1525 hours, before any casualties arrived.  That
information was given, in person, by an ambulanceman to a member of the
hospital staff, who appeared to act upon the notification.  Any suggestion
that the hospital had not received notification is, therefore incorrect.

Finally, with regard to the paragraph implications for disaster planning.
This service made formal representations at the Lord Justice Taylor enquiry
and were instrumental in introducing legislation to increase the emergency
provision within football stadia.   SYMAPS also declare, on behalf of the
other emergency services, a major incident by contacting the relevant
Accident and Emergency departments.

Please point out these errors in the next issue of the BMJ.

       faith




A. Page,
CHIEF METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE OFFICER
                                                   9      ft
3
      f                                                         CP/1009/92
IN TOE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE                      S.WPrn .by:. A Page
                                                  On behalf of: South
QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION                           XQEtehJ-EaJtetrppoljtW
                                                  Ambulance and Paramedic
CROWN OFFICE LIST                                Service

                                                 First
                                                 Dated 1~S»~ September 1993

IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR A JUDICIAL REVIEW

B E T W E E N :

                                 REGINA

                                  - v -

             HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE

                                EX PARTE

                           STRINGER AND OTHERS




This is the exhibit marked "AP3" referred to in the affidavit of

Albert Page attached hereto.




Sworn this        day Qf                  1993


Before me,




Solicitor

    0 f4 j4 * i
                                                                                              W. E A S T W O O D

    A             - A. Indeed.

             Q. Y ou had a l r e a d y e x p r e s s e d c o n c e r n a b o u t not h a v i n g a
                t h r ou gh r o u t e s t r a i g h t d ow n to the p e r i n e t e r fence? - A. I
                have.

             0. By r e m o v i n g 144 you w e r e g o i n g . s o m e w a y towards a l l o w i n g
                s uch a c h a nn el but not the e x t e n t that the P ol i c e w a n t e d ?
    B           ” A. That is so.            If I had a c c e d e d in 1985 there w o u l d
                f r o m t h a r d a y h av e b e e n a channel.,fxoa tap. to bottom,

             0. B a l a n c i n g those p r o b l e m s d i d . y o u thi nk that the r e q u e s t
                w as a r e a s o n a b l e o n e ? - A. I b e l i e v e that they had g o o d
                r e a s o n for the r e q u e s t , that it h a d b ee n well t h o ug ht out
                o v e r a p e r i o d of     time and t h e y w e r e qui te c o n v i n c e d that
o            Q.
                they weirs m a k i n g       the s i t u a t i o n safer.

                  I'Pnen those d e c i s i o n s are t a k e n a re they taken l i g h t l y or are
                  they taken a f t e r d i s c u s s i o n w i t h p e o p l e w i t h the b e n e f i t
                  of e x p e r i e n c e as to w h a t is a c t u a l l y h a p p e n i n g ?

                           LORD J U S T I C E T AY LO R:   W e l l now, M r . ^ T o u l s o n , I did
                  a l l o w you to a sk s em e s u p p l e m e n t a r y q uestions.

    D                     MR. T 0 U 1 S 0 M :         Tka-t m a y h a v e b e e n g o i n g a l it tl e far.
                            LORD J U S T I C E T A Y LO R:    Can I just ask, th
                                                                               the r e m a i n i n g
                  b it of 144 ir. ten               w h y does not that ,fail into the same
                  c a t e s c r v ? - A. If         :ock o ut the one bit - sorry, may
                  have a I-ok at                 ? ■■■e :ia tatce out c: 144 m . tne
                  n e i g h b o u r i n g pen.   ■••a toox out tne n r s t span, sir.
                  Yes. ~ A. Nov;, it i e e m e d to have b e e n b e l i e v e d by the
                  P o l i c e w it h that d i f f e r e n t c o n f i g u r a t i o n , b e c a u s e they
O                 a re d i f f e r e n t or. the two s id e s or the central barrier,
                  it s ee me d to be b e l i e v e d that just taking that one out
                  w o u l d r e l ie ve t h e \ii f f i t u l t v in the r i c h t - h a n a oen ~ the
                  lavouts ir e d i f f e r e n t ~ u.r.c this was their view.
                          •       ’ " c t " ""     AYLCR:           Yes.     T h a n k you.
    Fi
                         MR. TOULSC:-;:              Than:; you, sir.
                                OU T T 7 “ - C
                                                       Dr. P h i l l i p s , please.

         I                                       :LY:; P H I L L I P S C a l l e d
         I
    Gi                                     I::-~ir.ed bv MR. P H I L L I P S :
         i
         ! 0. Are vou Dr. G l v n P h i l l i o s ? - A. T h a t is correct, yes.
         i
         | 0. G e n e r a l p r a c t i t i o n e r and a s u p p o r t e r of L i v e r p o o l ? ~ A.
              T h a t is c o r r e c t , yes.

             0. You came to S h e f f i e l d on 1 5t h of A p r i l of t h i s ' y e a r along
    H

                                                         i     r\
                                                                                                                     G. P H I L L I P S
               with v• our b r o t h e r s nd two. f r i en ds . .                                  Is wthat
                                                                                                         * . • * so?
                                                                                                                  • • •-
                                                                                                                       *€* Wi   'T'u ar
    A          is r i g h t . y e s .

         0. I think you got to the g r o u n d r e a s o n a b l y ear ly and w e r e ir.
            the terrace b e f o r e I 2 - p a s t - 2 . Is that right? - A. Yes.

                                         ■race, n o w a i d it a ppear to you to be1?
               A. nP.en r,;e get to      ;e c e n t r e s e c t i o n it was a l r e a d y q u i t e
               fuii but it was st i p o s s i b l e to c ov e through -the" c ro w d
    B          w i t h o u t too strch .
                                                                              a bl y full then, was i t . at that t i r e ?
                          •         •» w •         _ L.    „ fij         «      snort c: tne iir.it cf cocfort.
              :.IJI rl i *« W **     " 'W
                                        f l »n •      * n       V O 11         into in fac t?      was it the sen 2 ? - A
o
          ,                    ••    ^                .t. «•»

              ? sn 2                          es
    c;   Q. That is right.           And I t h i n k in f ac t w hen you got in there
            d e c i d e d to r o v e t o w ar ds the back.    Is that risht? - A.
            v.:eli. we d e c i d e d to r.ove a w a y f r o m the t u n n e i ~ b e c a u s e it
            was so fuii. so we r u d e cur w a y to the right and e n d e d
            up. I. w c u i d say. a b o u t dive yards s ho r t cf the radial fen ce
            and above, the s e c o n d rs.rr.ier f r o m the front, from the

    Di
         ". Yes. ~ A. R ou n d about there, ves.

              * ^ 'j, — — ~ n o 3 r                                      j7                     ~n 3 c v c    v*s ^ — s ^ ~ 0   0




                                                           :e= t.".e rati t e n m a y o u :r. tr.a racial fence?
                                                                           too - a n y pecp:e to see that there
o                                                                         rr.ed tne tenca was cor.oiete w i t h no




              .'.r.a - t."in:: you _ :':r. a tr.at it was aettir.~ r.ore ar.c r.ore
    F:

              .... ir. tr.at per..  . y^u r er.er.be r the tear.- cor.ins out
              ;n 11 the p i tor ; - ... ':•£ .

              Zo you r er.er.ber . .:■r :■ "ou able to see the oitah frc~ w n e r e
              you '..'ere? - A. -au.i jee the p it ch , ves.
    G         2 id   you deel an;.' i ncrease m the p r e s s u r e at this c a r t i c u i a
              tir.e w hen the tear.: oar.2 out? - A. V:ei 1, as 1 put in r.y
              statement, it '..'as 1 oradu al i n c r e a s e in p ressure r ea ll y
              fror. the r.or.ur.t wt rot there but r ou n d about the tire co
              h i c h- ot f 1 seer, to rer.er.oer q u i t e an increase in p r e s s u r e
              although. as 1 have .raid, b e c a u s e there was no room to

    H
                                                                                 I o l
                                                                                      n   *3?




A:       m o v e tr.ere was no a ct ua l sure m g                or m ov em e n t ,   it w as j us t
         2 i * r n *1C -TSSS ,,v*a * * C «T9 £ sed *

         ’;cu */ere off ic                           *■*»•   the pen as we look at it f ro m
         zhs zunnsi v;er s r.c *           **c u ?     ■
                                                             A . Yes.

        A n d you say you                      ^ T * ^ e a ny s urges w h i c h i n v o l v e d
        you? - A. No. I                    ••2 V 2 a b e c a u s e of our p o s i t i o n
B
        p r o t e c t e d from - a   5       a z n 3.c we h e a r d about later.

        D id you see any        cM ^ S C         a n y o t h e r part of the pen?                -          A.   :

        ".vere ’*cu able t ^ .5 A A **fl^ “ wa s g o i n g on at the front of the
                                              _
        -gn      2 *^ r..7*nsr*s ■*cu v:er= ? ■  Not cieariv. no.

Q\      New, •.:era you acie to ;:-e :r near a:.v:h::.s said a b o u t
        c o n d i t i o n s ' in the ter.; - A. As 1 have said in m y scac




                                                                                                co </q ro
        large n u m be rs cf the far.s m chan s e c t i o n w er e v o i c i n
       ■ d i s c o m f o r t and derisicr. at the c o n d i t i o n s thev were, b

      . Yes.        You say also it : r “usnt: r.o r e s p o n s e in terns of
        a c t i o n fron the Police: “ A. No. b e c a u s e it see me d to be
D :     g e t t i n g m or e and m o r e dull.        I w o u l d have a s s u m e d - I woul;
        have hop ed ~ that as it b e c a m e m o r e and more s a c k e d that
        o s o c i e w ou l d h ave t eer. d i v e r t e d to the outer s e c t i o n s cf
                                                                                       3.       = HI LL I P S

A
     Chancing?                         v es.

     Chanting wnat?                    -.        May      I?

      /ss .           .         .n e v 5 rs o r = n 1 1 r,g t n s t it w a s a s h i t t y c r c u n c .

     " h a t w a s c o m i n g ■ " r c m t.~is t e r r a c e .                   was i t ? ’              A.       Yes.
B
     What      _ i.Tie w a s tr.st :.cr. i..,"c                     A.        sefcre kick-off.

     3e   fo r e k i c k - o f f ?          :.        ■ es .

     A r e y o u s u r s t h a t ..= 3                  s o m e t h i n g y o j n e a r c c o m i n c from the
     H o i c n .<oo at the z z r . s :               jna a f t e r k i c K - o f f ?      A.       I sm
     30 S0i i : t e i v s u r s .
C
     H o w l o n g c i a c n i s go or, : : : ?          A.       I can't remember cieariv
     o u t c e r t a i n l y the c n a n c •■■.•as r e o e a t e d n u m e r o u s t i m e s .

     ■'"s’ i = n 0 “ - s r : : : . ;■ 3 c e c i r i c a o o u t w n a t t h e p r o o i e m w a s ,
     t h o u g h , is i t ?                   ii. no, it i s n ' t b u t I t h i n k it
     c e m c n s e r a t e o trat z e c z i j were very u n c c m f o r t a b l e .          I
     c o n ' " •-;n o w w n a t ■<a s o s i ~ j a a i o s c t h e c e r i m e t e r f e n c e
D    t ~ r o i i c e m e n t.nere.

                                                             wa sn ' t witnir! z s r s n o t a n a t h e r e


                                                                         wn e cr e r        t r. s    Pc i i c e   nesr:


                                                       :3 n n c v a n n o u n c e m e n t .    Can you s s v
                                                       ;c u s 1 y r e n e m c e r .        I oouion't
                                                                                                                           r » cr


                                                            " n s v a g u e r e c o l l e c t i o n tha
                                                        ~raae r e c u e s t i r . o ■ r s t L i v e r p o o l
                                                       :r .nei to ~ a ^ e ~ c : e r o o m for o e o c l e
                                                       '= •••e ..e r = ■. t : ^ . • e rv t i c n c i y

                                                       !i - 3 w a vs t o w a r o 3 t r.e r a c i a l f e n c e .
                                                       ■- " s a ■u n c o m f a r t a o i y ; n a c a n c e r o u s !

                                                        no         vo u    sow    ‘. n s        z z   u " « cf     t n 6 car.s
                                                               *   a c




                                                   ...crease i n p r e s s u r e . "  r* .     :t
                                         e o su s e there were r e o e a c e a ana regular
G              se s       -n             ■j v e o u t . no, 1 a i a n ' t f e e l s n v s u r c e ss


     e ir e ;• o u    o c ie                 ~.r.n       ‘O o S i c n        w h e n Mr.              Seardslev near!               1
    iccreo a          z o a   i'?



    D i -j o u s e e a n y n n i r. g n o D o e n i n g d o w n at the f r o n t a f t e r t n e
    :a ~',e o c o r c ’ c 7            Yes.          It s e e m e d w i t h i n a s n o r t t i m e .
H   ' e i t t n a c the c a n e r,a c 1 a 3 r.e a s a m e t n i n q l i k e , w e l l , I
    t h i r;x i 3 aif; 1 : e r . e m o e c ■ C or 2 0 s e c o n a s .          Certainly 6
                                   n n  ■ ‘• ' m o
                                                       T rpmemner ^ n e i n q               I was
                                                                                                             PHI LLI PS

    Ai
          w a t c n i n g the P o l i c e = t :ne front: r a t h e r c h a n t h e g a m e as
          w e i l as l o o K i n c s f - e : - y s e l f s n a m y b r o t h e r a n a I " s o e c i f i c a l .
          r e m e m o e r a P o l i c e m a n e y tr.e g a t e , t h e p e r i m e t e r f e n c e c a t e ,
          I c c K i n g e x t r e m e l y ~ c n c e r r . e c c o w n at f a n s in f r o n t of h i m a n c
          r . e n a a a t t e m c t s c a: l = s s t o n c e e r t w i c e t c y a n « s o m e b o a v
          c u e s n a i: w a s c c v i c u s i y i m o o s s i d e b e c a u s e t h e r e w a s n o o o c v
          : e i n c s u i i s d su:.

               ne      cate      was         ccsn                  - v ; r an ,        yes

          I a n y o u g i v e us a n y ; : a a                     r.cw-     long a f t e r the g ame s t a r t e d
          that m e gate was c e e n e c ?                                    .    I m e a n . I c a n n o t a i v e vo u
          an a c c u r a t e a n s w e r                                        a s s u m e it w a s w i t h i n m i n u t e s
               ou     were       c:nsc::L'S .                                   the g a m e c n i y b e i n g on f o r a
    c         ’ ew    seccncs          : e r' : : =                              Yes.     Th e g a m e by t h e n w a s
               rrelevsnt.

               r.e - c : : : e d i e s                r t ■t r y i n g . t c ge t p e o p l e c u t b u t h a d s o m e
              :i f f i c u i t y ; m a'               13 w n a t ,-ou a r e s a y i n g , is it n o t ?
              :.          'hat    was                 i.r.cressicn I . c ot , y e s.

                   :u : : c ho t s ■                                     " a i l i n g or c i i e o f t o d i e s d o w n
    D;             : m s ccctcm                                            ■      I n s i c e the p en?

                                                                   c e c a u s e of the a n g l e of the
                                                                       • -e were in.                 _ t was i~oossib1 e




                                                                   e    ten     cy     going           o v e r i .- to t h e n s :
                                                                                      "hst's           co r r 2 c t . we climc


                                                                                 :n i c r. w = s -3 c o t             : / o    it,i(J t e 3
                                                                                  to     t ccK' . - . ' s r . c c                  *3T*   r



                                                                        TZ   - 3C K
                                                             -ns       tec     many.

                                                                       .e    there?           - .    y=s
                                                                       : o e a s i a e w a v s e v e r t:
                                 ~\ — o c:
                                                                       i. w n e r e    'we w e r e .

                                                ■■'t"5 : : s :         .vent    ana     climbea                over   the fence.
          - .       res. sc e n e : : i ‘ t.        rc r a s h o r t w h i l e , b e c a u s e                                the
         p r e s s u r e was c e c r e s s i r c 1 m o u g n t - - I felt that the                                             prooie:
         •■/as e e i n c a i i e v i a t e c c c t c o m e o o a y o n t h e o t h e r s i d e                                of
         t h e r 'e nc e b e g a n get*, ir.c      e r y c i s t r a u g h t and s h o u t i n g                               at
         js     tc get o v e r ce ca ui s e e e o D i e w e r e g e t t i n g s o u a s h e d                                 and
         ■r : u s n e c .- t t h e   r e r. t .
    H    io         /ou    :ic                              • o r e "nrj       more p eople c l i m b e d over anc
         eventual!'/               I wy s
V                                                            e g e t to         th e f e n c e a n d a e t over.
                                                                                                             j.    PHI LLI PS


    A   . S c ' w n e n y o u c o t o v e r tr,e f e n c e i n t o P e n 2 , n o w l o n o a f t e r
          :ne s t o p p i n g o f tr.e - s e e n w a s t n i s ?       A. 'I n a v e no i d e a .
          Sy t.-.en I n a a l e s t : : s c x o f t i m e b u t I a s s u m e w i t h i n s
          r o u o l e of m i n u t e s :   it c o u l d h a v e b e e n l o n g e r , t h o u o h .
          I c e r t a i n i v w.asn ': s : c r , : r a mv w a t c h P v t h e n .

           OF course, but                                    t h a n you. w e n t o f f t h r o u g n t h e p e n o n to t h e
           :i;cn. cic you                                                       Y e s.
    B
           Ano you t r i e d                                tc c u t ir.tc e f f e c t y o u r o w n 1 s x i l l s as a
           rooter.     A.                                    T r i e r . •e s .

           •ou must t n e r e r c r e    = vv=
                                             e - s s . n cn t h e p i t c h c n e w o u l d s u p p o s e
           s t th 3 v sr v e a r 1 1 s s          s a y , 10 p a s t ^ .      A.      I woul d t h i n *
           in             ■■ 3 c

O   c
                Pi C      I t         ~ 3 V      Li e    c   rt =r                             it m a y c e , yes.

           .r c o u r s e , bv z ~ s                                 . r. e  c u g o t c u t c n tc t he p i t c h t h e n
           m e r e were a ccoc                                       :m c e r :r p e o p l e w h o h s o t e e n b r o u o h t
                    r   ~   7        p o n       3 .          -.



           •.n c t h e r e w e r e s ; r c e r 'c f c e o o i s who w e r e l y i n g a b o u t ,
    D      some : f t h e m in = er y : a c c o n o i t i o n .         A.      Yes.

          ; : m s cr t h e m a i r e s c •• : e s c                                            Yes .

                                                                                      'uch. as y o u c : u : c . c i c y o u n e t
                                                                                                 T h a t ' s r i c n t , yes.
                                                                                       ret t: w a s z s v i c u s 1 v e i t h e r
                :v ■                                                                  : the s e n s e t h a t h i s n e a r :
                SC              'c c e c           s                                :C t    s h e art hsa stoooea
                !C                  • 'i   £ 5   " C l


O                               ,          . cr x e c                                    cnsiceraclecerica               of    time’


                                                                                  t t e m e n t ; c me t h i h c of t h e c r c e r
                                                                                       3 v e : = e n 33 r. u c n a s t r . s t .
                                                                               -- p r e c i s e c e c c u s e c f t n e c i r c ums tar.:

          •n ; _ = ■ u       e r3                                            : rim v c u we re s u r r o u n a e d cy ether
          : e 0c _ e . ■.e r s     ou ~z                                    h -.he c 11c h ?                   .     v ss.        Increasir. ■
          i 3 1 .-.as : n *v              e■                                crrzice h i m , i : c e c m o r e a-no m o r e
          : 2n s e _ . : ; " r e c   r.::                                        ■j -j 1 1 ■■■ c 0 u 1 c n 1 t c s s ■ f z r t h e 1 s c s
          in c : : : : e s : : : c : . t                                  ~ 'j n c

           cu r 23i _y                           ccu1c                  “ ee wn   r, -   was   naooenmg           only    a    few   y5 r c   s
          ;wa v  : - m                           0u 7          - .       '.  .


           0u              a c the " s 31 s t 2 ■                             . :n 1 nk . o f a m a l e n u r s e ,           aid vou
          *r> r                 J,                 / ui e



           ou v/ ere c c i n a                                                 He //as a l s o a fan                He    wasn't
          :h® r e 0n : u c v (                                 3 n v rn 1r c     like     that.
    H
                                                  ■■■■/as : c : . : ;;s: ; r. x n a yo u i n d o i n g wha t y o u we:
         ■: 0   1    nn                                 A b s c 1 1: t e 1 v . / n s , he wa s do i n n t h e c a r d i a c
                                                                                                    3.     PHI LLI PS


    A!          ■•nasssge a n a        I wa s v e n t i l a t i n g the m a n ' s lungs.

                So y o u h a d l e t it ce < n o w n f a i r l y r e a a i l y t h a t y o u w e r e
                a doctor?           A.     v es. I n a a l e t it b e k n o w n as I a c t u a l l y
                a t t e m o t s a to c e t cn t n e c i t c n t h r o u g h the p e r i m e t e r c a t e .

               W h a t w a s t h e ci r f i 'J 1 - V - P a r y o u s a w in t h e s i t u a t i o n
    B          t h at y o u w e r e 1 7         ■Vns - z i e y o u w a n t t h at y o u a i a n o t
               n a v e '?■  A.         ,i
                                    We. ■1 V •ve p aa a m a n t h e r e --           I didn't know
               h o w m a n y m o r e c a su a i z : e c t n e r e w e r e .  At t h a t t i m e I
               n a a no i a e a o f • ne $ c 3 * 5 c f t h e c i s a s t e r a n d I t h o u g h t it " s y
               C6 £ h a n a f u 1 o f **a n c 1 r .     ou k n o w , up to 10 .^avbe, t h a t h a a
               b e e n so o a a i y c • js Pie c £ P C it w o u l d h a v e b e e n . I f e l t , h e i o fu l
               if I c o u i c ha ve - u P V PS n c s o n s o m e o c a v w i t h a d e - f i b r i i i a w c «.
               f r o m . the C l u b c * f c ^ 3 1I s m o u l a n c e a n c it would, h a v e h e l c e c
o   c;         i f I n a o o e e n 8 c 1 6 I z * e t p.cid of s o m e c x v o e n to t r y s n a
               e n r i c n tn e a i r • p a t - as c r e a t h i n g i n t o n i s l u n g s .

               So t h e s e -.vers the : <•/c t n i n g a t h a t y o u w a n t e o ?         A.    Y e s.
               I c s x e c tn e P o l i c e m a n . M C o u l d y o u p l e a s e f i n a o u t i f t n e r e
               is s c e - f i b r i l l a t o r sr.c c e t s o m e o x y g e n . "

                jo v o u r e a i 1 v                            w o u l d h a v e b e e n s a f e to u s e
    D'         a 2 s - r ' i : : : l l a c c : cu t f . e r e c n th e p i t c h w i t h al l t h o s e
               p e o o i e ' n i i l i n g s o c u t ? " A.       It is o b v i o u s l y s o m e t h i n g t h a t
               I h a v e r r n s i c e r e c : v ? : ■■=~c e v e r a c a m s i n c e t h e n a n d a d e ­
               f i b r i l l a t o r , I ; c : s e , i :: t p o t e n t i a l l y c a n c e r o u s p i e c e o f
               e q u i p m e n t a n c = r.c u _ : - n _ ; ce u s e o b y s c m e o o o v c o m p e t e n t tc
               : s e it.
                 a c                                                      .3 ..c e s . , ; c .      -.     res.        l ~ e an .
                 OU                                                       !s 1 1 i v e c i a g n o s i s . I * y o u u s e it
                                 :y   .v n o                                  ■carciac a r r e s t , y o u s t a n d a c c c o
                                  CU t t 1                                :to it. ho I ..;cu:: a s s u m e .that if
               = c s - " : c : : . . 3 ".:: ■                              ■. e c it m o s t l i k e l y       s h o u i d have
               .tc m e - i t -. !5 c m e c c o 1                          .2 t r a i n e e tc use it. r i c h e r tne
                                                                           : : : : - ' e c i : i . nc uiar.ceman.
                                                                                                   n c r* a p.r


                                                                                    •t n e                Pave used c s •


                i3v e  .: u c e e n                                                     nem r            na ■      :ar t
                ;v t r a i n i n a .
    g    ; -    ■VCu i n v n V •*1  1 nx - * rj S                   r          r he i e e s a s e n s i b l e 1 c e a
                                                                                r
                                                                                                                              t ry
                                                                                                                        ft
                                                                                                                             f)




                -z      3 0 3  c o - ri r                              •: u t r, ne re on t h e o i t c n w i t h s o
               .Ta ny w o r p e OD i e P I i 1.
                           r
                                                                    p q •J        t?
                                                                                D O U      A.        I t hi nk i f the c e -
                : i c r L1   Z0 w as -
                                  r           “^ Q     p                    r ce o f
                                                                        P i 3              c o m p e t e n t p e r s o n an d
                1t ••i 3 z e i a
                          5      n     •j 2 ; pn  r. h
                                                   r                e r c r r e c t c i r c u m s t a n c e s a nd i n t h e
                                                                    /-« I: 3v e b e e n s a f e . .
               -0   »
                    ■*r*o pr
                             *na n n e r  1     0 Ui   -   .   Vi




               rut      are    ro t   the                             c i r c u m s t a n c e s t h o s e w h i c h in fact
    HI                r'c: r , o d o c v
               j i i c w                               ol           o c e w i t h i n r a n g e of it. in the
               fircr. p l a c e ?                                   r.t i n ! y n o b o a y e l s e o h o u 1 d b e t c u c n i :
                                                                                         i
                                                                                               PHILLIPS

      Ai
                       An a c i r c u m s t a n c e s w n e r e m e p e r s o n i t s e l f - u p o n w h o m it is
                       b e i n g u s e d is n c : ir, : : n ; = c : w i t n a n y m e t a l c r a n y l i q u i d ,
                       any m o i s t u r e :      m a t is n c n t , is it n o t ?              A.      That
                       c s r t a i n l v w o u l d re p r s f e r s D l e , ves.

           i     I . A n a s u r e l y t h e l a s t c i a c s v c u w o u l d u s e . a d e - f i b r i l l a t o r is
                      c u t t n e r e a n t h e pi t e n w i t h s o m a n y p e o p l e ' m i l l i n g a b o u t
      Bj              h a v i n g just ccme cut              = en 3 ?       A..     I don't agree with
                      t h at .
           i

           I     Z.   Y o u cc n o t a g r e e w i m m a t ? D o yai t h i n k a s u f f i c i e n t l y
                       clear space c o uic rave ceen c l e a r e d ?        A.    Y e s.

^          :     I . T h a t r.o-one w o u l c c m e               accidental contact                  with-it?
                     A.       W h o e v e r was c ; s r 2 t 1 r c it n a s the a b i l i t y          to s e e
      C,'            v/netnsr a n v o c a y is :r. : c n : s c : w i t h t h e . c o a y .             He has got
                      the c o n t r o l out. ter. ir. r. is r a n d s n a i f . t n e r e is           anybody
                     r e a r , y o u d o n ' t c r e s s it.

                               -CRD J U S T I C E    TAYLIR:          Well,   t h e r e it is.

                               MR. P H I L L I P S : - :< y c s n .       Did you get snv c x v c e n
                      cy 1 i h c e r from anyo n e ?          -.        Y e s ,I w a s p r 0 v id e a w i th
     D!               sn o x y g e n c a t t l e . '

                      :v w n c m ?       A.    = v ••r.5.?.. I c o n :t k n o w .     I was too cusv
                      . e n t i l s t m g :r.12 ~ c _ .     . ■■«= : : : c . " H e r s is an c x y c s n


                                    :3 y :r it   2                _ c r.n 3 cr th e r ; : e m c a d e ?
                                    >?    -.   - •2 r :           - n e w for c e f i r, 1 1 e c u t I c a n

o                                      nst -


                                    'u s a y     m 3t
                                                                        1 n x 12 ~ o s z _ 1 .< e i v c s m e r r c m


                                                                       I minK      resllv      oecause        cf    ths
                                        •v I »



                         = :: = e c it.' ••              .: -rri-.ec.    ' r u n e s n as s e e n ss
                      ■'cr      1: . . : -,1s                  *-c ;-cu?     -.      '.cl 33 s o c r 22.
      F'              ~2 .    z -j :it ; = r t s i r _ .    "e t _:ncer      m a n f minutes.

               i . i5 *-!“         r.3 tw 3 3 ■ 3 1      ' : ir '1<7p. * r,e r ew e r e , .in         f a c t , 1 f cur
                                      are         c r.               : : ^ c 3 oiy Fire m e n there as weil s 3
                      3 t .l i n n ' s A m c 'j_ a ~ c 5     ::e c c I .        A .I c 0 n ' t t h i n k t h e r e
                      ,v5 ■ = n i : s n e r. *._ "• r ? r ’• * r n .

     P         J. D i e y o u n o t i c e                 If   ,-/^s a St. J o n n ' s b o t t l e , I m u s t
     J '          -.ell /ou t h a t m e l - v i c i m n i C e m m a n c e r .         Mr. W e i l s , h a s b e ? '
                   a s x e c s e c u t t n i s m e u ns c s i c m e v i e e n c e t h a t c e r t a i n l y - -
                  c o t t i .5 t n a t r.s r.sc w s s c 1 1 1 1 h a l f f u l l at t h e e n d o f the
                  e p i s c c e a n a ■ v/as c :/ ir.r:.      W h a t did you e x p e c t the bottle
                  z o ce c a p a o l e of ccir.c:                    I e x p e c t e d it to b e c a o a c l r
                  cr’ ' j e l i v e r i n o c x v c e n .

    it   . = u t '.naer p r e s u r e , ' co 23 m          i n f l a t e the   lung s, for e xample,
            or ■: i m p l y as - n c i v i n n c o t t i e , .vnich is all it w a s .
           A.       ■ n 3 1 w a s n ' t t r,e t v p e o r b o t t l e I w a s g i v e n , no.
    --------------------------                                          -    - * ----------------- ..< ~ m « r» h FtC S ‘'1 !
                                                                                                                       PHILLIPS

    AI    w a s n ' t c e s i c n e a to g i v e p o s i t i v e p r e s s u r e v e n t i l a t i o n to
          s o m e b o d y , a n a t n s is w n a t I m e a n w h e n I s a y I u s e d it.
          I a t t e m p t e d to u s e it to e n n c n th e a i r w i t h o x y g e n - t h e
          a i r thac I ■w a s b l o w i n g i n t o t h e p a t i e n t ' s n o s e .

          Are you sure that                                   cu l:oxec sc t h i s p r o p e r l y ,                     this b o t t l e ?
          A . ' 'Yes.

          Y o u w e r e in s o m e t n i r.2                                 an      cWKwarc situation'                    A.     Yes.
         A n a u n d e r a g r e a t r e a l of p r e s s u r e ,                                    were you not?
         A.      C e r t a i n ly was.     9 s . I sores.


         W e i l , t h e r e it is.                  l o u i o I j u s t s t a t e , as in my
         s t a t e m e n t , t h a t t n e v a l v e w a s t u r n e d on.         I had the o o e n
O   c    t u o e ir. my m o u t h ;       tr.ere w a s n o t h i n g c o m i n g o u t o f t h e
         e n c o f it a n a t h e g a u g e s n o w e a a n e e a l e at t h e b o t t o m o f
         t he rsa.            I f tr.at s o t t i e w a s n ' t e m p t y , t h e n t h e o n l y o t h e r
         a l t e r n a t i v e is t h a t t n e m a s t e r t a n k too v a l v e w a s s h u t ,
         in w n i c n c a s e it ~ i : n t w e i i h a v e b e e n e m o t v .

         I c o n o t t h i n * I : 3 n t 3 <<e t h a t a n y f u r t h e r w i t h y o u .          You
         c o nt i. nueo w o r K i n g :r, : - e s a m e p a t i e n t , y o u s a y , f o r I t h i n k
    D!   it w a s s d o u c a l t o g e t h e r i 5 m i n u t e s a n a e v e n t u a l l y h i s h e a r t
          itarteoaosm.               -.        /es

         - n G         i t    W£ S      " Pi S n   C C 3 r l- 1 5            •- C-   - 3 XS   h im   3 W3 V     ■cm t h e       fieid
                                          e    : v m r.   3   r : - ,ti .    was      : : n o t ?o      A.       \:o.     I dion't
                                                                            t in      ,^v s t a t e m e n t .

         .       sr.       =o r : .       / cu. a:              -■-its n c n t .      : t was then p o s s i b l e
    T~
    L    to        t=«e         "!1 m     3ws v                 - ■■.n e r e ne w a s to tne a m b u l a n c e ?
             .               n a c is         -— r r :
o
                                                                                                                ! «S



                                                                     :r          . r u n t y =."ci:.:nce r      .        :
                                                                                 o u t t h a t is j u s t 3 n s s s u m o t i c n
    F
                                                                   . :r.1 1 1 : n 1 s s i t u a t i o n h a c a n s e n
         ■3n 0         _     1 11     /c u                          "ear: s e a t i n g again, you c o u l d not
         r e a l l y nave ~;                                             It w o u l d n o t h a v e c o n e s n v g o o a
         t o ~ 0 ve hi m.                                           e r e c 1 0 n ' t s e e m co O e mucr, o o i n t
         : s c E'j se in h o v i n o       ■- 0 ;j ••/ouic h a v e n a o to n a v e s t o D p e c
         :ne at.tercet =: r es - 3 0 1 to ti on .           Y o u n a a to do o n e or the
         ■; t n e r s n 0 as w e '-/ere c o m o a o e o u a t e r e s u s c i t a t i o n it
    G    seemeo sensioie               t o v w n e r e we w e r e an o c o n t i n u e it.

         That'= rignt.           •?- g o t h i m to the a m o u l a n c e .     Was there
         =cm e 0r00 1e m w 11n n e m0 u 1 a n 0 e getting away?                 A.     Yes.
         We r.ac t a k e n o u r ".i~e tc g e t h i m b e c a u s e h e s t i l l w a s n o t
         b r e a t n i n g s o o n c s n e c u s i v . a i t h o u g n he had a g o o d h e a r t b e a t
         b y : r . e n . 3 0 w e n a c to s c c d e v e r y f e w p a c e s a n d m e v e n t i l a t e
         h i m a n 0 it w a s m e n , .33 I h a v e s t a t e d , t h a t i t r e a l l y b e g a n
    H    tc n i t h o m e w n a t /(as g o i n g o n b e c a u s e w e w e r e l i t e r a l l y
         b'tsoomc ever bocies.                        W o go t h i m on the a m D u l a n c e and
         t h e r e w e r e . t w o o e a o o o a i e s a l r e a d y in t h e r e .
                                                                              PHILLIPS


 2eaa bocies?             A.       v es. o n e c n t h e f l o o r a n a o n e c n o n e
 cf tne c o u c n e s i n si d e .          We p u t t h i s oers-on w e h a d a s s i s t e d
 cn t n e o c h e r o n e s n o I c o n t i n u e a t r y i n g to v e n t i l a t e — w e i l .
 I c c n t i n u e a v ent i l a ti n g , not trying.               He w a s b y t h e n b e g i n r :
 to n a k e s p o n t a n e o u s b r e a t h i n g e f f o r t s .   I s a i d to a P o l i c e ^ a
 sna t h e s m D u l s n c e cri'.sr t h a t q u i t e c D v i c u s l y               What I
 s a i c w a s , " T h i s m a n is c a n g e r o u s i y i l l .     H e n e e d s to b e in
 a h c s o i t a l n o w " ana the snioulanceman s aia he c o u l d not cet
 cut.

 Did you see t h a t ?               3 i c y o u s e e a n y c D s t r u c t i o n to h i m a e 1 1 1 n
 out?   A.   Y e s.                 ! i s a n . it w a s ’c l e a r --

What?         A.   It w a s z c c i s s a n c p e o D i s m i l l i n g a l l a r o u n d .
I m e a n , it w o u l c h a v e cee.n n e c e s s a r y for 3 g a n g w a y to h a v e
t e e n n a c e for t h e 9 - c u i s n c e tc c r i v e off.

Dia t h e a m D u i a n c e   in fact get sway, t h o u g n ?                A.    I
t h i n k it d i d e v e n t u a l l y cut by t h e n t h i s p e r s o n had b e g u n
co - = K e r e a s o n a o i e : : e s t h : n g e f f o r t s a n c h e w a s o n n i s ' s i d e
s n c n e w a s b r e a t h i n g s n a I s a i G to t n e P o l i c e m a n , " G e t h i m
t n e r e as q u i c k as you c a n " s n a D e c a u s e of w n a t I h a a s e e n
I felt, h a v i n g seen:                l o n g w i t h h i m , it w a s t h e n t i m e
to : : s n a t r y s n a r e l c s o m e D o a v e l s e .

Zan y c u g i v e us a n y i:"ss c f h o w l o n g t h e d e l a y w a s b e t w e e n
■.he a ~ c u 1 a n c s     r s s c y t c c: a n d it a c t u a i I v c a 1 n a ?


   en    . : n 1 r,x . c u     ;z irea           acsin     crying       z2 ne sc a s r u c n
3 3 ■Z - Z Z w L z     i r« " r.t    '-r - - .      A■       V5 s

r u e • r u ~ztine. I tr 1 n x . '-“.at 0 e 0 0 1 s '.vers e i t h e r s i l e n t l y
i n ju r e c :: e e a a . c c n n 1 ~ t e 1 y a e a c ? A. That was the
i.-pression I :ct.

” ~ 5 r r e ze v * r             ^ •>              1~ c e t w e e n ?     -          Yes. th s v
- e r e ".“ 3 : e c c i = : n 2 :• 3 t r s 1 1 y we w o u l d ’o e            l o o k i n g for .
        c s n c e r c u s i y ill             -c-ecsa i m m e a i a t e c r e a t m e n t ano
1     ~m x         n y i m c r e s s i t n .-as : y t h e n ic w a s c o o l a t e          for
; cse .                   r e ~ a v •' ■- e :: e n s o m e c u t 1 .. c o u i d n o t       fi.no
in y c c c v       1 nt r, 3 t : 2 t - c c : v .

’■ 0 u z z t r a t n e r a n c r .; 1 - ■ c u         no t . on      t h a t a a v , 1 c is
 " 2 1 : zz : 3 v , 13 11 ~ t 1 7                     I think        : n a t is f a i r to
3 a v . .~s .

.'hat w a s - it : a r 1 1 c u 1 : : i v t h a t m a g e y o u a n g r y , t h a t i n c u c e c
y ou :c co co s e e ax *.r :n e p r e s s o n t h a t d a y ?                 A.     Really
the ./no is ' •cenar ic : the ,-/av t n a t w e n a o c e e n c o m o r e s s e a l i k e
s a r c m e s m -• o e n :        c ne w a v t n a t t h i s a p p e a r e a to be no
i t e w a r c m a "cr s a f e t v r e a s o n s to g e t p e o p l e to d i s t r i b u t e
■ o r e e v e n i y . a n d t h e n t h e f a i l u r e o f e q u i p m e n t to a r r i v e
c h a t n a v n a v e c e e n o f s o n s b e n e f i t a n d I s t r e s s the w o r d
■'hay’1 a n o t h e n . " 3 v i n e c e e n u n a b l e to f i nd o t h e r p e o d e
I m a y n a v e c e e n a o l e t n e L o ’, a n o t h e n b e i n g u n a b l e to f i n e
cut ../here t he c s s u a i t i e s n a a a c t u a l l y b e e n t a k e n to.
                                                                    G.   PHILLIPS


Yo u s e e m co h a v e r c r m e a a . v i e w , d i d y o u no.c - I t h i n k y o u
s a i d it in y o u r s t a c e m e n c - t h a t t h i s was. t h e f a u l t of*
the P o l i c e ?      A.      W e i l , i f I c r a w a t t s n c i o n to m y s t a t e m e n
t ne w o r a I u s e a G e l i b e r s t e i y a n d t h e t e n s e o f t h e ' w o r d is
d e l i b e r a t e is I " k n e w ' 1 w n o s e f a u l t it wa s, b e c a u s e at t h a t
t i m e I w a s c e r t a i n in m v m i n a t h a t it w a s e n t i r e l y a P o l i c e
m a t t e r c u t on r e f l e c t i o n t h e r e a r e o o v i o u s i v m a n y , m a n y
factors involvea.

Yes, of c o ur s e .              S a f a r as that, is c o n c e r n e d , c a n you. s a y
if t h e r e is a n v b o a y w h o m i g h t h a v e b e e n s a v e d b u t w a s n o t
as a r e s u l t o f w h a t y o u p e r c e i v e d as the i n a d e q u a c i e s o f
t he e q u i p m e n t f r o m y o u r p o i n c o f v i e w ?       A.      I can onlv
say t h a c t h e r e m a y n a v e b e e n b e c a u s e it m a y w e l l b e t h a t
the c e i a v in g e t t i n g p e o o i e c u t o f t h e t e r r a c e w a s t o o
t r e a t s n a by t h e n it w a s p . r o D a b l y o r p o s s i b l y t o o l a t e for
t h e m a n d it c o n c e r n s m e n o c t h a t p e o p l e w o u l d h a v e b e e n
n a r m e d by s d e - f i b r i l l a c o r , t h a t in a c t u a l f a c t m a y b e s o m e
s e ve r e l y b r a i n - a a m a g e o p e o D i e may have been r e v i v e d and
we w o u i a n o w h a v e a g r e a t n u m b e r o f s t i l l u n c o n s c i o u s ,
p e r m a n e n t l y b r a i n - c a m s c e a fans.

Y o u , o f c o u r s e , w e r e ve:"' h e a v i l y t a k e n up w i t h t h e     first
c a s u a l t y t h a c y a u c a m e t o f o r t h a t 15 m i n u t e s or s o      after
y o u c c : : n to t h e ?it:n.?              A.      Yes.

:c c u r i n g t n a t 15 m i n u t e s it is f a i r to s a y, is it n o t,
Dr. P h i l l i p s , trac i f •s n v b o o y h a d b e e n in s b a a c o n d i t i o n
;r if : ~ e v - s c beer, r v s n e c so t h a t t h e y c o u l d n o l o n g e r
              "3 u n u r e s l a t e r it w o u l d be ■too l a t e , w o u i c it.
net?                7ha:      a r i J t i n c t c o s s i b i l i t v . ves.
    A        j. You nave heard figures cf >* minutes and S minutes? - a.
                Certainly, yes.  If they had not been breaming for that tine
                tnen it was hopeless. I agree.

                                               Crcss-Examinee by MR. KALLIFETIS:

             0. Dr. Phillips, may I just asK you a couple questions about the
                use of the defibrillator as you appear to be familiar with.it.
    B           It is right in acdition to being certain that the patient is
                in fibrillation you have- got to be..cer.t,ai.n. of the type of
                fibrillation? There is a course and fine fibrillation., is not
                there? - A. Usually ir. carciac arrest one cf two situations
                exists.  There may :e absolutely no fibrillation and it mav
                actually ce asystciic.

o   C!
             j. Asystciic is just a straight line, is not. it. on the machine?


             ij. Would you use a defibrillator in those circumstances? - A.


                You would? - A . Yes.

                What would that achieve." - A. It mav actually achieve the
    D!          object.  I: nay restore tr.em to cyanosed rhythmn or it
                may actually cut tr.em-ir.tc ventricular fibrillation, in
                which case a repea tec jolt cf defibrillation may put


                                                             it c: somerccv wno is m
                                                             ict. ;arcic: pulmonary
                                                             iould always so on anvvav.   You
    e    :                                                   :. . That must continue between

O
                                                             :eopie wno unicrtunaceiy were,
                                                              fit anc reasonably healthy, anc

                                                             :n in asvsttie ratr.er m a n in


                       _ _ r>-J                                _ am sorrv. cid you say anoxia ::


                       MR . r'Ai                                    -yccxic ceatn.    In c-tr.ez
                *.vcrcs. l a c K

                        1* k*                        Ycu =re susgestins tnev would have ceer. ir.
    Gi
                asvstoie?
                      MR. KALLIrETIi'':    :es . More than iikeiv the majority ■
                m e m would have ceer.? - a; I con't know I am qualified to
                answer that.    You m i n k you would have to ask a caraioiogis-
                out 1 think it is reiscnaoie to assume that they mav have
                           i    » ir.to 7F ana then asystole.
                                    'a r \ *



    H
                .us: icoK           cl          .is mart.   please. Dr. Phillips.    You mav not
                                                                            = U1



                       abie to help us with it. but if you can please try. (Chart
                       handed to witness) Do you recognise any of those? - a . These
                       are ail ECG tracings. I assume.

                    Q . fes. what is the rirst one? - A. The rirst one demonstrates a
                        patient in carciac arrest most likely who is fibrillatins.   I
                        don't reaily see tne point of drawing a dis-tinction between
                        the types cf fibrillation.
        B
                            LORD JUSTICE. TAYLOR:  I am wondering where the whoie of
                       this is taking us. quite frankly.

                                  MR. KALLIFETIS:   _ csn do it in two sentences, sir,

                      Ir. Phillips, would ycu have used the defibrillator in all of
                      these conditions? - A. This is not a condition.  This is a
0       ci            piece cf paper.

                0.    I am sorry.  Short circuit.    The conditions as revealed by
                      these readings? - a . This does not. reveai anything.  I want tc
                      see wnat the patient looks like. Has he got a paipabie heart
                      3 0 3 r'/

                Ci. The point is this, ycu can see that for example the
    D                 distinction between - 2 nd 5 is very fine, is not it? - A.

                I’. - is ir. fact a ventricular fibrillation and 5 is merely a
                    loose lead on the r.acr.ir.e. You see the point? - A. These
                    traces are not coming off a defibrillator.    They are coming,
                    oresume, from an III mscr.ine.

                      • ’U , ..« .  / -w•••— — -••• -■•— ---- — __ _ a 1— ..   s reac-
                      cut.     That is wnat ycu nave to monitor before you use tne

                      :: you :on't you tr.ir..-: it would be very difficult to
                      cistir.guisn between - anc 5. for example? - A . I don't thir.r.
                      ycu wouic have ceen attempting to use the defibrillator as a

                      were .sirlv oartair. -as in carciac arrest.

                                                        ■t pattern is cer ere vou apply
                                                         if you con't
                                                        :oir.t of tra­

                1   , The point is simpiv tr.is. Ir. Phillips, before vou use a
                      cefibrillator you nave got to make sure tne patient is in tne
                      rignt condition ftr it. snc tnat means t ■ kins a read ins cf r.is
    q       \         heart beat or tne aoser.ee of it? - a. Th at is not entirely
                      true, because tnere are cefibnllators t.nat c o n 11 give a reac
                      out, in wnicn case you use tnem purely o.n clinical grounds.

            ;                MR. ." . ALLIPETISSir. I don't think I need take this
                      point very much furtner.     With the crowded conditions on that
                      pit’-cn, you nave heard tne evidence from peoDie who are trainee:
                      to use tnese machinesi and I thinK Dr. Phillips wouid concede
    J-J j             tnat someoody wouic nave to come who was trainee to use it.
                      and vou nave neard tne evidence from tnose people.

                                                        I I #1
                                                               =«TT T t s c




             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Yes. “hank you.

0.           MR. KALLI?£TI£:    Just help me cn this, please. Dr.
        Phillips.  The aaiDulance to which you took the patient cn whom
        you naa been wording for 15 minutes, that was behind the goai
        : think, was not it? - a . That is-right, yes.

                      Cross-Zxamlned bv MR. WOODWARD:

Q.      Dr. Phillips. you went into pen 2? - a. Yes.

0.     And having got into pen 2 you perceived there was quite                a
       crowa of people in it? - a . Yes.

■j. At that stage if you r.ad wanted to what was there to prevent
       you from returning anc retracing your path if you aid not like
       what you found? - a. There was nothing to prevent it. but I
       did not know there was anv other way on to the terrace.

C.,5ut you got cn to tr.e terrace, and does it follow from-your
   continued path across the terrace to where you took up a
   position that was by cr.oice? - A. Yes.

j. The position you tcoK up was towards the right-hand side of
   pen 2~ - a . Yes.

      And were you actually :v tr.e crusn barrier you described?
        re vcu up against tr.e crush barrier? - A. No. we were not uc


      You were to tr.e rear c: cnat.' - A. xes.

      And some distance frcr. tr.e racial fence? - A. Yes.

      How far were you         tne   fence? Can you .remember? - A. A
      matter :: ■-•arcs.   Between   1 anc 5. About r yards, prcbabiv.

      jLz. tr.at put ycu tcwarcs tr.e ieft-nana ena of the barrier you
      cescricec. :r trwarcs     tr.e fence st.ce c: tr.e carrier? - A. I


      Ycu were not aware t:     tr.e carrier? -   a   . No.: was not.

     Hew cc vou .--.now wr.ere ■■•t-u were in relation to it? - A. Because
     as ~v statement savs. - ano c-ne or tne people i was witn wnen
     we went a c r c s s to tr.e rignt enaea up furtner down the terrace
     from r.v orotr.er ana'.tiv fnena. ana having looked up we saw
     wnere tney were anc we .naae our way up to tnem. ana to get tc
     tnem we haa to actual!-/ crawi under tnat carrier.        That is new
     I knew tnere was a carrier there.

      what I want to ast: you aoout snortiv is your experience uni is t
     .vou were in tnat position, ana so far as you could see it wnat
      was nappening m tr.e crowa arouna you.   Accoraing to your
       tatement you were not aware, being in that position, of any
     a «)




       articular surge coming upon you.   Is tnat rignt? - *. Not a
                                         ~c


                                                                             PHILLIPS


      surge.     An increase in pressure.

0.    A steady buiid up in pressure? -A. Yes. sir.

u.    And is that reaiiy the extent of your experience whilst you
     were on that terrace? - A. Yes.

0.    Did you witness any surge in the immediate proximity?                         - a . No.

0.    You wouid be'generally aware ox the crowd around vou?                         -a .
     Yes.

0.   So tne evidence you wouid have the Inquiry accept is that from
     the time you were cn that terrace in that sort of position
     there was no sudden surge which affected you or the people
     around you ? - A . Yes.

0. How long were you in that position fcr? -                      a   . From reaching
   that point until climbing over?

1. Yes? - A. I am fairly soon we got to that position by about
   2.20. at the most 2.20. ~.nd as 1 have said I am not sure when
   I climbed over tr.e fence, but it could have been round about
   LO-past-i.

            LORD J U S T I C E T A Y L O R :        Thank you, doctor.

                                  rZr.ZNC MORATH Called

                               E::=mir.=a :v MR. -iQLDSACK:

1.    Are ycu    Ferenc Mcratn? -              a   . Yes, I am.

J.. Living ir. Lcr.ccn cut a supporter of Leeas?                      - A.   Yes. that   is


     a he Mr. .‘^oratn. you get in touch witn us -is i. resuit ofbavins
     ceer. at tr.e ire cemi--mai cetween Coventry ana Leeds.        Is


     Anc appreciating tnat m e r e were a r.umcer of similarities o:
     tr.at cccasicr. witr. wnat r.appened tr.is year? - a . .£ tnousnt
     there were similarities.     It is subject to you to decice.

     jr. tr.e   occasion of tne 1987 £emi-Jinai vou came from                     Lcncon
     ccacr..     Ic tr.at rignt ?■ - a .Icrrect.

     Ana you were one of cr.ose affeetea by tne aelays on tne Ml?
     A . Yes

     *hat time cic vou actually get off your coach in Sheffield?
     A. I can't rememoer the time, actually.

     Do you   know      now long before tne kick-off it was? - A. The
     reasonI can't      remember tne    specific times was because tne
     same actually       kicr.ea off eariy.  It was playea on a Sunaav
     because Leeas       were plaving. ana it was the second Cup fixtur
4
                                                                               CD/1009/92
      -THE,-HlfiH-CQ.URT QF JUSTICE                     Sworn hv? a
                                                         On behalf of: Smith
 QUEEN S BENCH DIVISION                                 Yorkshire
                                                        Ambulance and Paramedi n
 CROWN OFFICE LIST                                      Serving       --

                                                        F ir s t
                                                        Bated             September 1993
 IN-THE MATTER. OF AN APPLICATION FOR A             JU D TnTA T. b t o t t o

B E T W E E N          :

                                          REGINA

                                           - v -

                     HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE

                                         EX PARTE

                                    STRINGER AND OTHERS




This is the exhibit marked "AP4" referred to in the affidavit of
Albert Page attached hereto.




Sworn this                 day of               1993


Before me,




Solicitor

  O      ^   k   l
                     CRITICISMS OF SYMAS


Implicit       criticisms   of SYMAS   appeared   in quotations

contained in an article which appeared in The Times and The

Independent ,of 17 April 1989.      They also appeared in other

newspapers.       The remarks were made by two doctors       who

attended Hillsborough as Liverpool supporters on 15 April

1989.    During the course of the evidence it became clear

that the first five criticisms by Doctor A related to events

in the area behind the Leppings Lane stand and terrace (day
25 pl21D).




DOCTOR A



1. "At 3.30 pm there were no medical personnel apart from
   one or two St John's ambulancemen.   There was no medical
   equipment and there was only one ambulance."
  FACTS:

  a.    Ambulances arriving at Leppings Lane (see video RJH2)
        1513       S407 arrives (leaves 1523)
        1516       S203 arrives (leaves 1528)
                  (by 1530          "n from this ambulance is on
                  the pitch - video MAPI)
        1521       S208 arrives (leaves 1532)
        1535       R608 arrives

        This doctor cannot have arrived in the concourse
        until about 1535.

  b.    About 40 casualties are taken from the Leppings Lane
        end by SYMAS, of which 5 were removed by 1532.   All
                                1




                         Illo
      casualties had been removed from that end of the
      ground by 1606 (SYMAS recording track 19 page 19)
      Therefore about 35 casualties, all of whom survived
      were conveyed by SYMAS vehicles between 1532 and




 "Lack of triage”

 FACTS:

a.    SYMAS personnel operated triage:
      -   see               statement, paragraph 7
      -   see Mr Yoxall's evidence - day 23 page 126F
      -   see               statement - paragraphs 15 to 18
      -   see              statement - paragraphs 16 and 21
b.   Other personnel - police - also:

     - see Miss Pearson's evidence - day 17 page 159E-H




"A full casualty team with resuscitation equipment did
not arrive from the hospital until about 4.15 pm."
FACTS:

a.   A full casualty team arrived at the designated
     casualty clearing station (the gymnasium) at the
     Penistone Road end of the ground.
     statement paragraph 12 shows that the medical team
     left Northern General Hospital at 1544? it would
     therefore have been at the ground by 1550 at the verv
     latest.

b . A casualty team did not attend at Leppings Lane and
     all casualties had been removed from that end of the
     ground by 1606 (see above).

c.   A further casualty team arrived from Barnsley
     District General Hospital at the designated casualty
     clearing station but was not required.

d.   The implication that only the casualty teams would
     have resuscitation equipment is wrong.   All SYMAS
     frontline ambulances carry portable and fixed
     resuscitation equipment which was used at Leppings
     Lane.    Fire     service     also    carried resuscitation
     equipment.




"There was no oxygen, airway tubes and drips.

FACTS:
a.   No oxygen        -    W r o n g =* All S Y M A S frontline.
                           ambulances carry pneupac minuteman
                           oxygen resuscitators and have a
                           static supply of oxygen on board.

b.   No airways - Wrong:
                       i. All SYMAS frontline vehicles carry
                          a selection of airways, and a large
                          number were inserted.

                      ii. If the doctor means to refer to the
                           lack of intubation equipment, such
                           equipment is carried by paramedics
                           for use by them as they are trained
                           to use it.       Although there were
                           some doctors present in the crowd
                           who were competent to use such
                           equipment had it been available for
                           g e n e r a l use ( a p a r t f r o m that
                           brought by paramedics and the
                           medical team) it is impractical to
                           expect a supply of such equipment,
                           which can only safely be used by
                           those trained to use it, to be
                           available on the offchance that
                           suitably qualified persons may be
                           among spectators. (This doctor
                           admitted that it was some time
                           s i n c e he h a d c a r r i e d o u t an
                         > intubation himself - see day 25
                           page 124D).
                     iii. A consultant anaesthetist (day 25
                          p27D) agreed that if the tube were
                          wrongly inserted it could kill the
                          patient. The treatment that was
                          b e i n g a d m i n i s t e r e d by p o l i c e
                          officers, fans, St John's and SYMAS
                          ambulancemen, namely CPR, was the
                          correct treatment                   in the
                          circumstances and undoubtedly did
r                                   save lives,
         c.    No drips      -      Wrong:

                              i. Infusion equipment is carried by
                                 paramedics, and requires special
                                 training, however, there is no
                                 evidence that any c a s u a l t y was
                                 prejudiced by the lack of infusion
                                 equipment.

                             ii. Medical Team (gymnasium) obviously
                                 had I.V. drips because spectator
                                 nurse F J Eccleston gave evidence
                                 that he set up 10 drips ready for
                                 doctors (Transcript day 5 pl5D).




    5.   "More lives could have been saved if staff and equipment
         had arrived earlier."

         FACTS:

         a.    Before he was reminded that he had made such a
               statement to the press, Dr in chief (day 25 page 115G
               to 116G) accepted that it was pure speculation
               whether or not further lives could have been saved
               (day 25 page 1156 to 116D), and on cross examination
               (day 25 page 127C to D) a g r e e d t h a t it was
               "unfortunate" that he had sought out the press to
               make public pronouncements which it was not possible
               for him to make.

         b.   If as SYMAS submit, the crushing started at the very
              latest at 1459, by the time that any medical
              a s s i s t a n c e got to the most severely crushed
              spectators they had been deprived of oxygen for over
              4 minutes and therefore it is unlikely that the
              presence or otherwise of such equipment made any
              practical difference.



    DOCTOR P

    6.   "Complains about the lack of defibrillators"
         FACTS:


                                     4




                                 1 1 1
We believe that the Inquiry accepts that the use of
defibrillators on the pitch in the circumstances of
t h i s t r a g e d y w o u l d h a v e been p r o f e s s i o n a l l y
irresponsible, (day 19 page 31C) (day 24 page 103F)
(day 25 page 24A and 29A).

In case anybody has any doubts about it we list the
difficulties:

  i.   If wrongly used it can kill:

        - the patient
        - the operator
        - any third party coming into contact with the
          patient.

 ii.   Before being used national guidelines for
       ambulancemen lay down that an ECG reading for
       diagnosis should be obtained from the machine.
       In order for the reading and diagnosis to be
       accurate the patient and the defibrillator must
       be completely isolated from any movement and
       t h e s u r r o u n d i n g e n v i r o n m e n t m u s t be
       sufficiently stable to permit an accurate
       assessment of the ECG recorded. Spurious
       readings can occur in a crowd.

iii.   In the circumstances of this tragedy when
       otherwise relatively fit individuals were
       rendered hypoxic (lack of oxygen), the likely
       heart pattern is asystole (continuous line of
       electrical activity with no effective heart
       contractions) and not ventricular fibrillation.
       The purpose of a defibrillator is to jolt a
       fibrillating heart rhythm back into a normal
       pattern.    The standard treatment for asystole
       is CPR.   Successful CPR would normally produce
       a regular heart pattern rather than ventricular
       fibrillation.

iv.    However, given the length of time during which
       most of the patients had been deprived of
       oxygen, even the use of a defibrillator would
       not have made any practical difference (see Dr
       P's statement to the police, page 7 "my
       thoughts that in view of the length of time he
       was pulseless it would probably be kinder if he
       died.   I am sure he must have been severely
       brain damaged by that time" and at the bottom
       of the page "I looked desperately for somebody
       not dead but seriously ill who needed help.   I
       could not find anybody in that category in the
                          5




                      12.0
pp




                         goal area.   They were either all dead or okay
                         with nothing in between.")

     B.   Ambulance Equipment

          1.                 A list of equipment carried by all SYMAS      f
               ambulances, the contents of a rescue box carried on a
               frontline ambulance, the contents of an ambulanceman's
I              satchel and the equipment carried by an extended trained
               ambulanceman are contained in Section V.

          2.   This equipment is intended for use by SYMAS personnel and
               not by third parties.

          3.   Much of the equipment has to be kept with the ambulance
               for use on the journey to hospital.

          4.   The primary purpose of the ambulance is to give immediate
               treatment to casualties and convey them to hospital.

          5.   On 15 April 1989 many SYMAS a m b u lancemen treated
               casualties with CPR and resuscitation, as we l l as
               conveying 172 injured to hospital. Any criticism of lack
               of equipment on SYMAS vehicles is ill-informed.




O




                                        6




                                    1 2 - 1
5
                                                                             CO/1009/92

                               STICE                        Sworn bv:   A Page
                                                            On behalf   of; South
    queen:                                                  Yorkshire   Metropolitan
                                                            Ambulance   and Paramedic
    CROWN OFFICE LIST                                       Serv ig Q

                                                            First
                                                            Dated TS     September 1993

    IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR A JUDICIAL REVIEW

    B E T W E E N :

                                         REGINA

                                         -   V   -

o                HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE

                                        EX PARTE

                               STRINGER AND OTHERS




    This is the exhibit marked "AP5" referred to in the affidavit of

    Albert Page attached hereto.




O


    Sworn this   a    day of                         1993



    Before me,




    Solicitor




                                  1 0    2
                                                                            G.    KELLY



u m b r e l l a a n d e v e r y b o d y s a y s , "I w o u l d h a v e r e m e m b e r e d
t h e l e t t e r h a d I s e e n it.            I have n o t s e e n it.

C a n I a s k y o u t h i s , Mr . K e l l y , i f y o u do r e c e i v e a l e t t e r -
in f a c t it is a d d r e s s e d to M r . C r o k e r , b u t i f y o u r e c e i v e
a l e t t e r w h i c h is o b v i o u s l y i n t e n d e d for t h e F . A . A. Y e s .

W o u l d it b e n o r m a l p r a c t i c e t o a c k n o w l e d g e t h a t ?          A. Y e s .

     • LOR© J U ST I C E TAYLOR :               I a m j u s t w o nd er ing ,, Mr.
C o l l i n s , a b o u t t h e f i g u r e s y o u a r e p u t t i n g b e c a u s e it
l o o k s as t h o u g h t h e S o u t h - W e s t c o r n e r h a s b e e n e x c l u d e d
on t h o s e f i g u r e s a n d it s h o u l d be w h e t h e r t h e S o u t h - W e s t
C o r n e r is i n c l u d e d c n P a r a g r a p h 20.        I do n o t k n o w b u t
it m a y n o t b e a v e r y p r e c i s e - - -

        MR. C O L L I N S :           I do n o t k n o w ,     s i r.

          LORD J U S T I C E T A Y L O R : . B e c a u s e we s h o u l d r e a l l y h a v e
s o m e t h i n g a d d i n a up to 1 0 , 1 0 0 a n d w h a t w e h a v e g o t is
s o m e t h i n g a d d i n g u p, i f y o u l e a v e o u t t h e S t a n a , to s o m e t h i n g
a b o u t 7 , 0 0 0 or 8 , 0 0 0 .
        MR. C O L L I N S :    Mr. E v a n s h a s g o t .his f i g u r e s w r o n g .
T h e o n l y p o i n t I w a s s e e k i n g to m a k e is w n e t h e r — -

i GRD JUSTICE            iAYLGK:           S o m e b o d y ,;:j.gnt ,ia«e 'r a i s e a a q u e r y
on it.
         MR. C O L L I N S : - - a n v c c c v s p o t t e d t h a t b u t w e c a n a s k
1M r . Z vs n s i f it is tncu'cnt n e c e s s a r y a b o u t t h e a c t u a l
 details.         Than* you..Mr. Kelly.
            : GRD J U S T I C E     TAYLCR:         T h a n k y o u , Mr.      Kelly.

            MR. JACKSON:            S ir. if I c a n a s s i s t o n m y f a v o u r i t e
 „ c ;n -       T f o n e w e r e ic r e p l a c e the V/est T e r r a c e w i t h / . 2 C 0
                ^ ■ s c o v i C ' j s l v 5 m i s D r i r . t - t h ey h a v e r e o e a t e o
 T h e ^ e s c S i a n o - i f ; ou r e p l a c e th e W e s t T e r r a c e w i t h
 7 . 2 2 0 . :r.a t w o u i c “ e an a c c u r a t e f i g u r e .

            _0RD    JUSTICE         TAYLGR:          Yes,    I see.
                                      JOHN ASHTON,          called

                                  E x a m i n e o bv HR.    PHILLIPS:

 Dr.    John A s h t o n ,        is t h a t r i g h t ?       A.       Correct.

 You are a l e c t u r e r            in C o m m u n i t y H e a l t h at L i v e r p o o l
 University.       A.                 Correct, sir.
 I t h i n k y o u w e n t to th e m a t c h o n 1 5 t h A p r i l o f t h i s y e a r
 with some of your family.                 A.    Y e s , t h a t is c o r r e c t .

 Had v o u b e e n t h e p r e v i o u s y e a r ?             A.       Yes,     the    previous
 v e a r " I was on the L e p p i n g s Lane                terrace.
                                                         J       .1
     I                                                   i WT
     t

                                                                                                     2 . ASHTON


                   Y o u m e n t i o n t h a t in t h e c o u r s e o f y o u r e v i d e n c e .       You
          Q.
                   lav       I t h i n k , t h a t v o u w e r e r a t h e r p l e a s e d , to h a v e S t a n d
                   s e a t s on t h i s p a r t i c u l a r o c c a s i o n t h i s y e a r .     A.      Yes,
                   b e c a u s e of the r e d u c e a a l l o c a t i o n l a s t year b e c a u s e          .
                   L i v e r p o o l had the Leppings L a ne ena, even t hough I have
                   s e a s o n t i c k e t s f or s e a t s at A n f i e l d w e o n l y h a d an
                   - l l o c s t io n of t e rr a c e tick e t s last year.                  It w a s v e r y
                   b a d ° it w a s v e r y c r c w c e c , i t w a s v e r y d i f f i c u l t .       I was
    B              frightened last year.
                             LORD J U ST I C E TAYLOR:           In 1988?          A.    In 1988 and
                   ay i n t e n t i o n w a s n o t to go t h i s y e a r ir we h a d g o t t e r r a c e
                   tickets again.               I d e c i c e d I w o u l d o n l y go i f w e g o t
                   t i c k e t s for s e a t i n g .
O                          MR      P H I L 1 IPS:   W h e r e had you                   s i o o q   on. t h e t e r r a c e s m
          Q.
                   1988?          A.       In t h e c o r n e r a r e a .
                   W o u l d y o u l i k e to t u r n s n o l o o k at t h e p l a n t h e r e .
          C,
                   ^#       (D e m o n s t r a t e o ) In t h i s a r e a h e r e .

                   Yes. thank you.              T h at-is the S o u t h - W e s t corner,                         just
          Q.
                   b e l o w t he P o l i c e C o n t r c i B o x . A.    i_orrect.
    Dl             On t h a t o c c a s i o n w a s :: p a r t i c u l a r l y c r o w d e d t h e r e ?
                   A . V e r v c r s w a e c ir.cssc. y e s .

                   W ers ycu           .    - - - s o s c r . s s ' t h e r e s t cf t h e t e r r a c e ?
                                           .— ■? c - ~ q '/1 3 w » i a m a r s s s o n s c l e h e i g h t
                   A.    Weil,
                                sc    CU1 t 3   <=   ^       ■


                    r,iH i *■ = = e m to ce 3 3 c s a a c r o s s           A.     It w a s the s a m e
                    c n r o u g n o u t as f ar as 1 c o u l d s e e a n a r.sny p e o p l e h a v e
                   ■ s u b s t a n t i a t e c t h a t : c ~ e as w e i 1.
                            was      w r c n c w i t h it ‘ rent y o u r p o i n t cf v i e w ?                            There
                    ,ere    :=c -any        :ec:^             rcunc        there.

                    W e r e vou f e e i i n g : : e s s u r 2 . 3 e i n a c r - s n e l .                        Y es .
                    i - wa s v e r y n p 1 e s s a n t .
    Fi
                 D i e v o u s a v anvthir.g, to a n y b o d y a b o u t t h a t ?          A.      W e l J»
               ' r.n           v Q U = e <=. th e t r o u o i e is p e o o i e l e a r n to p u t up w i t h
                 I'hige t h i n a s .        T h a t is c a r : o f t h e p r o o i e m .   The e x p e c t a t :
                 ar^        le w.    T h a t is « n a : p e o p l e g e t a n o t h a t is w h a t t h e y p u:
                 UO W i t h .
                    H a o v o u stood on t h e t e r r a c e s b e f o r e at o t h e r m a t c n e s ?
                    A     ' T h a v e n o t b e e n at S h e f f i e l d f or 2 0 - o d d y e a r s
                    when     Leicester          beat         us       2   : nil   but      I used       to   always       stand
                    c n th e S p i o n K o p at A n r i e l d w n e n I w a s at s c h o o l .
                         - t- s i o n i f i c a n t l y d i f f e r e n t f r o m w h a t y o u e x p e c t e d
               •              t e r r a c e s w h e n y o u _ w e n t in 1 9 8 8 ?        A.      In 1 9 M ,                 yes
                     it ia n o t w h a t y o u n o r m a l l y e x p e c t at a h o m e m a t c h
     HI              Anfield..
                                                                        to<s . if w a s m n r e c r o w d e d ,
                                                                      J. ASHTON

C o m i n g to t h i s y e a r ,     you w e r e a i m i n g     fcr'the West Stand.
A.        That's right.

Ana t h e r e were , I think, f o u r o f you. w ere t h e r e ?
A.    I w a s w i t h t w o c f ay s o n s a n a o n e c f m y n e p h e w s .

W h a t t i m e c i d y o u - a r r i v e sc t h e L e p p i n g s L a n e e n t r a n c e
to t h e g r o u n d ?       . It w a s a b o u t 2 . 3 0 .

Is t h i s t h e t i m e y o u h a G i n t e n d e d to a r r i v e ?         A.    Yes,
m o r e or l e s s .        If •••'e a r r i v e a t a m a t c h at A n f i e l d w e
f r e q u e n t l y d o n o t a r r i v e u n t i l t w e n t y to or q u a r t e r to
a n d w e h a v e no t r c u o l e g e t t i n g i n.          T h e r e i s no p r o b l e m :
it i s v e r y s m o o t n .

So h a i r .past.-two e v e n t h c u c n t h i s w a s a S e m i - F i n a l a n d
w a s a o i n g tc b e a w e 1 1 - a t t e n d e d m a t c h , y o u c o n s i d e r e d
to b e a d e q u a t e .  A.    P e r f e c t l y a d e q u a t e , yes.

What time did you a r r i v e the p r e v i o u s year?                      A. W e l l ,
it w o u l d h a v e b e e n a s i m i l a r t i m e b e c a u s e w e d i d t h e s a m e
k ind of thing exceot that the p r e v i o u s year we w e nt via
the S n a k e P ass anc t h e r e h a d b e e n a l o t ' o f t r a f f i c p r o b l e m s
o n t h e S n a k e P a s s in " 5 8 8 s o t h i s y e a r w e w e n t v i a t h e
M 6 2 a n d t h e M1 a n a L ~ - f i c z w e e n t e r e d S h e f f i e l d by t h e
S c u t n . the s a n e w a v t h a t t n e N o t t i n g h a m s u p p o r t e r s w e r e
; z m i r.c i n t o i h e f f i ; _ : .
Cn t n is c : c : s : : r ;• c u r e t       to t h e c r c u n d a n d I t h i n k      you
frur.c 3 r.umcer c f                       ■/s i t i n g to g e t in, is t h a t r i g h t ?
A.         It w a s i. -m ec i 3 1 a 1-. a : p a r e n t t h a t t h e r e w a s n o c o n t r o l
e v e r th e --      t n e r e w a s r.c m a r s h a l l i n g o f t h e c r o w d g o i h g
i n t o tn e t u r n s t i l e s 3 n c t n e r e w e r e v e r y f ew t u r n s t i l e s f or
p e c o i e to g e t r n r c u c n .       -ie r.so t i c k e t s for t h e s e a t i n g
a r e a o u t y o u n a a tc :: t h r o u g h t h e s a m e t u r n s t i l e s a s i f
.au w e r e c o i n : tc t.te t e r r a c e .             T h e r e w a s n o ■s e g r e g a t i o n
= nr. t n e r e w a s r. c                         i n t o l i n e s fc r t h e t u r n s t i l e s :
it « s s j'js: ; c c r.c i = t e ~ej.ee.                Therewere very            few P o l i c e
in ev i c e n c e . no ■£ t = w a r e s      at 3 i j. .

W o u i c v c u e x p e c t tc tee c t e w a r c s c u t s i c e t h e g r o u n d ?
A.        Weil, some t i m es .           I m e a n , t h e r e a r e n o r m a l l y a few
a r c u n o r o u n o L i v e r c c c i cut t h e r e ' s n o r m a l l y a lot m o r e
P o l i c e in e v i c e n c e a n d z y t h e t i m e y o u g e t n e a r t h e
t u r n s t i l e s at A n f i e l c ;• cu s r e in l i n e s o f t w o or t h r e e
s o r e a s t from way cack.




                                                  /You saw Police horses.
                                                                                     J.   ASHTON


                  voa saw oolice horses chough, did you? ■ A. There were one
    A        Q<
                  or two police horses that I saw. Tnere were only about
                  half's dozen officers that I saw in nciai, and that may be
                  generous, actually.

                   t think it is right, is it not, .that your children joined
         ■   U-
                       c-0wd ci teooie ccing through uns uurnsuiies but you
                   J:
                    -os»~not to?’ A.       “t was too unpleasant,   we got to
                   wi-h^n ab-out 1 0 va-rds- cf t,hs turns^.es and it was too
    3
                   crushed.   I didn’t like it.      I became somewnat claustrophoo
                       r wit"dwaw. liv neohew, who is 24, said that he was
                   coins in and it would get worse before it got better, and
                  -so    said he was coir.g on. b y two -teenage d o v s m s i s u s c
                   on coins with their cousin,, so I found myself withdrawing

o                  alone the first time.
                   times before I went i~.
                                              But ail together i attempted tnree


             U.
                            did vou co back to when you left the crowd of
                  And wnere did
                  people?   rt •
                                               1 withdrew, I just withdrew
                  as far as —
                            W* 4 A
                                 —



                  the gates.
                  Would vcu ioc.< rcur.d,■ please, at where the pointer is
    D             showir.cr? Was it in fact where it is being snewn?
                   ■*         ^o        _        tn at    : o m w/   v 2a .

                        — *."=2 — «* — * a n u r t v e r a o i n c *?               ~        cioin— *.o t **i*ic..
                  — — — - ^ i * — ** - *         * f.srs ',vsr6 t w o o 1 1 1 C c r » • — ii* — »va s w. *~
                  I ' 1~Z~Z           : •.;itndr=w.        .’h e r e w e r e t w o o f f i c e r s i n it.
                  Z~~ZZ~-~^ .            -.-x                    a t t r a c t e c the a t t e n t i o n of one
                  •~f''the' o f f i c e r s v.v.c '..'as i: t h e L a n d r o v e r a n d I s a i d t o h i m
                                                                l this.          '.‘h e s i t u a t i o n is
                             v cu-                                  1s g o i n g t o b e a t r a g e d y "
                          r = -iust lac.-:ec a t m e ir. s u r p r i s e .
                                                                                                    • o "■ ~>
                                                                                     ihat's r - — 2 sav


    Fi             jiu vou. hea.                    j - - t-— discnar~inc messages to the


                  ' Z z u i d v o u s-96 v;r.5" -:                            re dcir.c, wns-nsr Tir.sy
                   v;a & zz. i s. ir»- u ~ z z s.r.'                          none cr an.vtning?
                    1       .;i'9V S D 0 2 S I S C , -w

                   ' - n i n k v o u d i d _r. f a c t g o i n t o t n e g r o u n d A. C o u l c
                      ■'’-t sav tnat '.viier. i withdrew that time, i when .vent
                   a-iu^stoca" bv the wall on tne ether side of Lappings Lane.

                            w„ _ _ v, ____                a . On the river side, and i watcnea
                   t r . e ' w n o l e s c e n e u n t i l it e a s e d o f f v e r y s u d d e n l y a b o u t
                   ^iv*=-r'0-3 c r 3 c ' c i o c ; < -./hen I w a s a o i e t o g o s t r a i g h t u p
                   t o ”n e t u r n s t i l e a n c gai“n a d m i s s i o n ;       so I o b s e r v e d ^ the
                   wnoie'"ever.t2 f r o m                    t o 3 o'cioc;-: a n d I s h o u l d l i k e t o
    H              ~ ' a v ~ t h a ^ l n e v e r saw a n y o f t n e e v e n t s t h a t t h e o f f i c e r s
                                                           I     I
                                                                                                           ASHTON


                  from the Constacuiarr r.ave c e scnaea m t n e i r evidence in
                  m e last week or h o .      At no point did I see some of this
                  activity and benavicv, r ir. the crowd that was described by
                  the officers,   1 »Vd li s. tc make that point because I feel
                  verv strongly              at point needs to be-wade.

                  Wnat are you tailing about particularly? A. I am talking
                  about the .vandalisti: ;:i:.d of behaviour cf the supporters,
                  ■J/ie supporters were :ressing to get in the gates but I
    B             never witnessed any ■•j:blie drunkenness or violence o r ”
                  anything of that .*:in:     i I was watcning throughout that
                  oericd iron 2 . 2 0 to .    .oc.<.

                  Did you see people.climcir.g ever the turnstiles? A. Not
                  ever"the turnstiles.    ihere were a number of people
                  climbir.c uo over the wall.

                  Did you see, curing tr.a time you were tnere ooserving it,
                  the Police Landrover 1:rcadcasting messages? A. I didn't
                  hear it broadcasting m essaces.

                  Di'c ycu see a iir.s                                  roiice r.crses across tne perimeter
                                 •            * - •   —                   a lot of police horses.   The mos*
                  I ever sav/ there w-                                  :wo police horses.   There may have
                  been mere but I ci;                                    see more than two.
    D
                  — -■                   =e s             r.vc h e      -.ding cn the roof c-f the Landrover
                  ——                 . “ 1 '* T S5 ■           “ ***    : = microphone?    A.
                                                                            -—          t   o       0 if
                  * - — -■*. *----   -JS y-    .

           ....   Lid vcu see any      the cates ceir.g cpenec, tne larger gates,
    ■r :          a . :.o.   he thing -as I v;as watcning from the other side
                  cf. the road and- there vsre a very vast number of people
O                 ii iC i       t,r.sr*                                ~^    ^ c*               •




                                                                                            Asntch?        A. Outside.

    F i ■:                                                                  m g s Lar.s? A. Yes, that's right,
                                                                            e ’ust been there this morning and
                                                                            horediblv smail.

                  ~c can v;e just nave i ;:::ture cr tne sort of view you
                  w o u l d hav er     :                               wnic:
                  m a y give us a clue, :o you see that there? A. I am sorry,
                  which oicture?
                  L o c k at the first picturo. i'ou will see a shot from
                  approximately th-t- position cf tne bridge over the river
                  cowards the corner snop --

                       LORD JuS'i'ICL 'i'AxLCr.: I am just -wondering if ne might
                  do better with Ccmpcsiti-_J., pnotographs 1 0 and. 1 1 , as a
                  succestion.
    H
                                                                                 IA
                                                                          ASKTC2J

                     '.‘he WITNESS: They are a bit too close up, I'm afraid,
                Is there not cne tr.at r.as got a bit rr.ore — —
    A
                     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: . I co not think he has got the
                right ones tnere.

                     Mr. PHILLIPS:    When you say 10 or II, sir --

                      LORD-JUSTICE 'TAYLCR:     Composite 1.            I am sorry,
    B           ISA' anc' 17A.
                     Mr . PHILLIPS:   Anc ISA perhaps.

                     LORD JUSTICE TAYLCR:        18A, yes.


o                         PHILLIPS:   Lcck at 18A first cf all, would ycu?
                    z'z~ s ISA, actually. It wasn't wnere I was standing,
                thcuch. - was standing _ur«.her round uO- _ne le_u.

        i   .
                All ri-nt.    Lee.-: at 17 and 13A.             A. Yes, 18 is better.

                Is that taken            a position that you were in? A. Yes,
                accrc::ir.ate ly.       :hir.k I was a bit further back and to
                                               tr.ink. Directly across from tne
                ■3:100 t.-.ere is a '.vail, a sandstone '.vail and I went back
    D            to tne sandstone •.■.•all:.
                                                 YCU       1 1 L         :.;a: ::.at is a
                                               ■im   W Ct W •       A. C-kay. I don't
                                                                   ,t it was never as e«
                                                                   ;-oers cf people.

                                                                   the■view tnat vou
                .•cult nave, -.c you =■=:
                          '•erreser.t the sort of view that you would nave'




                      ■v;::at ti.r.e -id vc: "z tr.roucn the turnstiles? A. -..'ne:
                  ...a„.„ai'_.,. -ct tnrou ~n, it r.ust have been 2 c ‘cicc.< cr




                You nau no trcusie    :attthg tr.rougn at a n /              A.   i-.O .


                Did vou see any cf            •crer cates oosn?             A.    HO.

                .'hen vou cot tr.roucn tne turnstiles, where did you co tc
                                    ..'as a oit disorientated because tne^
                     """.ediateiv I ’
                "-"cninc was verv peer ar.a'I didn't know where to go. So
                r :oc.<ea around to see wnere I should go and realised tns:
    H!
                                              I A A
    i




    j                                                                J.   ASHTON

             • co co      the seating area in the strand you •riad to co to .the
    |          '■■'chr    and uo ;r.2 sta—r tners, out — v*ent and boughu «
    !
    i            me u t.i ’"'oc   3ra,  n,ns —— -r.ir.the ,booth
                             '-''3 »•••*•**»                , ,  was wO
                                                                      • ■ t-.ie le^t •. Ox. «...
                                                                                         _

    I            an ,nce - *nd there were .1 m i n x two policemen on tne
    i            cate~u:Tto the stand itself -and they were .checking ticket
    |            acair. before people were allowed into the Suu.nd.

   Iq    on vour ticket it said which stand you needed to go cn,
B * ..did" it nor?   A.      Yes:, I have them,.here...

    i            It said, m tact, zr.a .1 vovi were required to go on gangway
                 vs   i v'^ar1 c correct.

                 And did you not see signs snowing you gangway '/? A. I
                 c , « i t remember it scecnicaiiy as tnat.    n i l j. can reme..»~
                 •           I fcunc the cate tc tne stand.   It may nave saic
                        but 1 1in not sure. My memory in general is that, m e
                 signing was very ccor.
                 C~n vou lust sieass icc.< at this bundle cf photographs,
                 •vest"Midlands' 2 , cr.a ‘
                                          .ircer bundle with tne west Midlands
                 iccc cn the zrcr.t, ar.u ioc.-c a>_ pnc-^g-av^n        ies .

                              courss-f 13        emorv. ysrcif buu go you sss uins-rs
D ! ~ * ^c~tr.e^ 1 eft-nand aids,                      and I?    A. Oh yes, I think


                  .„ ^           - — .= r -    t.".at ’,'ou w e r e ltc.<m~ ccr, w as it


                       L ; - ~ 2 ;-i:r..:     -■=3 , and m e r e was this gate, n.-;«
                 a**dcuble cats i c z z z 2 tne stairway, yes.
e       :
                  -_                          ir.rcu-r. there and uc the stairway to


                  •      -.-a-        ---         3   cc ttcm cf the stairway, die you


                 -                    =       v c u v;ere tr.ere?    A. Yes, m e r e
                 were~two'*cr ’t.-.r=e ;:itpli anead of me having tneir _ticket;
                 ~~=-c-:-z and w m 1 = - -'as there     there was a man a bit oide:
                 --ar. me wnc accsarad :rcm my          left, and I assume ne had
                 ccme cut of tne tunnel cut ne appeared from my lert.              He
                 ::- -.veeoir.c: anc v®r" ucset and he said tc one of the poi;
                 cn tne cate :r?ou 1va got to do something, there|s kids
                 dvina'in there".       The policeman just ignored him and
                 continued checking tickets, checked my ticker, and tnen
                 I went on up into tne stand.
                  Did tr.at colicemar. send the man off across tne yard to
                  ctr.ers wno were ?.crccs cne yard?   .A. That's not my
                  reccilection cn it.

                  You went uc tne stairway““then, did you?                A. Yes.
H!
        ' t *i    Ana you went ir.tc m e         stana?       A.   Yes.
                                                      I M A
     "ORD JUSTICE l.-.YLCR: BlcLyou take what the_man~had
said seriously?    A. Yes, I was quite shocked and --

DidLyou-say anything to the policeman?   A. I.^said “D o n t
you think you'd better see what the proolem is . He wasn w
actually — -
You said t h a t , did you?                            A.      That is my r e c o lle c t io n .

            LOilD JUSTICE TAYLOR:                         Yes.
             ^HILLI^S: Ycu v.rent up tne szsirs and i tninic
l o o k e d * for*
                vour se£-.    Was it congested in the West Stand
when vou went uo tners?             A. Well, I had now begun to
wo-’-v'because mv two sens ana rav nepnew naa cone ana I
h - d * s e a that tnere was something going on. This was
l-e r’“sr --ime I realised that there was really a problem
as oDDOsedTo ay anticipation that there could be_a proble:
__cJ,‘
     ar-ar-r0 - 3 .     S o I hurried up the stairs and rouna
       i r ../as v®"1
                    "'/ ccr.cested at tne top of the stairs, i_uat
-lora“wer« Deoole in'tr.e aisle all the way back up to the
--u'o’-- the stairs, and that I couldn't make progress aown
          vq.,; qr seats ■.-.•here we had tickets booked, which was
    '’second rcw~frcm tr.e very front.        I couldn’t get down
"'o’-s'becauss there v.,ere so rnanv people actually in tne
s
i„-ari    VOU CCZ—    —r . __ -—- •
                                  .*
                                   •-s 2-——u^ .r'
                                                uf "               r-n •vo*1
                                                                         w ** i>bi w ~<- c
                                                                                         w 8 0S
                                                                                           «»ww   ou~ on
  **W* , * • * ’ - • _ •                   **     Vp*              ’—■*—a r* * a —o * vr


.'nier. v o u              ..er — -~ —                                                i e l d of play,
•■•vcS
    • - c   v-..-   -. . .aa t>c- *h» . . ------------
                                          ^till -r. " r c a r e s s ?          i-o.
-       ,.ou avehtuail managed tc struggle ccwn to your
I--c~a-Vvou’- -ernew?’ A. Yes, I went along tne row
adjacent to where I    ccme cut at tne to? o f ^ h e stairs

 :. . . - - 2              z.zr.zt z r.-        - .= wc..,r               ('•ror-
                                                                          w . — - -ne~ rows
~w *                _ „ ,3 -     .       “ c v/nsjirs - r . e v v ;s r s 3r.c zou r.d i r . i i
             v.'srs     a il    n"**-*

,-.n       - -v-a- -- .3 -t would be \;nen vou get tnere?
T'* i'hat"mistLnave :een about ten-past-3 cr ;ust after,
because the game ".as stopped.     I aicin't ever. .%now
came nad e v e r starts-, tc ce p.cnest,.

 vou 'would not have =eer. fr.y cf it at ail, would you?
 A.

 And what was haooenin? at the front of the terrace? A. It
 was iust chaos.         The immediate impression tnere was or
 iarge .numbers of people being pulled up into tne stanu
 :-rQ; tno terrace.        Mv nephew was involvec m tnat. i.e
                       osooie v;i=n o^hsr ?e c n U : ar.c tnen you
 '-oulci~see peoble oK - n e j i t c h ly in g c l e a r l y very se verely
 111, c is tre s s s d , sons o f -fiem looking as though tney “ y
 already be dead - one or two - at that stage.
                                                                     * AA
                                                                      I I I



                                                                                                                 J.   ASHTON

                   Were you able to see into the cerrace frgat where you were?
             Q.
                   A. Oh yes.   Into che cerrace?

                   Into cne cerrace       Oniv reailv cowards the front.   I
             * •
                   didn't really cake in che terrace.   My attention was arawn
                   —o chs whole area cf the pitch j.e&lly •

                   What cid you cor          >iv immediace concern was with the
                   oressure that there was there at tne ircnt rows, Decause
                   it was verv squashed in the front rows' of the stand because-
    B
                   cher® u/ere so rr.anv oeoole in there; and I wanted co get
                   rnv-own children bacit away from that pressure, so I persuaded
                   •-y cwc sons co ccrne csc/. a rsw rows. L^y nephew, Carl,
                   5 -ayjj cecause ne was helping co puli people upi     -hen
                   wnen'"^’ goc back about eight or csn rows, you know, I was
c                  cr.en acie tc appraise :ni situation in the stand ana'look
                   across and see what was actually ccinc on across uhe j^i^.—...

                   •■’hese oeoDle who were being brought up into the West Stana,
                   did thev apoear to you tc have any injuries or to be
                   distressed physicaliy.         ■rhev were distressed.




    D              •-c-
                   1  U         ’ C m* f         ■~®oois
                                                   w ^   wers culled uo into the stanc.

                   At wnac scage di= it happen last year? A . I can't remeicci
                   T.i_ . 2 nc tir.e ice. Sue I rernenicer seeing people c e m g
                     x• • • -                ~              ——.a     - - - r i       1 2 .3 “      V S S 2T •


                   C'” ‘d vou sav how ~ar.v people were pulled up last year?
                        I c o u l d n ’t s a y I ~usc remember noting it, you xnow.
    E!
                    ~-d vou hear anvtr.ir.g cr. _ne tanr.oy.     A. Yes , che tanr.oy
                   v""
                    .r£S   Liner ^ s c ‘
                                       o 19      r~.r-
                                                  * _ the
                                                       V*   oitch and get bacx into
                                                          .rcscscc ———

                                 ^ —. —«
                                wwPD       — • - “ • •. “
                                           u -w C 5 -—
                                                             ,
                                                            ——         ,      ,— •           iCi —v. oo tr.i getting cit
                                                                                            c*-
                                                                                          ••• Ti
                                                                                          ,,C                                       _r.e
                   citor. and bacx into tr.e grcunc?                                                       A.   To cec off the
                   cl ton and bacx into tr.e ground.
        Fi
                   c=l i ' j i l l
                   f s                *1 • ’
                                           ’W
                                            ' ' ell,
                                                --------------- tr.ey were
                                                                 t    -      saying
                                                                                ^ ------ V    to„ - get
                                                                                           ---------   ^
                                                                                                           cio tne -niter..
                   - :an'c oe      n(a certain
                                         a                      accuc   v.'hetner      they          said  co get oacx
                   ;r. tne cround.                          ;hev   said'to   cec       off         tr.e  pitch.

                        ;-ir. PHILLIPS: All right.  Did you hear anything about
                   doctors on the tannoy?   A. Not until about 20-past-3.

                   And wnat cid you r.eaj. . A. I can't remember cne precise
                   words cuc thev canncved for maybe doctors ana nurses^ ic
                   tav nave been medical personnel. It was to inaxe cnemseives
                   avaiiaoie co go dov/n.



    H                                                                                                           /Q.   'i‘o where?
                                                                                 1 ^ 1
                                                           112
                                                                                        Wii




                         _  , ...,p .'-av -u s t said v/culc ,tnev come ou<_ «.nc
        q  Cc wnere? -
            .                                                    -member the fo ra of worcs
A          make t h e a s e l v e s .............. — u - - -
           e r.a c tly .
                                 . .„               r.,-.r,r.o v ~, - a . Yes, I imm ediately
        q. Did you rajponc - - z "~ .~ r ^dcv.’n the bad: o f Leppings Lane
           responcec uO --..a-.                        ,: ,e bov3 f o r the moment ju s t to
           Stand myself «n -                                         a constable on the s t a i r s
           see what was n a p p e r . - . ^ - ^ - ^ “ “Qdv who i0 0 :<ed as though
B          ‘ J the ^ S e ^ - i - ^ ^ ^ r e i ' b u t were riot c r i t i c a l and ..
            t h g V V/S2TS                                     ^ ,
                                                           •cort    to.
                asked him v:nc
                                            „ _                              *Teil I assumed he was a
                ;ou        ir®v!
                :cnst-ci=. tC«e
                             -*s w.1—- S r
                                         - :-unlor rank Policeman.

        Q       0**           ■*


                                                            i       - -i «   n .e?
                                                                                s l - A. He did. not know,
        0.
                      did no- knew ar.y
                      C
                                                                    ■------- —
                     . .            --- - -. I went down the stairs at the
                ■ o                         eove-a i ?oIicemen'who I shoulc re?o:
                Lr.to tne yarc                 r ..,_s ar.Sv/erinc the Tannoy, wno
                ;o as Z was a C w w - ~ ;_    n; ^ _he.- h-d -ny idea who I
                shculc -i repcj. ■-
                    : ^^ i         O 2T ^   * w/ *
D                                                          ■■ ■ -•'-i cf the sort cf ranks these men
                                                                                       •c cr three
                                                                      cncTof th:      io  was in cna—ge
                                                                           "Z dcr.1 1 k n e w cut
                                                                           -'--(5 ether Policemen crcunc
                                                                              :          cQ   3   w e n t a.id ss/iad

Ei                                           _                    , r_^£.       dcr. 1 1 know.           - nave jUa_
                                        con -                    v.'r.at is happening."
                                                 •-=-d -■ “h ’£ time? - A. There were
                                                          _ t_0- cf people injured and
                r_eo?ie lying m                  " T . ^ cisariv dead’ alread y
                  '.ere were some                                -
                                       - -             ccme from? - A. V'ell j. v/as no..
■F I              * u i d VCU 3 c - ._I~-    ■" -1 3 ume che*' must have come rrom cnc
                        - —   ----------- ....--- ’"a1 configuration or che area
                -irrcce^£=mencw_c--                              subsequently.

                                -POO'- -«'nc croucht through the tunnel trom
                    D igyou see t-eop--^---------
                    che terrace? - A. Yes, seme.
                                                             ■•'-'■'ucht? ~ A. Through the tunnel.      ir.tv
                    ;-:cw were tnuy                    1    -7 “J ^ a n u a l 1 v bv supporters mainly.
                    •./ere jusc cei-.-                 -----                    *
                                                     r, - - • '■->-s clso heluing to carry them? - A.
                    :■* ? ? s r : < c t 5 i i i « : - r : - ; r e  h a i P i a S - b ttt a i « o « ; . * •
                    '       - o .- c - Y                          -_:3t S ta n d in g a ro u n a .
                    c lot O J P o l - C C W              -----     j-                    -


    H
                                                                   I *   9
                                              - c            supporters who './ere not engaged
                     T •*S5TS O wriSXb        CS    «• S ± f
 \
***   n
      w> .   *,e-w                      ..          fl > v i r p• Q£* or ceac
                                                                         ^         1A^
                                                                              Tseoole?    \   'Til’i f l f C
                                                                                      a . -..sr—
             .^ T S W iiS S K i                    « a . a l o i o f supporters had
             - £ < ™ i « d tr /a itr -a r carrying out people or prying to                                     ,
             -ou
             resuscitate  npc-ie
                          pec--e.   '■"- was verv
                                   --          - impressive
                                                  '         no */ «a!iv su^-o---
             v/ere actually mvoivec.

             Did you- ^ a n y a » b ^ n c e s wnen you
B            i S L ; t e ”g a « a n d T - s L ; o aware ^ a t p ,op le were be.ng
             carried out of the cate into -he lane ^                                    bac...
                      ...     ,.ru,^ -•>~ 2                 this was? - A. well it aust have
             Caii you tell us        ---                    -- -
             been about 3.-0.
                                             ■=> su'-ceesion of ambulances at that tine or*
             Die you .not *•« a. ^ - - * " r 0!. A. Ho. A su ccession o f
             Lappings  -‘aI}® ^0- " _ , - a r ‘ a l i s e u n til i t a u st have been
             ambulances cic now nawax.aiisi-
              about a quarter-to--. •
              ... .          ,,n„              actualiv do? - P.. "ell having seen the
              situa-7 on' I%/ent” ac:; up and brought, ny two sonscoy/nstairs
              s1lJ6,— w .               „-r_ r,)-ro          !7'bz.J- \;as tr.e n r s t w.ii..- -
              7 ?$ ?UT K « n      initially attended tw o people who w e r e lying
D             “ I*, floor.          1 ascertained that one o- uhe.uj/as nou                          _
              w                                 ~r.e cf them w a s ceaci. -r.e.i - real_s>_-
                ::r:C^ ; ; u; r : ^ : r ^ s nobody in control cf the situation^
                •”at              __ ;OT.              v;as hao^er.inc and tne .-.wul&ncs
                mare w as *.«                             ?circe -;era about to put pecpis
                ...au ..-a -■       ___                          •- —■*t-*cal iv ill, so at tr»a •-
                Lr. i-."-0 .v;e;:.-r:,r.:::";.d" r.as scrcebcdy to ta>e an
                ; r e a nsec                                                       actuallv scsc : : 1
 E!             -v e rv 1 s °     :f      ” r!•% T-~ ^o"*th <3*"hcs c ita i**as quickly as possib
                      S...W—-C.       ^           ^j - i —              , “j’
                                                                            .G2T6 v/as r.o ecuiw.i*-.. -
                .^-.vea.tr.sri ‘-/a-                                                 Peoole were
                              'c   •-
                                             — •— £ c c u i — no on       -.*0   ^-wu.*—.•   - ~ w ;r-w
                                 c         '"-•=v""ccuid -ust wit: normal resuscitation
                             .__                               li.-it cf ••./hat cr.e could to ar.c
               -1      cs                                                 --.at, sc the important
               chars ■■are a --- -- ^*w*v:                                        ,i m       people went
                • •     - cr       r ? . / r - s u r s u * f t t  — - - W      - x - i - i - 4.
               -.nin«-                             to the hospital casualty deparuaenu.
 F
                               -TMiia-'c5 ceonle doing this themselves? - A. ^.o-
             • •’pren 1 u u**G
               '‘e - ei1    _ ca*TVa3V1  ciici «.
                                                -at seem tc nave ve^y mucnr*H m
                                                                              in ^ t5*
               really.      i -e«n — e, ci-         -ee _         an'.cuiance there
               way of equtpaonz: ■                                -;3re aore ambulance
               at first as _ c-./ —                     Hn-nvpc ve-v nuch to\/ards
               ca-a and the emergency rasponse i-.ip^oveu vc_/ wu
               X suppose 4 o ‘clcc>:.
 g    ;                ..                          cuestier., Dr. Ash ter., I v/as as-'.mg ^ c ^ t _
             v r a a lly S h u a r ' t i e i-b u la n ce people were                                           '
               people in
               ceoola      to pPnraioir^it
                         into              ie-s;j' - ."
                                          -r          A. u.Tl
                                                          uo, t^Vr-t
                                                                n e / .. aid... second
                                                                                  • n5 #              zi actual
                                                                                                         . =_- 1
                                                           on es-w h S   jo u tl                cn es^ h o
               r.eeded”to g o ' and the Ambulance people responcea to .iu.
                                                                                                                  w 4« ■




                                                                     '-.-..j -<>] fi ne in the vard there were
    A                                                                r i v i v r ^ p l / v h o ^ l ^ n brought out
              from the terrace? - «• --s '                                                             -s
              These included what,                                          -Oiicsnen? - A. ^es.

              Ambulancemen? - A.                                      -e s .
         a-
                                                             r-                        -   .. :iot until later. When the
                                                                                           1

    B    o,   Die you see                                                                   ts have £ such better idea abou-
              :ireaer. i..-vo^                                                                di!=     thev seened to have
              resuscitation tnan                                       -..e            ---—      ---
              much mere equipmer.-.
                                                                                                         n.     Yes, they had proper
              Thev had o::ycen, did tnay not?

o             ,,-2SU£CI 1             ulC H

              "he Ambulancemen had equipment as well, did they not? - A.
                                                                                ■" *


              itoy did not seen to have very mucl tnough.
                             , - _,, n-~pr“ tVeni to have? — A. Tnere was no,
        I Q   v;ell wnat woul j      -Z-V~ 7 n g"£nv oxvgen cylinders out from
              T,con C                T^ a n c e .  There was no equipment eithe
              tne ariDulance.^-w- -.^r£=s           tQ    r3Coiiection until
              : L ^ 1 ^ aSer?Ice“Zrrivad and an anaesthetist and I presume
              a lrlih telS frcm the -hospital turned up some time arter 4.
    D
                                                                                                  i .thin;-:■it was 2 2 -minutes-
                                    -he ----                                              ■zrcunc which in fact seems to ce
                                                   —         * r*
                                                                                    c.r-3 talking about? -            cr 1 — irscs 1
                                                                                                    --                     - 4- e   £-    i l l .


                                                                                        zz equipment. Can you just *n*el^
                                                                                        ■;'at vou would nave tnoucnt ouch-
    Ei                                                                                    -ric Jootbail Ground? - A. v.'ell
                        ;-.ava Izeer. aval.                                               a*bit earlier, it would have beer
                                                                                          r;roser s tretcr.ers. Apparently
                                                                                        •hsre'wers c.nly a v e r y small numbs:
                                                                                                        -     c =- w h s
                                                                                        "■*”     s:a r:3 d                   t s - ^ r dcv::i c h e


    F!
                                                                        . .
                                 -iu -
                                 . r.e
                                            t * ' s r r * 'r
                                            S2C C ..r.
                                                                    -------- ....
                                                                                                 u ' x4 * -   *- '** i c
                                                                                                                      J      nn^
                                                                                                                           •*—•*    QZ.    S 2. —H 5 . w l O n
                                                                                                     bes for intubation ito
                                                                                                                          -n e n s
                                                                                                                              ensur
               -'■•-n there is a need =u nav*.
                                                 .r.   i                                             .nortant to have c::ygen
                    *v*^ ' 1 “        3 .

                                                                    :             2 . “rco!
                                                                                          :s airwav or sonst-iinc
                                                                     “•han"that?”: A. Well even Brooks airway
               -°~c
               ’. / c u i c      os      ne    jl ?    - -
                                                              ' - * *;~ - -"his
                                                              -            ---
                                                                                hind of circumstance.

                                          -.is sorsiag, you *•>. that intubation
                   ■ 'i'.-i'-swr&? ^" e ^2 '•<rcw .".C urd
                   U
                   — i.        t s u w . -aicS require quite a degree or s«.iU
               .   „    W W- -
                   -o*7/ork? - A. I assume that the Ambulancemen are -auc...
                   intubation.
    H
                                                                                           I a    Ll -
            T-e 11 we aav hear differently. What else -would you think
    A       should have been available? - A. Well o::ygen anc crip line:
            ar.c salines.

         Q. sris
            uri? lines and salines? -                xes,

                     crcund? -          '.'ell - think frcn ny understanding of
         Q. At t;
            cont.
    B
            Spain.
                           r -’‘s:?- idd:   it seems to ne if there are .iGf(jOC
            reopleWin*one place“ that is like a snail town and the r.ornai
            '•:ind cf medical facilities should be tnere zor a snail town.
            :* don't mean tnat m •••-. *•)>. erae -enae
                                                   carcija -u-
                                                           i*\ti “1
                                                                  *■•**/a •s
                                                                           c Ti 1£ X
o           to be events happening tc people wnen you naze go: :u,«0- ^
            neonle in cne clacs for several nours, the sane tninga w_i-
            ^ncen.      Ycu would entect that some people will nave a
            ‘I'Z'JZ- s o n e -ectle      will have other things happening m
             che'norir.il'course cfevents, so there should be seme kind
            ofWfirst aid post available anyway.

            nu.gre were first aid facilities on the ground of course at
            :he far end cf the green .^ rTja£^ perhaps v;e night like tc
    D                                 :ght to have been there which^


                                                 Z O VOU £33? - A. "-S3.
                                                   h a t '..'cuif vcu 5 s.v ....            -Ou
                                                   k i n k the air*,-rays, the 2 rc ck s
                     and tr*3                       ou s u b s c r i b e ~c the view, rcr
    Ei                                               b a g a nd .task -.;culd h a v e b e e n
                                             - •.:o.uld h a v e been h elpful.             It i s
                                             leu n av e v e r y s s r . c u s 1 j — -*j 1—


                                             e j.vaiiabl. at ail a n d -it was inpcs;
                                                   - ’'ia h = rr>.

                       was the eauismer.t that was carried on the Firs
                     w                  < . ■_^   -»
                        * _ t.»e
            inom es ana on   j_% ^ <
                                   -*■—         “ rx • \Y*0_ S_ • • ,iG1JL1— i'—^ t iV*7
                                                                                       t c m
                                                                                        &S IIO“
                                                                                              f*.



            in'evidence. Where I v/as behinc Leppings i,ar.e it v/as no.
            in evidence until .ia-er -n.

            -•ou '•c'-’ do vcu think looking back on it and seeing what
            was there, that if equipment of. this nature had been
            available it would have nade any practical ditaerence -o
            the number of people who survived? - A. I tlun^iu is a
            .._rv ri'Pficult cuestion oecause or tne na-u_e Ot tne
            -iri-r^es " Tt seems to we-that a lot of people were actual 1:
            dead when they were brought out fron the ground so we are
            really in the realns of ^speculation. Wnat I ^ u l c -a*
            if there had been equipment there then at least tne variOw-
    H
                                                  I *a £
                                                         •   • c«•*.—
                                                                    jpw'*i
                                                                      rw‘V*



                            nurs'ra reoole who were there and who becaae
A                         ?aSy oi wnora have contacted ne, could at least
           h a v e   had*a go at trying to do something witn the equipment

     r>,
     Si■


           corrsct.
B                                           ohare has cot to act very swiftly




           bier events
                                                  rr.ace ar.v difference if the
           Do you. t.r.ir.:-: i ■-_          ; that is*to say doctors, had been
           recuest ror :?.ed_c—          ---       • - t think at 20“-past“3 f d>.un ^
           ~ade any earlier.          -cu ~-
           you, o r " thereabouts 7 - - -    .   '.rsll  it seeded tc “ e that civsn
                                          •~v.!~"s"^l'at -eo^le were seriously
            :he ract
           the  ra^ t r . a J _ nas>_3 " it would have been a
           iro-rec_some                —                      £??eal e£riiSr. It
           very                             i j cn about what the intervention
           is cr.e realms                             _•    nte^vention should have
                            ro n e  ~ — -   w*- —                 *•              ^
           :;oulc i^--T c --          ^            clearlv a let cf doctors anc.
D                *^0 ££iJ-S • -**- “ “                         ^     ^ ^ ——r-n

                                                     course ther 2 by where the
                     ;3U ~j;“- 7 “ . ‘V-     .-c .;.3    considerable ti:r.e, didn Iu
             r.^Ui::.=3s_^^s .-.                   ,;cr;: --vseii around the casualtie
             you? -              "T.                -• ~ z    despatching and telling
             assessing tne... an:.                            ./ho" should'go ne:;t
E:                                              i- ; aj ""sc. bssn. c s s c s t c n ^ G
                                               ‘.-f-     :;iora i“incr ir.iuriss
                                                                                 5 -oas c--s
             •"0 S.?-^iiiJ““ -«‘*” -i-5 "daad" "rhat was by about 2 0 -past, 2
                                                                          iid you? - A.
                                            ■■ —           the teo~le '.‘ere r e m g
                                           ..-■•j-l because; I had no './ay or .-‘ .nowing
                       Z w..•w I*-
                                           ■ u- j.he cv.ru It was cirricult.           —
    Fi                                            "-"-.d'thev did r.c: /.now v.'here it
                                                         round to the gym- and went
              ••as ^r-c -'-'er:      J          ' - .(.n« -oo late tc be of any use
              in ihere anc i-                               t..,e cv~. -.;as cleared,
              '-^■-ause "scoii                - — —                      •




                                              ’LOfvD JUSTICE TAYLOi'.:            Can you

    H
                                               I
                                  V




                                                                            J.   ASHTON



q   .         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Can you just help me. The peopie
         you say you were helping to Gispatch, there were those who
         were dead and there those with very minor injuries who you cic
         not dispatch.   The ones you helped to dispatch, what sort, cz
         "rjuries did they have wnich you thought they were going tc ce
         able to be helped with at hospital? - A. There were things
         like ciearly crush injuries to the. chest. They looked as
         though they had fractured ribs or they might have had a
         punctured lung.

q   . But they were still breathing all right? - a . They were
      breathing, but tney were obviously seriously ill. They
      obviously needed medical attention as soon as possible.                                    They
      needed to be got. off ~o where that was available.

   wa« z h & z the principal form of injury of the casualties ycu
"" despatched? - a. Quite a lot of chest injuries and some
   abdominal rigidity which might_have^indicated they might r.ave
   r"Liptured intestines anc ..hat ^cind of uhing.

                MR. PHILLIPS:         Did you find any deficiency in supply of
         ambulances* to take these people away? - A. When I went down
         •into that area at t h e ■back at half-past-3 there was one
         ambulance there, a second one came shortly after, but they cic
         not come in a constant stream into the area there until _
         would put it at about quarter-to-A.             I understand tnere is
          s.— ® . =pute about m i s . but - am telling ycu that t..e
         .t-hu' ^ c - ^ w e r e r.ct there m .Lappings Lsr.e itself where they
                                      il that time.    I don't know wnere tr.ey
                                  -sv* ceer. stuck or. the way cr something.


         v=u four.d wne.n you get            t=the gymnasium that things had teen
         irettv wall riearec up              cy then? - A. Yes. tr.ev haa.

                           - i - was net lens after that y o u lert with your
    '■                     ~:*’ellT cef:r= that I went rack to the Lappings

         7r!.*oc”tb certify tr.e c=a_ ry cne cr tr.e Officers.                                So I began
         --*'r“rtify”^he ceaa at tr.at ena. There was a general
         --petitioner wno r.aa oeen .involved tnere as well was aiso
                         c-^tifyir.s tr.e ceaa.                   The two c: us carried cut tnao
         :sIs k ~ ' That was from acout iS-past-i for about_5 or 10
         -■i'nutes. Then I -ncugnt presumaoly somebocy will have a^
         ~^X-cai debriefing.                  Presumably the people who were involves
         “• Z ~ - Z “Z would   ail'oe
                        WUUIJ - - -           garnered         together.53        ana there would be sen-
         ’• ■ i r a c t debriefing.           So I went back to the gymnasium to see.<
         f
         that cut. ~ xhis time wnen I got to the gym I found it very
         aifficuit to*gain     — — * * entry.
                                       W. . ~ - y • The
                                                    ---------- Police were excluding_everybocv
                                                               ------------------
          -nd the emergency peopie inside the gym haa been tolG to go
         put the peopie who had been helping, and the only people wno
         werp allowed to be in the gym were the Police.                                    Somebody
          soni'or in authority of the Police had got ail the Police to
          cn» end of the gym and was giving them some kind or
          debriefing, but not the .medical people as far as I could see..
          - rcuid s 3*2 r was not v*cn"C0 Q so X lsr^.

                                                  I ^*"1
                                                    J.   ASHTON



      Then on my way b a c k t o Lappings Lane tor the final time i
•net a Constable who was totally broken down and weeping ana ir.
-ears    I comforted him. and he said. ’They are going to blame
as now    They will blame the Police. They will say it was our
“ault 'but     was the senior Officers' fault because they
didn't -al«fcontrol ana didn't organise things, and when they
came they just got ir. the way". That is what he said.

He said that tc you? -      a   . :'es.
in your statement,          Ashton, you say towards the very end
something about this:
          "On Saturday I relieve this belief about football
          -upport^s contributed tc the apparently slow initial
          response*by the Police tc what was happening.  It seemea
          _hat they mistook tne tragedy for crowd trouble .

what was it that vcu saw that made you form that conclusion? -
■' ~ ^ e are manv things that happened that day, but the one
       -hat «f' ~k= in my mind is the image of that very large
         poliesBen acr;ss -he centre of the pitch at the time
when tr.ey should have -been helping people to get out or uhe
grcunc.
-         cut Cf -he srcunc? - A . To get out of the terrace.   The
              wa= that tr.ev needed to keep-the supporters from
=r~'r--g ;cwn tc tr.e       —nc.
          ..ou see Wr.at' was going cn at the front of the pens, what-
Z Z Z Z r =ciice Officers were coir.g at that time? _ A * 1
" ^ I r e r * n c WfrcB reccrts I have reaa that the Police were
' - v o i ^ d in helping peopie, but I also understand and I nave
                    r.u.trer "of -=ve witness accounts sent to me from
-eocie who wer: a:usea or pusned back into the terrace.              _
                ne'T-<=r«n r have the account which I. have submitted or
sciepccy whc“ hac actually managed to get cut and then was saae


            - cn the casis of that you are saying the Police
             "t* fcr ;r:wc trcucle? - A. That is my impression.

Ves .      Thank ycu very ~ucn.
                  Crrss-Ix3 sii"5'3 bv MP.. KALLIPETIS:

Cr. Ashton, you are a lecturer?           Is that right? - A. Yes.

Do you also have a practice? - A. I am a public health
consultant with Mer?ey Regional Health Authority and a
lecturer at Liverpool University.
 - u at- s n o t G u i t e an answer to the question. Do you also have
 a'oracrce? - a. I no longer practice clinical medicine as
 such.    1  am a community physician involved in public health.

 when was tne last time you did have a practice, may I asK?
                                                             ASHTON



A. You may, yes.          I was a general practitioner until 1976.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   From? - A. From 1974 to 1976.                 I
was a junior hospital doctor between 1970 and 1974.

          MR. KALLIFSTIS:       So two years in general practice? - A.
y es.
And' then you went into - i don't mean it unkindly - the
academic side? - A. It is not, actually.   It is quite-a-
Sr-c-^al side     I am involved in public health in preventive
med*cine, which incorporates a wide range of activities,
including an interest in things like crowd satety ana
environmental protection and so on. So this area has some
professional interest to me as well.

v.~u -3id us what happened when you arrived at the ground anc
when you went through the turnstiles.   When you were aDout tc
=o u- the staircase that you have indicated to take your seat
vou told us about this man who came out from the tunnel are=
-ayin® "There are kies dying in there".    My Lord asked you
whether you took that seriously, and you said you did. - A.
Yes, he was very distressed.
Did you mean what you said to my Lord that you did take that
seriously? - A. Yes, I did.
     ___n -~i'c -,v Lire yo u ’said'to the Policeman, "I think you
             *rc do sc-etnir.g or find cut about it".         Is tnat
               - ~ 2 l z .rc-etr.Zns like. "Don’t you think you hae
r._Z__ —"-'ok                 cecause he cicn 1 ” res pond at all.    ~—
•ust       carried cn mspectir.g the tickets.

      u    - - - - *4«s
                   ■
                  -oniv --- - v-u?
                               .•  • - A. I d e n 1 1 think he replied.   :
~cn   11     rememcer r.ic rep-Z-r.s.

•    -- » •--.T.mur.’"'•* or.v-ician with a nreat interest in
   *,.— -—..              ir.o 3 s 3: ccctcr . aid you uhink you mign-
^""tnere'and fine :u: if peopie really were dying? - A. At
-nat*'ecint" my concern -as to find out where my two sons were
and my nephew.
-he answer to my :ues:::n is you die consider it or you die
I c o n s i d e r it?- A. At .tnat point I felt the balance cr -v
                 was -- go anc look and see wnere my two sons were.

’ s the answer that you did think about it but you thought_ic
Gas more important to go and find out where you sons were.- -
A. That is correct.
cQ     voudid think about going in there? - A. As you can see I
^ - n ' t hold back later on in the afternoon. I became
^.voived.     It was throughout the afternoon I had this balance
TX s-rike between looking after my own children and becoming
"nvoived in the emergency, situation, and it was very difficu.
because it was difficult to know what was happening.
                                                    J.   ASHTON



These are the same children you let go into the turnstiles
havin® described the crusn situation which you preferred not
to «»t into? Is that right? - A. That is correct, but they    _
are°not full grown yet, and one of my son’s friends was one cr
those who was killed -n the disaster.

When you got u d to the stana. Dr. Ashton, had play started?
A. Presumably play had started and stopped, because there was
no1 play going. cn. wnen - get up there.

Were the players     still cn tr.e pitch? - A. No.

They were not?      A. .
                       ‘Jo.

You are certain about tr.at? - A. I can't be certainbecause
there were a lot cf people cn the pitch. Theremay_have    been
players but I didn't see them.   I think they had left.

A*ain you told us you could see people on the pitch, some of
whom were clearly seriously injured, and I think you said some
of them were dead? - A. By about quarter-past I found myself
saying"to the person standing next to me, "There are- two
oeopie dead there.     There are three, four, five dead there",
"^e^ause you could see. from where I was, because it was very
c ’^se to the front of- the stand, not very far from the
^ a i i 0Uth from the vantage point down, people who were lying,
-hey*looked ccacieteiy still,and they looked as' though they
were dead.     People had been trying to resuscitate then ana
^®=ving them.     People at first were incredulous that this was
what tr.e 'situation was. but that was my impression.

'„'ere they being administered to by St. John's Ambulancemen cr
-moulancemen cr Policemen cr fans? - A. You have a much better
a s s e s s m e n t cf tr.at ;rcrr. tr.e rilm. buw. . ..

-      -^Tgroe^ 0 2 in wnat you saw. D r . Ashton, you understanc {
7 "-•-e* inoressicr. I r.ac v;as tnere were not very many St.
      t ijnouj"ancemer. m e r e :n tr.e pitch and a lot of the
attention' was"ceir.s r ^r. cy supporters.

vac s u p p o r t e r s wr.oai ..cu had no reason to believe were
medically qualified? - A. That is correct.

\®*»-in as a doctor with the concerns that you have, did you
think it might be a good idea if you went down to offer your
help? - A. There was no way out forwards.

I am sorry, I d o n ’t unaerstand that. - A. I was in the stand,
   was impossible to get rorward on to the pitch.

The question was did you think it would be a good idea if you
went down to offer your help? - A . Yes, I w a s considering it,
and as soon as they Tannoyed for medical assistance I went anc
offered my help.
They Tannoyed for assistance just before 3.30. - A. I woulc
place it a t ....
                                                     J.   ASHTON




Q. I think we can prove that, Dr. Ashton, just before 3.30. - A
   Yes, I accept that.
0. So you waited for the Tannoy announcement before you went
   downstairs? - A. Yes. You assume that at large events peopi
   have got things under control and that there are emergency
   services and there is an emergency plan.

G. Forgive me. Dr* Ashton. but you are telling us they were no­
   where from your view in the stand.  Is not that right? - A.
   Yes.
Q. That assumption would not assist.  So you waited for the
   Tannoy announcement before you went down? - A. Yes.

G. So you-arrive down in the yard some time about 3.30? - A. If
   - • ^ 0 Tannoy was 2.20 then it must have been a little after

   that.

G. I think it was just before 3.20. - A. OK.

G.   Ycu would accept I an sure that your area'of vision is li-.it
     to what is i.-mediately ir. your vicinity at any one time? - A
     At the game?
                       y - s r c . - A-. Yes., the'part for which I car.
                       fer.ir.c Leppir.gs Lane stana ana in Leppings


D. Your imcressicn, and I a.- not in any way suggesting you are
   anytr.ir.2 other tnan an honest witnesses, please understanc
   that, cut your impression is there was oniy one ambulance an
   no equipment, and I am not going to recite ail of your
   evidence, but that is your impression that you nave of this
   day? - A. Behind Lappings Lane end, yes.

    =y 2 . 2 0 at least four amoulances had already attended at tr.e
."'.back of Leppings Lane.     Does that surprise you? - A. Weil, i
    they had been they naa teen ana gone.

0.   You don't seem to have catered for that possibility. One c:
     them had been and gone and three were in position before 2 . 2
     - A . Yes.
0.   «e can see that aisc cn tr.e video. - A. O K . i accept that,
     but the ambulances cia r.ot arrived in the kind of numbers
     that were neeced until ^ater than that, when they started
     ccme in a steady stream.

G. Dr. Ashton, you as an experienced community physician will
   understand that one does not have hundreds of ambulances
   sitting around doing nothing? - A. I think this does raise
   questions about how many ambulances are available.

G.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    How many do you suggest there
     ought to be available before a football match? - A. To be
                               it. i
                                                                              J.   ASHTON



present at a matcn?
vgg        -       a   . My experience is limited on these matters.

t am asking for your professional view? - A. I think what is_
needed is that there neeas to be studies or events.  There
literature on events which I am not....

Are    y   o   u       n e t   g   o   i   n   g   -    -ale to help me? - A. No, probably
not.
         KALL ~c T^ *      How many ambulances do you think
            c o m e t s that event once it was realised the size
s h o u ld 'h a v e
   -il disaster? - A. : would say there was something like
“ 'er*ously hurt people at the back of Leppings Lane. So
      Zhe number cf ambulances that were neeaea to take
those people to hospital.
v 0 ur         assessment is :remarkably accurate. Dr. Ashton, because 1-
ra t           *-om the SYMAS records about AO patients were conveyed
     I         It,- [pnninac Lane end via ambulance to hospital. - A.
Thar           t's right?* because I was involved in dispatching them.

      =r-evou saying ail iO you sorted? - A. I think what you
         ing me is tr.ars were a number who were sent off before
r -scame i n v o l v e d , a n c I accept that, but....

        vou also accept tr.at before you arrived on the seen
tu.-I -mbulanc° o^-'icsrs had the training and intelligence anc
     I . « e n c = of = : ; . 3 --= remove patients who were clearly not
-er-’
    -ously -'njurec irca the ambulances uno had entered or
-tlfr .    o J n accord. anc put in patients who were seriously
-*njurea and needir.g to be taken to hospital immediately? -
7 -         - a n ’-.® -,-ou wnat I found when i went aown was that
          ice"were taking’ people to the ambulances not in orcsr
3 f”=ricrity cf the severity of them.


              * —i " - — * -■ *'i%* corvcem is z o t "ins ambulance peep— ~
       r.’Zn ^-w p                 is unable to sort the serious
 -‘
  ^ u ='-:-y r:-oa tne”less serious casualty, - A. I think you are
 trvir.g '"to" put worts ir. my-mouth, actually.
 t      - 5 i;e no wish to co tr.at. If I have got the wrong impression
 -1*1- 1 i r* haooy ~o ^e corrected.      - A. I con't know whetner
 - ^ v =wereWabie'or'-r.able. but what I know was that it was not
       r0 p ^ 9 when I went cown there, and I began to do the ^
 I-’0 --T-*o**and to tell the ambulance peopie which ones to taice.
 and "they w e r e very nappy to go along with that.




                                                       /O .   Dr. Ashton, if we are at
Dr. Ashton, if we are at cross-purposes, then we can cut
this* short. Are you talking about the conveying of
casualties to the*ambulances by the police or are you
t aiking”about the conveying of casualties by the anbulans
to the*hospital?    A. You've thrown me now.

7 am sorrv to have dcr.e tnat. Are you talking about tne
conveving'or casualties by the police to the ambulances
when vou'said that there was no sorting of that priority,
or are vou calking about the conveying,, of,, casualties,, bv



           were beinc weaned against tne wall or laid out
bv'*tne'*wail ir. tne* lane, in a long line, and the police
were taking people from one. end of the line as the .
ambulances came, tc put into the ambulances,^ and >-he



•
’nd in fact there are tv;c peopie down :nat er.ci wno nee a
   co*"-ext not these naooie here".   Thau was the kind of
thing what 1 did.
    ^ ^Sri-on, vou will zorgive ms i- X suggest uhat while
— pa* ^cht have i^een .naooemng on occasions , it cer ^.ainly
..;ac -Q£ ~he cattern of the ambulance people that aiternoor
 *rd cr.ev were sorting casualties as indeed tnev are trains
 -o do? " A. Well, there are other medical witnesses wno
 ”ou~cculd call      t would substantiate what I 'nave just sa:

     i,-M.2 r v : could call every 'ambulance officer who
   a .ja^ : - - ";'j;:',t it r.ecassarv. But will you pernaos
acceot”tne statistic tnat cf the 40 people who were
ccnveved frcn Leppings lane to hospital, only one was
found"dead on arrival?        A. I think that that is a
"••indication cf tne triace approach tnat was adopted.

        - - •• ^    _ IT .
                                    «...
                             . . w * . - —»• f   —— —   ^
                                                            — . * ■ —.*
                                                                   w"*    J w- '
                                                                                   ” *cs**
                                                                                   “
                                                                                             Xtr —~ ~
                                                                                      *' “ - *“*- ^ —



        ~          c c.v ■; ~ 3- "r.sir c s s “ .
            . 2 0  • Hut m e r e was nobody in overall charge
whicn is my point.
Ycu sav that tne amculances had no equipment.    Did you
’■nsDect anv cf tne amouiances?   A. 'rucre was no equip.ns.i
brought from the aiaoulances into tne area outside the
ambulances.   Most of the people were actually outsiae m
tne lane and m tne yard, so the equipment was neeaec
outside.
Did you not see amoulancemen with portable resuscitators
and bags   and mas.-is? A._tIotuntii later.

7  -u-cest tnat vcu ara wrong about that, and ii necessar/
vou can ioo/c at a video and be corrected about it and see
i- I- on m = viceo sctua 1 1 v using tnem at the bac/. of ^epp
                                           124-


                                                                      ASHTON


              Lane.         A.   Can you tell me how many?

              as many as had arrived, Dr. Ashton.    Sach ambulanceman
              carries with him his portable treatment bac, including
              ? 'oortsble resuscitatcr? A. And my point was that
              between half-past-3 and about cuarter-to-4 there were
              oniv three ambulances during that time and it was after
              cuarter-to - 4 that they began to come in a steady stream.
    B
         o.   Dr. Ashton, I am not going to bandy words with you because
              the evidence that we have heard comes from reliable
              sources.  Dr. Ashton, will you also accept that the
              “ouipment on an ambulance is necessary to stay on the
              ambulance to treat a Datient while he is being conveyed
              to hospital?   A. N e K r yes, but sometimes, it needs to
O             be Used off the ambulance as well.

         o.   Of course, but the primary purpose of an ambulance is^to
              convev a patient as quickly as possible to hospital, is
              it not?   A.  It is the main purpose most of the time, but --

                   ;3 sufficient, thank vou verv much indeed. Were you
              wearina a brown suit cr brcwn jacket cn that day? A. Mo.
    D         Or a licrht cclcured ~ac:;et?                  Mo.

              v:u      accut tha irrtubation treatment.' Have you ever
              intubated a patient:       Yes, but not for some time,

              ^vould you ris.< c       ~   .- r    cn that occasion?
                                                   C'                      A. In that
              situation, I wouid, yes
    Ei                                                    .s it net.'
                                                                - ~ - o
                                                                          A. .Intubation?

                            A. Are vou talking about tracheostomy perhaps?

                                           r.~t "cu sre taikinc about.            T   1 -



                                                   -\zbe “o estsblisr. s.n sirvay.
                                                  ;kincr = hole in somebody.1s neck


                      • c                               That is a tracheostomy.

                  •     r.tubatincr a patient in the manner you have described
              ;_ -cre than r.erelv cuttir.rr an airway in the noutn, is
                       j - •_s n u 11 ir.~ a tube down the throat which then
                         >.e trachea - is that not richt?       A. To
              ir.fi ate tr.e luncs.

              A r s ,ou familiar with that?     A. Yes, it is something that
                      ioctors learn as part of their traininc.

              Ann vou assume that ambulancemen are taught that?                    A. I
              assume so.             —

    H         ■jut vou do not know, Dr. Ashton?      A. I don't ,-cnow. I thi:
              - - e ?_rG some verv interesting and important questions
              T-J.T.i    -vairipf.'n-' a—.bulancemen and oolice that come
                                                       125

                                                                                      J.    ASHTON


                  .4                     vou what ecuinmenx you would have liked to
    A        Q.   Mv l o *c as^e               ^     crounrt to assist those patients wno
                  hSde,— «n ca^ied'cut. '-'ou described them as s u f f e n n o <
                  naa “« n « * - •           .               ribs, sossialv a pur.cturec
                  from*“ -           ■        abdominal rigidity, implying _
                  lung Ono .on             ;        ,-„-srnai orcan havinc been ruptures
                  per naps some                               wouid sssis1; any one of
                  cr                              c lie nt?    A. Well, if somebody has
                       Se 0 mbarrassmenr~cir rheir brear,hi.ag because, their lung
    B             ®                            n <- would be helpful to have an oxygen
                  "s              ?^"eon ebo<*v has had a ruotured internal organ,
                  supoiy.                            bleecinc infernally and it would be
                  S e l o f u l t o h l i i r c r i o and to be able to establish so-.e -
                           Q f sluis raDlscement.
                                     i     n"ose are the two nair. things -hat
                  Ar.vz.mng.eis-.
                  _         J~        - a 'CT•. w
                                    Sr^^‘     .m
                                                           o=in
                                                              ■•* ** relief
                                                           .. «      — «■. «««» • is obviously
                  - wouic pic.-. ••       "-      r.,'rl raiiof available as far as
                  important • Tnere          -o       i ------
                  I was aware.
                  - ~u-se, Cr. Ashien, ycu-do nor knew, but in fac esc:                                 i C
                   ^ Upis— a carries Aaawene wnicr. is :or pm..                             ..2
                   r..^ ■    _ -ta ■,i •••cu are islling me mat.

    D                                    1   rt was -usi- r.c: in evidence.
                                                               r,ress making various
                   Dr. Ashton,-you were repo:
                               Have vou seen those reoorts ofvourseir.
                   claims.
                   —ojq^*1 some repor.s    "■ ich did vou r*ava .ir»

                        - -
                   Tr.e .r.nepence**.   ----
                                        =— ■ --=>
                                        <    -— •-••';mes and the Sheffield                         Star?
                   2'   - -o2 Ve n 11 seen the S n e m e i a -.at.

o       Ei
                       : 7 ^ -- ■
                                       "ceech from vcu# rutting 1 - i.»-o
                                    •= - v.,er''- direct scescn rrcm you. ;-.ave
                   rruotations^i.-.^-- -- 'llcca:;;i_v hive.  Would vou like 1 ;


                                   ar C o0- -./her. vcu reaa it, -..a.      --- _■
                                                                            <           .
                       -1 C ;-J ac,.-P-,                -  r     rriscuoted on a num.ter
                                                                         ...,a s



        FI             ^ “ SSioS!                       be helpful to re if you coul*
                       t e l T m e what it is that I ’m supposea to nave saic. ■

                             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      You oresumably were not
                       - ’scuotsd when you were s p e a k m c on television. A. _ — ,
                       that1s right.

             I                    ‘•'A1-r T-“"IS'•  You said, accordingto two nev/socssr
                                  " ua- p r 3 ,n ‘•her® wereno medical personnel
                       r«p°rs*. chaw               j ; John A a b a U n c.s.n, no M a i r a n :
                       a oar- _-on o..s -                 et. n c ai l did vou say tr*ai?
                       s’nd onlv one asnoulance.       first o l all, cia yo        dy.h
                       A    '"hat is what my impression was at the time ana -n-
                       is what T saia.

                                    ••/noT"° r r-vr-o yv^m
                                              were           “ ’ 1^lncrabout, ^iSDoings
                                                        cj — •
                                                                                                    ^an®.
                                                                                                  r,sii"icc •••   ^
                                           _ •j:; ^  1 1'
                                       sr;(=ci::c2 i i / / *
                                                           - n 1       P. DOUt^ -r*€i a l    1 1  *
        H
                       *M a   t.    n>
                                   ~ •
                                                                II   ✓
As a matter oc facr, Dr. Ashton, by 3.30 four ambulances
had aireadv attended behind Leppings Lane and two
ambulance officers regained assisting the iniured by
2 .3 q  -he area of rhe yard there. You are not talking
about"any orher parr of the ground and I will not bore
vou with" the starisrics in relation to that- SlEeondly,
vou are reported to have said "I had to assume control
of the casualty situation myself and carry out a triage".
Did you say that?    A. Yes,' I said that.

As.a matter of fact, ambulancemen were there at.3.13,
15.12 and 15.20 and each of them carried, out triage-
before the casualties were conveyed by~thenr ter hospital.
Do you accept that?    A. Well, that was not what I found
at 3.30 when I went cur there.

Very well.     You also are quoted as saying that-a~£ull
casualty team with resuscitation equipment" did ncrtr-arrive
from the 'hospital until about 4.15? A. That's correct.

Where were vcu talking abour?       A. In the back of Lapping
Lane. All of rhe csrte.nrs that. I made during thar oerioc
•..’ere soecifisaliv about- behind Leppings Lane, but Xlknow
from rhe submissions -that I have received and w h i c k l hav
 forwarded to the Inquiry from various other medical and
nursing personnel that much the same situatiorr- .seems*to
have applied in crr.sr r laces.    I have suggested "that:'' they
be called bur I ricr.'r know whether they are being called.

'••par evidence is z z i . e i is nor a natter for ~ e , Dr. Ashtc
=.nd I f.are rs'-’ that       se who are concerned with it will
take r.ota c: vcur c c m e n t s . You are also reported as
saving "No oxvesr., airway rubes or-dries".        Obviously
vou have s a i d thar, because you have said it again today?
A. Thar's righr.




                           /.O.   I suggest to vou
                                        127
                                                                               J. ASHTON


Q    I s u g g e s t to y o u a n d I p u t it to y o u t h a t o x y g e n a n d
      airway tubes w e r e t here w i t h the a m b u l a n c e and we have
      heard e v i d e n c e about that.        Yo u d i d n o t s e e i t ?
      A.     No.
Q. " M o r e l i v e s c o u l d h a v e b e e n s a v e d i f s t a f f a n d        equipment
    h a d a r r i v e d e a r l i e r " , di d y o u sa y t h a t ?      A.           It is m y
    b e l i e f --
Q.           LORD J U S T I C E TAYLOR:                Did you say it?             A.      Yes.
Q_        MR. K A L L I P E T I S :  D i d y o u m e a n it w h e n y o u s a i d t h a t ?
     A.   I b e l i e v e t h a t it is p r o b a b l y th e ca s e , as       I have
     said earlier - - -

Q.          L O R D JUSI.TCE T A Y L O R :            I thought you said earlier                      that
     it w a s n o t p o s s i b l e to s s y .          A.    That s right.

G. It is v e r y u n f o r t u n a t e , i s it n o t , t h a t y o u s h o u l d go
   to t h e n a t i o n s a y i n g t h i n g s l i k e t h a t i f it is n o t p o s s i b l e
   to s a y it;        is t h a t n o t r i g h t ?        A. W e l l , I t h i n k t h a t
   it is u n f o r t u n a t e *      I c o n 11 k n o w .       I, t h i n k t h a t it is
   very probable that there w o ul d have been some lives saved
   b u t it    is d i f f i c u l t to p r e d i c t .         I t h i n k t h a t w h a t is
   really      t e r r i f v i n g to ifietiical p e o p i e is to f e e l t h a t t h e y
   a r e in    a s i t u a t i o n ans cid not h a v e the things they n e e d e d
   to be a b l e t c t r y to a s s i s t p r o p e r l y . " •              -

G.             MR. KALL I P E T I S :         In f a i r n e s s to y o u . o n e l a s t
     q u o t a t i o n . Dr . A s n t s n .  t e c a u s e I p u t t h i s to o t h e r
     witnesses!          T h e S h e f f i e l d S t a r q u o t e d y o u as a c t u a l l y
     s a y i n g , " A t l e a s t 30 p e o p i e w o u l d s t i l l b e a l i v e t o d a y . "
     A.       I did not say that.
              MR C O L L I N S :       Sir, i f I m a y h e lp . . I k n o w I a m g o i n g
     tc n a k e a p l e a w n i c n I w i l l n o t b e p o p u l a r for m a k i n g
     b u t : w o u l d a s k t h a t y o u s i t if h u m a n l y p o s s i b l e to
     f i m s n t h i s w i t n e s s s n c i n o e e d t h e n e x t w i t n e s s w h o is
     a~cccccr, z u t a v e r v snort doctor, because otherwise
     we w i l l h a v e e n o r m o u s p r o c i e m s in g e t t i n g t h e m b a c k
     h e r s o e f c r e t n e e n c c f the I n o u i r y .
                LORD J U S T I C E TAYLOR:            Well.      I am p e r f e c t l y w i l l i n g
      to   cd    s o, i f o t h e r s are.
           MR. G L A S G O W :            S i r, I s n a i l r e s t r i c t   m y s e l f to o n e
      question.
                              Cross-examined            b v MR.      GLASGOW:

G. Dr.    A s h t o n , I s i m p l y w a n t to a s k y o u a b o u t y o u r c o n f u s i o n
      over  your ticket.             I t h i n k w e h a v e it u s e f u l l y a p p e n d e d tc
      your s t a t e m e n t , the copy of y o u r ticket.                 You h a v e got the
      original with you?               A.       I have.

Q. W o u l d v o u j u s t l o o k at it w i t h m e , p l e a s e , a n d p e r h a p s it
   w o u i d be c o n v e n i e n t to l o o k a t a c l e a r p h o t o g r a p h o f t h e
   S t a n d , if y o u h a v e g o t t h e W e s t M i d l a n d s s m a l l b u n d l e ,
                   ( H a n d e d ) First of all, your ticket.                     A.       Yes,
                                                                     J. A S H T O N


the t i c k e t .
C o u l d we l o o k at th e t i c k e t p a r t t h a t you w o u l d h a v e
had b e f o r e it w a s d e t a c h e d f r o m the c o u n t e r f o i l . I think
v o u w e r e g o i n g to t h e W e s t S t a n d .    A.       West Stand.

Di d you h a v e sny c o n f u s i o n r e a d i n g W e s t S t a n d on y our
ti ck e t ? W o u l d ”you like t o . l o o k at your ticket.               A.             No,
I m e a n i t s a y s v e r y c l e a r l y ''West S t a n d " .

It s a y s     very clearly         "West        Stand".          A.     Y e s.

Did you        know what the West                Stand was?       A.   No. I k n e w
that'we        w e r e at t h e e n o i n        the S t a n d above the end ofthe
ground.
Y o u k n e w t h a t y o u w e r e at t h e W e s t e n d o f t h e g r o u n d ?
A.      Yes.
Did you h a v e any d i f f i c u l t y t h e r e f o r e s u p p o s i n g that the
s t a n d w h i c h h a d " b e e n b u i l t at the W e s t end of the g r o u n d
m i g h t be c a l l e d t h e W e s t S t a n d ?   A.      Y e s, I do f i n d it
confusing still.
W a s t h e n e x t i n s t r u c t i o n on y o u r t i c k e t t h a t t h e g a n g w a y
y o u were, l o o k i n g .fcr w a s .'.Y           ^        Entrance 'C1.

I am s o r r y .      Cn the t i c k e t p a r t n o t the c o u n t e r f o i l t h a t
v o u n a n o e a in.    A.    Ism       sorry.       G a n g w a y Y, y e s , t h a t is
correct.
E v e n f r o m o u t s i d e t h e c r o u n d is y o u r e y e s i g h t g o o d e n o u g h
to s e e t h e l a r g e 1Y ' t h a t i s a b o v e t h e s t a i r w a y w h i c h w e
c a n s e e on P h o t o g r a p h 7 in t h e b u n d l e w h i c h I h a v e j u s t
Gi ve n y o u ?        A. " W e l l , I c a n s e e it on t h e p h o t o g r a p h
c u i t e c l e a r l y b u t it is n o t c l e a r h o w y c u e t i n t o G a n g w a y Y
w h e n v o u h a v e E n t r a n c e C b e c a u s e E n t r a n c e C is w e l l to t h e
j.e r t c f G a n a w a y t .

D i d y o u o o to E n t r a n c e C in t h e e n d ?           A.        Yes.
D i d v o u s e e a n y t h i n g at E n t r a n c e C t h a t s h o w e d y o u t h a t y o u
w e r e ' g o i n g to t h e 'West S t a n a ?      A.     When we got i n si d e ?

.No, as y o u a p p r o a c h e a E n t r a n c e C - I t h i n k t h a t w a s a b o u t
3 o ' c l o c k w h e n the s i t u a t i o n o u t s i d e was r e l a t i v e l y quiet.
Y o u h a d w a i t e d u n t i l it h a d q u i e t e n e d d o w n , h a d y o u n o t ,
Dr. A s h t o n ?         A.      I see what you are saying.                   I don't
r e m e m b e r s e e i n g a n y t h i n g at a l l .    A l l I k n o w is t h a t I
went t h r o u g h that t u r n s t i l e and w h e n I got t h r o u g h the
t u r n s t i l e I w a s n o t -- it w a s n ' t c l e a r to m e w h e r e I w e n t
first.           I h a d to o o a k i n d o f d o u b l e - t a k e a n d l o o k a r ou n d . .

D i d y o u by a n y c h a n c e s e e. _ t h re e n o t i c e s o f t h a t size, a n d
colour?       A.     I dorT't r e m e m b e r s e e i n g t h em .
                                                              J . ASHTON

                       C r o s s - e x a m i n e d by MR. W O O D W A R D :

 S i r , is it y o u r c o n s i d e r e d o p i n i o n t h a t an a t t i t u d e o f
 mi nd has b e e n c u l t i v a t e d w h i c h r e g a r d s all f o o t b a l l
 s u p p o r t e r s a s a m e m o e r or m e m D e r s o f a s u b - h u m a n s p e c i e s ?
 Is t h a t y o u r c o n s i d e r e d v i e w ?     A.     Yes, it is.

 D o es that not c o l o u r e v e r y t h i n g you have s a i d ?             A.    Well,
 I d o n ' t t h i n k it d o e s .      I t h i n k t h a t my e x p e r i e n c e t e l l s
 m e t h a t i f y o u go to w a t c h f o o t b a l l m a t c h e s u n l e s s y o u
 h a p p e n to h a v e t h e g o o d f o r t u n e to be in t h e b e s t p a r t
 of the g r o u n d , then you can e x p e c t that yaur need s are not
 g i v e n t h e p r i o r i t y in t h e a r r a n g e m e n t s .

 You have c r i t i c i s e d        the P o l i c e ?       A.        I have criticised
 some of'the Police.

J u s t s h o r t l y in r e l a t i o n t o y o u r a p p r o a c h to t h e t u r n s t i l e s
on t h e d a y i n q u e s t i o n , is it r i g h t t h a t w h i l s t y o u a r e
s t a n d i n g by the L a n d r o v e r you h e a r d not a s i ng l e w h i s p e r
of public address?                 A.      I c a n ' t r e m e m b e r h e a r i n g an y
public address.

W h i l s t you we re a p p o a c h i n g the t u r n s t i l e s , you h e a r d n o t h i n g
o v e r the t a n n o y ?   A.         I can't remember hearing anything
e v e r the t a n n o y .

 W h i l s t vou we re       si t h e p i a c e a p p r o a c h i n g ' t h e t u r n s t i l e s ,    did
 v o u se e st a n y        stags s line of horses?                     A.      I can't
.rememoer s e ei n g         a line of h o rs e s .            I remember seeing
 d e f i n i t e l y one,    p r o b a o i y two, p o s s i b l y three horses.

D i d y o u s e e t h e g a t e s , the b l u e c a t e s , the L a p p i n g s L a n e
a a t e s c l o s e d at a n y s t a g e ?   A.      I saw a P o l i c e m a n try
to c l o s e t h o s e g a t e s a n d, I m e a n , it w a s an i m p o s s i b l e
t a s x b e c a u s e hs w a s j u s t o n h i s o w n t r y i n g to c l o s e t h e m .

V/hat w a s p r e v e n t i n g r,ir, f r o m c l o s i n g        the g a t e s ?       A.     Thers
were just c o n s t a n t numD ers of people                       coming.

Wnat were they doing, these people,                               t h a t p r e v e n t e d the
P o l i c e m a n c l o s i n g th e g a t e s ? A.                T h e y w e r e t r y i n g to g e t
to t h e t u r n s t i l e s .

D i G you s e e p e o o l s g o i n g o v e r th e           river      bank    and    coming         in
at the s i d e ' f r o m . t h e b r i d g e e n d ?          A.        No.

Were you a w a r e that p e o p i e h a v e a d m i t t e d d o i n g t h a t ?
A.   I am n o t a w a r e b u t I s a w s o m e p e o p l e c l i m b i n g o v e r
the wall.
Which wall         are you t a l k i n g a b o u t ?              A.     Yes,     t h a t is t h e
one there.

Y o u s a w p e o p l e c l i m b i n g over, t h e w a l l d o w n a l o n g t h e s i d e
r o a d , is t h a t c o r r e c t ?     A.     A n d I also saw two P o l i c e m e n
h e l p i n g t h e m to g e t o v e r t h e w a l l .
                                                                                J. A S H T O N

J u s t let us be c l e a r a D o u t w h a t it is y o u ,a r e r e c a l l i n g
seeing.          Yo u s a w p e o p i e a l o n g the s i d e r o a d c l i m b i n g u p
and over the wall?                   Is t h a t r i g h t ? . Is t h a t w h a t y o u
a r e sa y i n g ?    A.      W e l l , i t is the w a l l to t h e r i g h t o f
E n t r a n c e C.
Just where the Usher was poin t i n g .                        A.       Right.

H o w m a n y p e o p l e d i d y o u s e e s c a l i n g th a t w a l l ?              A.       How
many?
Yes.         A.    I w o u l d s a y p r o b a b l y a b o u t a d o z e n or m a y b e
g e t t i n g on f o r 20.
Sir, do y o u n o t e x a g g e r a t e a n d c o n f u s e ?              A.       I don't
understand your question.

M a y I ask y o u th i s : did. y o u see k-o ut .. th e presswoitrcfziil?'
the press seek you out?           A.    When?
Following- these events.                  A.      I s o u g h t o u t the*pres®**-'
b e c a u s e I w a s a n g r y a n d w i s h e d to m a k e a s t a t e m e n t a b o u t
what had h a p p e n e d .
                  N A D E R A S S E N - C A R P O O S A M Y CURPEN, called
                            E x a m i n e e b v MR. G Q L D S A C K :

Dr.    uurpen,       you p r a c t i c e i n L i v e r p o o l ,     do y o u ?        A.         Yes

Are you a g e n e r a l p r a c t i t i o n e r ?         A.        Yes,    I am.

A n d y o u c a m e a c r o s s to the m a t c h in A p r i l i n a g r o u p w h e r
t h e r e w e r e o t h e r d o c t o r s as w e l l , is t h a t r i g h t ?
A.       Yes, t h e r e w e r e f o u r o f us, t w o of t h e m w e r e d o c t o r s

Anc    I think you haa t i c k e t s            f a r th e N o r t h S t a n d .
A.      That    is    correct.

Y o u r j o u r n e y w a s u n e v e n t f u l a n d y o u w e r e in y o u r p l a c e
bv s D o u t 2 o ’ c I c c k ?        A.      Y e s , 2 o ' c l o c k we w e r e in.               We
h a d no p r o b l e m s .

I do n e t t h i n k y o u s a w an y p r o b l e m s i n s i d e t h e g r o u n d
e i t h e r u n t i l a b o u t the k i c k - o f f time of 3 o ' c l o c k ?
A.        Yes, u n t i l , y o u k n o w , t h e t r o u b l e s t a r t e d a b o u t
five past three.




                                                          / S o m e t i m e a f t e r that.
6
                                                                            00/1009/92
                                                     Sworn bv;      A Page*
                                                     On behalf      of: South
                                                     Yorkshire      Metropol if a n
                                                     Ambulance      and Paramedlr
    CROWN OFFICE LIST                                Service

                                                     First          ■
                                                     Dated              September 1QQ3
    I N T H E MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR A    JU D IC IA L   R EV IEW

    B E T W E E N :

                                     REGINA

                                      - v -

o                HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE

                                    EX PARTE

                               STRINGER AND OTHERS




    This is the exhibit marked "AP6 " referred to in the affidavit of

    Albert Page attached hereto.




    Sworn this        day of                  1993


    Before me,




    Solicitor




                                     iSi
                                        0

                                                   J.A.   CT T T<



               all these youths piled off the bus. He is not supposed to
               let them off if it is not a bus stop.. They jumped over
               the wall and went to the big doors. They were banging on
               the doors but obviously they were all locked, so by this
               time then I drove round the roundabout and pulled in and
               they had crossed the road. They were urinating all up
               against the chemist's door and windows along the main road.
      B        I went' into the shop- and they follp.wec me in.

          Q. You say that they cot off the bus and went first of all to
             the Magnet Hotel? - A. Yes.

          Q. What you      are describing seems to be   a sort of invasion, a
           * surge* of them? - A. They were going to get some drink
             wherever they got it.    I don't know where they went aftervarcs.

          Q. Thev did    not keep to thepavements,    they climbed over the
             walls and got in the shortest cut possible? - A. Yes.

          Q. When they came into the shop, where did they go to first of
             ail? - A. Straight to the drinks.

      rv Q. And you said that some were putting it into their pockets
            or i n t o -heir coats? --'A. Yes.

          W ' How did they respond to the reasonable requests of the citizens
          rs
              around? - A*. Foul language and then I said to the lady, they
              were verv flustered, they did not know what to do, so I
              =aid:   "Just 1 chcr.e the Police because there is plenty in
              the ares. A couple would be here in a couple of seconds", sc
      h       then thev started acted like children and saying:     "Oh telephone
(^)           the*"?olice, 1 phene the Police" and just giving abuse out.

               The crowds that you have described sitting around Halfords
               and that area, tr.e Gateway Supermarket area, were they
               -^ver=;:c^ sucrcrters, .were you able rc tell? - A. I did
               no*" ~.c~—cs• There, wss      sucn a mass.. - v/as just sc
               shocked at the amount of peopie lying around drinking.

                You came cut and saw this crowd at the shop at about 10-tc-2?
                - A. Yes.

                How far is that away from rhe ground, what sort of distance
                'is it in walking terms? - A. Well I would say perhaps ten
                minutes.

      G    c . When they came out did they make for the ground or did you
                see where tney went to? *     No, X did not see.

                      MR. WOODWARD:   Thank you.

                      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Thank you very much, Mrs. Ellis.


      H                       FREDERICK JAMES ECCLSSTOK' Called
                                                      r me*
                                      F . J . 5CCLEST0N



      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: I am sorry you have had to
come back, but I am sure you understand.

      MR. PHILLIPS:  What is your full name plfease? -
A. Frederick James Eccleston.

I think you are a Senior Nurse Manager? - A. I am indeed.

And you live in the Wirral near Liverpool? - A. That is
right.
You went to the match, did you, with your son and another
young man? - A. That is rrgnt.

What time did you get to the ground? — A. Approximately
approaching t h e Leppings Lane end 25-past-2.

What was the situation that you saw as you approached at
that time?**- A. We came from the river end, across the
b r i d g e , havinc parked some two miles away from the ground.
The actual approach to where you get to the turnstiles
      Ytf&s not too bad at that stage. I am aware of a bus
discharging some of its passengers, a coach. At that poin
j actually socke to a young man who works in the thea — e
c~ the hoscital that I*work at so we were nor crushed, we
had a quiet and pleasant conversation for a couple of
ninuiss•
Were vcu abie ro get tc the perimeter gates of the ground
_              CUite easily, but once you got to the perimeter
cates " ' " w h i c h "were open, there was then a tremendous crush
There is no doubt s.oour tnat.




                           /Q. Were the people
                                  I  o
                                                  F.J.   ECCLESTON




 Were the people behind you still coming along? - A. There
 were people doming along the Lsppings Lane and there were
 people behind me across the bridge. There was no crush at
 that time.
  How long did it tafce you to get to the1 turnstile? — A. It-
  took us a good ten minutes or more and that journey to the
  turnstiles was probably the worst I've had.     I mean I go to
  every Liverpool*game, home and away, and we were a little
  frightened to say the least, but there was humour in the
  crowd. For instance     there were three Police Officers on
  horseback and one of    the horsesnudged my glasses and the
  Police Officer-,  we smiled at each other and he apologised
  in fact, and there wars Police Officers at the side cf the
  river cn foot.

  Did vou see any   in the crowd itself? - A. Yes. The
  Police Officers   on horseback were actually in the crowd but
  there was no orderly forms of queues as there normally is
  at football matches these days.

  which turnstiles were ycu going through? - A. There was
         fcur we were  timing roc« There wa^n w one in
  canicular.   We were trying to get in one of those four.

  wiiic- sat of turnstiles? Would you li’<e to Voo* at
  the'cian? - A. It is those four.

  These over there?     -        Yes.

   Turnstiles A to G?       -   A. That is right.

   Was it crushed the whole cf the time that you were going
   ---•j-s-" -       From the perimeter gates tc the turnstiles
   ::.e:e'wai a tremendous crush, yes, ana that soilled out
                *-iver.  The ether side of the bar that is shown
   there ...
r,. The railings?  - A. The railing, ves. The crowd had
   soilled - in fact at one stage we were that side of the bar
   and”we had tc negotiate cur wav underneath that to get in
   direct line with the turnstiles.  .

Q. Were you not able to go back and wal.< round the end of the
W * raiiinss? - A. No, that had become impossible.

o, Did you get through the turnstiles?        -     A. Yes.

rs. Straight through?  - A. Yes. The last ten yards we were
    cataoulted.  My feet did not touch the ground and my son
    and comoanion were the same. We ended up in different
    turnstiles and in fact I had my son's ticket and he
    actually had to leap over the turnstile it was that bad,
                         9

                                               F.J.   ECCLESTQW




   and I then handed his ticket with mine.
Q. Yes. - A. I had never come across that befora.                That last
   ten yards, as I say my feet ....

Q. The turnstile worked efficiently did it?           -   a.   Yes it
  .did..

Q. You then find yourself in the yard behind the turnstile?
   A. Thats right.  As soon as we came through the turnstile
   my son actually was remonstrating with a steward and the
   Police Officer ana the steward told him to shut u? because
   other fans had done the same thing ana had been forcibly
   ejected, so we obviously took notice of that.

Q. Where was this Police Officer and steward? Can you again
   loo*? - A. Immediately behind the turnstile, within"two
   or three yards.

Q. Can you say what the time was at this point? - A.
   Approximately just befora twenty to three I should thin*.

Q.   Did you know vhera you were going to go? -    A. Yes because
     I had baen to the pre-zicus year's game, and it was a
     totally different approach this time.   The year befora I
     arrived at ten to three because oc transport problems.

     I will come to that later if I may, but can you tall us
     where you had stood cr sac on the previous year? - A.
     Yes.   When we came to the turnstiles the previous year
     there was a line cf Police Officers and stewards that
     stopped us going through the tunnel.   They quite gently but
     forcefully said,- "Look, this is full, you've got to go to
     the left cr tha right" and the previous year I had my
     daughter with me, we vent to the right, and then it was
     still crushed because we were under the scoreboacd and I
     saw tr.e previous year to the left of the blue boards .....

n. Would you like again to look at the plan there.  - A. I ’ve
   actually got the picture c: the ground which I've arrowed.

j. It may help us if you turn round and see there.  Can you
   see.  If you show us where you went to once you got inside
   this year.

          LORD JUSTICE       T-.YLOR: We are talking about this         year
     now are we?

C.         MR.   PHILLIPS:     Yes.   - A. We went straight to          the
     toilet in   fact.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: ■      That is just to the left of the
     tunnel, we know that.

                                      1CC
                           10



                                                    F . J . SCCLESTON



     MR. PHILLIPS:   Then aftar that where did you go to?
- A. As we came out of the toilet my son said, "Look at
this" and one of the gates was being opened and so I said
to them, "Right, follow me" and we turned to the right.

       to. the. right. - A. It went past the open tunnel.
T u rn e d ,,
In fact I have a unique recollection of looking down that
tunnel and seeing daylight as we ran past, because I knew
from my previous year's experience to go to the left which
was a better vantage point and a safar vantage point.

Look        atwhera the pointer's going.Did you go up thera
than        to the right? - A. No wewent the other way.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Through the gap in the wall?
A. Through the gap in the wall.

And round to the north side.              -     A. That is correct, and up
the stairs.

           MR. PHILLIPS:  And ycu went into that corner pen did
ycu?         - A. No we were high up on the left hand sida.

High        up on the terracing there?          -    A. Do you mind if I ...

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:              Yo u   go   and show us.        - A.
Exactly' there.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:         Yes I sea.

      MR. PHILLIPS:   Thank you very much.  Are you saying
the previous year you had been in fact on the opposita side
of tr.e cround?   - A. No. .We had first tried to go on the
cocosite side cf the ground but it was very crushed so I
r.kd lcc<ed up to that other =ide and I'd ta.o.n my daughter
out cf the crusn and gone round the wav we went this year.

 So what was the situation like in that part of the
 terracing whera you were?  - A. Reasonably comfortable.
 There were plenty cf fans in there, more than the previous
 year but it was comfortable standing there, and what amazed
 me at quarter to three was that the far side, and that is
 under the scoreboard and the right hand pen were half
 empty.

 ves.           -   A. I was astounded to see that this year.

 Were you able from where you were to see the centra p«ns 3
 and 4? - A. Yes, very easily.

 What did you see there?            -   A. Absoluts jam packsd at
 Quarter to three.

                                        t £ L
        I



                                                  11


                                                                                          p .j   :-e c c l e s t q w



            Q. .Did you keep an eye on that or were you looking out to the
               field as well? - A. I was looking out to the field as
               well.

            Q. Do you remember the teams coming out on to the field?                                                       -
    B          A. Very distinctly.

            Q. Ana did you take any particular notice of the terraces when
               that happened? - A. No, not particularly.    I didn’t taka
               much notice that I'd done when I cirst took my place.  That
               was what really astounded me.

o           Q. Do you remember the kick-off?                                        -     a.   Yes.

            Q. And die game starting?                               -   A. Yes.

            w* During tnat time again I suppose you were watching the
               field were you? - A. Yes, undoubtedly.

                And you remember the shot which hit the goal post?                                                     -   A.
                 a   •   ^   •! «   ^         ^   -    i_ i_ _• _           i       « «             ^


    D           eternally grateful that Liverpool never scored because I
                think ....

            d.• Did you notice any effect?                              -           A. Yes.

            ^• T e i - -s aocut t a c please? - A. Whenever a si de attacks
               like that, whether it is this game or any gama, the crowd
               surge forward and they did cn this occasion.
    El
o               Which crowd are you talking about now? - a.
                about the Liverpool crowd benind the coal.
                                                                                                              I 'm talking


                Ir. : and 4?        -        A.       In 2 and 4 yes.

            .    »ci vcli no w  nv chir.g particular about that, what was
                                         3

                               .       -1 . - -isn nuticsa cnat oeooie were
                beginning tc be passed down across the heads'      Now that is
                a sign that there is problems.

                Did you see anything else in those pens? - a. Yes.     This
                coincided with the teams going off.' The front o t the oens
                were flat. Now when you're at a football match you're"
                looking down on a crowd.  The heads bob all the time.
                There is movement.   On this occasion I noticed they were
                flat and I knew something was wrong.




                                        /Q. You recall seeing the Police Officer ..
    H
                                                                                i
                                     •2


                                                          F -J   EGGLESTON


q   . You recall seeing the Police Officer run on to the pitch then
      to stop the sane, do you? - A. I do. indeed.

Q. And from then on did you pay particular attention to these two
   terraces? - A. Yes, you could not help but not to because the
   fans were trying to get over the fence. Some of them were
   being pushed back. Some managed to get over. One fan was
   arrested and,was pleading not to put him back. You could tell
   he was pleading for something.

G. Did you see Police Officers on the perimeter track? - A. Yes.
   we d i d .

Q. Did you see the fates open for pens 3 and 4? -a . There was
   one.' One gate was being opened.  It was at that time that I
   turned to my son ana said, "Look, they're in trouble down
   there.  I am going down because they need help".

Q. Can you say which sate it was that was open.' -A. I think i-
   was the one behind the goal, immediately behind the goal.

G.            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Pen 3 or 4? - -A. I don't which
       pen.
              m o   sut'';ss.   : think that would be    a   . in fact:

    G. 5o wne.n cic you first realise, by reference to what was goir.g
       on cn the field, wr.en cid you first realise there was
       something caaly w r m g ? -A. a s the teams w e m

       As the teams went cff? - A. As the teams went off.     The Police
       Officer ran on tc get m e referee to stop it, and your eyes
       then moved as tc wr.y m i s was happening, ana you concenrratec
       on thearea behinc the goal.     That is the thingI can rememDer
       tc this dav is m i s flatness of the immediate crowd in front
       cf the carrier m a t lec tc the pitch.

       So vcu I think tr.er. went down to the pitcr.. did you not? - A.
       That is riznt.       I /.new rry way from last year's experience, anc
       t* g CZ 3 stewarc t: tSKe me. and he did not hesitate at all.       I
       sa i c . "Look, you are in trouble out there.      I ’m a trainee
       nurse", ana he tcoK me tne quickest way under the stand, anc a
       P o l i c e Officer let me cn- tne pitch.

       And vou went to tne area oenina the goai m            the first place."
       a . That is correct.

       Ana Police Officers, what were they doing at that time when
       you went down? - A. Some seemed to be stanaing around, but
       some were working like beavers at the gate.          The one I
       remember. I am on video with him. that is the Police
       Officer without any hair, and we were literally pulling
       people by any part of their body we could grab hold of.
       their arms, their legs.  They seemed to be spilling down
       in a*cascade towaras that gateway, and there were three
       Police Officers ana I was just behind them helping them
                     ■
                     « -••—     t*k *=» n __r^pAnlo t hst c ame our *chsv
                                                   j L , J . ..RCCLZBIW


were just shocked.   They could hardly breathe.

Mere you helping them on to the pitch after they had cone out?
  That is right, immediately on to the pitch behind the net.

The first people who came our. were they badly injured? - A.
No.
You then went back. I think, and helped some more people?' - A.
By the time you got the top of the pile out you then began to
get the really injured people out who were unconscious.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Could you help me. because the
video does not shew this very closely.   The people you were
getting out first who you say were shocked but nor badly
injured, were they coming from behind where the people you
eventually got out were, or were they clambering over people
uno* were in a worse condition, or were they themselves right
ar the"front, do you know? - A. They seemed to be jusr
literally tumbling ever the peopie who were at the front.

Thev were really coming* from behind those who had been right
at the front? - a . Yes. I think so.

T         vou tcok a young man cut who seemed to have some chest
injuries? Is that rigr.t? - A. That is right.        I worked on
Vm.     I can't recall hew Ions for anv cf the peopie I actually
worKed. but he esse round quite reasonaoly easily and quite
well, ar.d it was eovieus he hac chest injuries.       I: shcutec^tc
him wrier, he t n e c tc struggle up. I said. "Lis down anc I ’ll
-*Ir.c a streter.er".    I then as«ed some Policemen around me wno
seemeo rather cazec. I noticed the oniv stretcher I couic see
was 'ey the penalty spot, and how I saw it was that it was a
wire mesh one and tne wire stucK out. so i ran to the penaitv
spct anc grac-eec it.      On the way back I literally ordered
“r.-ee .-dice Officers cc help ~e carry this fan away.        Thev
 -Mr- T.ss.-tlv ccev=-c ~ . anc we r.aic ran acrcss tne pitcr.,

At tr.is tine was anybccy taking control of what was happening
benir.c the seal? - A. I am afraid not. Many individual Folics
    ± ;e r 5 usea tneir initiative, ana tney were magnixicenw.
let’s have no ccucts aoout that.       Some were in the pens and
D u l l i n g oeople up. There was even one trying to bend the
drills back witr. his own bare hands-. anG there were others
that were beginning to treat the injurea at the said, but
there were otners who were just standing there.       There seesiec
tc be no overall control.       I would have expected some sort of
clearing station to be set up around the goal area, people
using their initiative from a managerial point of view.

 You did go I think with the stretcher you mentioned over to
 the St. John's Ambulance room, did you not? - A. In front of
 the gymnasium beni.nd the stana.

 What scene did you meet when you got there? - A. It was not
 too baa at that stage because a lot of people had not arrived.
               »        —   * U•_   •-   J   /an      • «   4*^ A   CT   TA W n   1 ff
                                                   F.J.   ECCLESTON


Ambulance and then turned and ran back because I knew there
were so many injured coming out to give some more help. So I
ran across the pitch.
You then took part, I think, in the resuscitation of people
who had been brought out of the pens? - A. That is right.

And others were .helping, of course, to do that, were they not;
-A   Yes.  I came across a surgeon.    I tried to take over rrom
him* so I actually tapped him on the head and apologised.
Then I moved on to the next person. There were Police
Officers giving mouth to mouth. There were St. John s
Ambulance people.   One of the people Iworked on - it was a
lud^-ous situation, because I had to do mouth to mourn anc
chest*massage on the same person, which you just cannot do.
and then he started to vomit.
uae -he’"® any eauismer.t available a.i...wha.t,. - 1 me?.— ~ ,A •
Absolutkiv Nothing'''' 1 "turned~to the St. John’s Ambulance man
worKiS g T Tongside me and I said. "For God's sake, nave you got
any swabs to clear this m a n ’s mouth?", and all he could hana
me was a dry sponge.
Can you say what time-this was. approximately? - A. Yes. it
jsust have been cuarter-psst, 20’“paSu-3.

Were you conscious of amd u lance and Firemen arriving at any ^
                     amouiar.ce arrived, in m y statement I tnougnt is.
         •         - -ri'asz-2 . Ir. fact from suDseauent knowledge it was
abc”-'"cuartsr-?ast. out it was oniy a St. John's Ambulance one
         ■;s p.ot well equipped at ail.      The fire Erigade. I was
             conscious tney were arouna.       The xans at this time.
-IZyU*-*e'« magnificent.         They had used their initiative..  A lot
o*f"''our.s men had decided - the aggression had gone irom tnem -
             wantsa :: help.       They took the hoardings, they
            cecrle. thev were doing moutn :: mouth as they thousr.t
             ^ --          •- =:' -r.is chaos zr.ey were trying so narc.

     vou «et any equipment from the ambulance or the Fire
 peop *'1 ®? - a. No.  - believe there was an oxygen cylinder
 arcunc! but" I* c i c not see anything of that at all.

 I think you then went, aic not you. to the gymnasium where
 people were c-eing taken." - A. ‘hat is * ignt.

 were vou working in the gymnasium? When aid you start wording
 j     .;,s r a 5 - a. It must have been well alter half-paSw-3.     wn_..
 r*-ot"around the back by tne gymnasium it was again chaotic.
 i h l r l were people lying dead on the floor      ™ e r e were the
 injured by the St. John-s Ambulance room door.           There were
 Police O f f i c e r s trying to keep control.  There was only a
 small doorway to the gymnasium that was b e i n g used, aind the
 deaa ana the living were trying to get through at the same
 time as some stage.
 were there any meaical staff working t h e r e i n the gymnasium? -
                                                               F.J.   ECCLESTON


                   outside the gymnasium, and when We got in the
the left °utsiae been divided into two. I realised afterwards
                   to r e c e i ^ h e d e i r a n d half to receive the injured,
half was to re                   there appeared. I was aware there were
'rhre^doStors eventually, and they were treating a r o u n d about
     Hozen injured people, one of the doctors turned to me and
             "FO? SoS?s sake, have we got any drugs?". There was no
 e q u i p m e n t  whatsoever even in the gymnasium at that stage.

 .j vftlJ rrv ro’— t some drugs? - A. Yes. I then ran oux of the
Did you try     -.antacid some senior Police Officers who were
gymnasium a           ^      QUZsidet and they immediately
in that no ma             ^        s o m e z n ± n g for us within
S v e minutes           It     w m        just three small boxes of equipment.

      'non tiisttc - "4YL0R:   Do you know where they came irom?
 . a. No I don't?               i
                       am afraid. There was no Health Authority
       zr. on i"
        mr  s w t l ttoc-    Ha<i y°u tried to get any from the St.
 -0>.r ■« Ambulance room? - A. Yes. When the doctor asxed fa.
 -      “T             r-.e St. John’s Ambulance ana they said,    j.
 sorfy "ye don't carry that, sort of equipment.         We are not
 allowed to have any drugs or any sort .
                                                                            n
                                                                             *•   T
                                                                                  —
                   u  a--er ”ou got back to the gymnasium? -
                       az
          "oT-e'i the ccctors set up 1 0 intravenous lines.

 ■■■        vr-                  T.e equipment from? - A. They were in tne
 wnere ■— - /o<- e —
 boxes.
                              -'eceived from the Police Officers.-' - A.
 :*I‘      XoSIe® we n a c ” received. There were some forceps, some
 “ '.■Z-o-e snme -wacs. some spiints ana there was enougn
 sci 2 = o.s:                     intravenous lines.     Then I went rcunc
 equ.pnien.                         tr.em set up the lines.     We then co-
 "*               - ■ z. - ' • - — officers to act u a n y no id >.hs bv - — ~—
 ~r                          -use we had no stands      of any sort.
  ZT    tr.e pSCKs     —r    ----------

          •    "pra vcu •" there doing this sort of thing.' - A.
• Mr” - W--our‘:a i*--Dis---- ™ d by then the injured that were
  • n o ro
           ar°
           ridC q C
                     I-'..% *»eS - n removed.
                                     ■*
                                              I wasaware, my tattention
                                                                uac c h n r /
  :.*?r:-,Un -o tne otr.er part of the gymnasium.            I was shocked
  Za ~         v 'no« --- 'eccusiy, wandered into that area, ana x
  -nuln      ^ o T ^ s l a ‘a v o u n g girl wno we had b e e n w o r k i n g on at
          S'ce*o-: the pitcn' a n a stayed w i t h her h u s D a n a who was
                io!?:fisc. as you can imagine.          I could give some
  rnnsoia~”on      I s u B D O s e . because she was the girl that the
  S S S S f t S ' - S m * on. SC at least she had had some gooa
  attention from an mc ivi d u a l point of view.

  Can you cast vour mind back now. if you will, to the
' ^T^i^ences^you^.oticed^betueen^the two%vents^ because you
  went’to both events.  You say you came later on the
  previous year? - A. That is right.
                                iii
                                          16

                                                                 F.J.   EGGLESTON


         0     Was the journey to the turnstiles along Leppings Lane any
               different on the previous year? - A. Yes, the previous year,
               my daughter and I had not been allowed to get to the
               turnstiles without the Police made sure we had a ticket.

         q     From which direction had you come? - A. We had come from the
               other direction the previous year, from down the Leppings
    B               »•••
         Q. From the roundabout? - A. From the roundabout, that is right,
            because we came by coach the previous year.

         0     How did this h a p p e n that you were checked for tickets on the
               previous year? - A. The previous year there seemed to be a lot
O              more Police Officers around, and there was not the same crusn.
               let us be quite honest and fair about this, there was nowhere
               near the same crusn at iO-to-3 when I arrived the previous
               year.
         ■*'   wer® there simoly groups or lines of Police Officers, or were
               there metai barriers cr what? - A. There were lines of Police
               Officers the previous year.
    D    3. Across the pavement cr the whole road? - A. You had to go
            dowr.T They" channelled you off, so you had to go past them.
            anc^'Have you get a ticket?", was requested of you before you
            actually got anywnere near tne turnstiles.

             . Die you -ave :: snow your ticket? -     a   . Yes. 1 had it m   my
               hanc .


o              Hac you seen anvtr.ir.g like -that ail in 1989, this year? - A.
               No .
                     ■•.--sn -m c — TAYLOR:    Mr. Zccieston. about how far up
               --c. -:ac":rcr. tr.s entrance., from the perimeter gate:s. about
               ==ncw" far uc tr.s rcac -ere you cr.aile.ngec for your ticket in
               7ac£~ - a . I tr.inx it was round aDout the perimeter gates.
    F:         Near tne gate?   Not furtner up the road? -. A. Not far away,
               no .
                      mo  PHILLIPS    Had you had a reasonable journey to
               Sheffield on botr. occasions? - A. Both occasions. for some
               ~*aason'"cr anotner. the M62 haa road-works.  They were
               opened just a week or ten days before either game.    This
               c*ae we haa actually avoided them by going through the
               country area anc Glossop.    That is the reason why we were
               late on both occasions, in fact, because we like to be at
               the ground a good hour before.

               So althougn you arrived at 2S-past-2. that was later than you
               haa hoped? - A. Yes. most definitely.

    H          You nave a l r e a a v told us in 1988 when you went through the
               turnstiles you were pointed away from the tunnel? - A, Y e s ,
                                               I   i              “
                                              17


                                                                  F. 3. E C C L E 5 T 0 N

                            C r o s s - e x a m i n e d bv MR. H V T N E R :

Mr. E c c l e s t o n , b e f o r e y o u e v e n t h i n k a b o u t p e o p l e , the
s i t u a t i o n at t h e Leppinffi L a n e t u r n s t i l e s is o f a f u n n e l ,
is i t n o t ?         A.     Yes .
W h i c h f u n n e l s p e o p l e w h o b o t h c o m e d o w n L e p p i n g s L a n e an d ,
o f c o u r s e , over t h e b r i d g e f r o m th e o t h e r s i d e ?           A. Yes.

It i s a b o t t l e n e c k ?          A.          Precisely.

By t h e t i m e y o u g o t i n t o the a r e a b e t w e e n th e r a i l i n g s
a n d t h e t u r n s t i l e s , t h e r e w a s no w a y t h a t a n y b o d y c o u l d
f o r m an o r d e r l y o u e u e b e c a u s e t h e r e w e r e t o o m a n y p e o p l e
a l r e a d y in t h e a r e a .        A.      T h a t is c o r r e c t .

So t h a t if y o u w e r e l o o k i n g for o r d e r l y q u e u e s , yo u
w o u l d have re a l l y been saying, "Well, something should
h a v e b e e n d o n e b e f o r e a l l t h e s e p e o p l e got i n t o t h a t
area."         A.     Yes.        Yes.
And the P o l i c e m e n on h o r s e s w i t h i n t h e area, of c ourse,
w e r e a b s o l u t e l y helpless..       A.     T h e y t r i e d t o do a
v a l i a n t j o b i n e x t r e m e .'.'difficulty.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:             That is i n s i d e the p e r i m e t e r
aates?   A.   I n s i a e t h e p e r i m e t e r g a t e s , y e s , sir.

        MR. n Y T N E n :         A g a i n , w h a t I a m t r y i n g r e a l l y to g e t a t
is t h e i m p o s s i b i l i t y , g i v e n t h e g r e a t e s t P o l i c e O f f i c e r s
ano the most d o c i l e s p e c t a t o r s , there were simply too many
for q u e u e s .        A.         The s D e c t a t o r s that were there r e a l i s e a
c h a t t h e y c c u i d n o t p o s s i b l y g e t in.           They all had t i c k e t s
in t h a t a r e a .        T h e y k n e w — and the f r u s t r a t i o n that b u i l d s
u d in v o u;       you h a v e got a t i c k e t and you h a v e got a right
to b e i r. t h e r e : y o u h a v e to be c a r t             c f a football crowd
:c r e s . i s e that.
I w a s c c m o to c o m e o n to t h i s .         T h e r e has b e e n a lot of
talk of h o o l i g a n i s m , you see.          N a t u r a l i m p a t i e n c e to g e t
i n t o t h e c r o u n o is o n e o f t h e t h i n g s     t h a t , r i g h t l y or
w r o n c i y , is to be a n t i c i p a t e d ?     A.       Y e s.

Ana       t h a t w i l l a p p l y to an o p e r a or a- p l a y j u s t as w e l l .
A.          Precisely,yes.

T h e n e x t t h i n g , o f c o u r s e , is t h i s , t h a t i f y o u w e n t to
t h e o r o u n d t o a a y , t h e d a n g e r m i g h t n o t be a p p a r e n t b e c a u s e
the c r u s n in the a r e a b e t w e e n the r a i l s and the t u r n s t i l e s
w o u l d have a s a f e t y v a l v e d o w n the p e r i m e t e r p ath alon g
the r i v e r ?        A.     Yes.

Of c o u r s e ,    t h a t w a s b l o c k e d o f f by b a r r i e r s ?        A.        Yes.

So t h a t t h e r e w a s a b o t t l e n e c k c r u s h .            A.     Yes.
-   ■ ■                 -      n_ 1        n f F;         «1nnn     lopninne      lanP      rfoino
                                                               F. J. E C C L E S T O N

as t h e y c a m e d o w n i n t o t h e f u n n e l ?           A.  Remember, I
d i d n ' t a p p r o a c h f r o m L e p p i n g s Lan e ,     I approached across
t he r i v e r .
A c r o s s th e r i v e r .      A.    No, b e c a u s e , to be f a i r to t h e
P o l i c e , t h e r e w a s n ' t a c r u s h c o m i n g o v e r t h e r i v e r at
25..p,ast 2.
D i d y o u s e e a n y P o l i c e O f f i c e r s i n L e p p i n g s L a n e at a l l a s
you came over the r i v e r ?                A.     Yes, I was a w a r e of s o m e
Police Officers be cause there were coaches d i sem barking
t h e i r p a s s e n g e r s in the road, you know, b e c a u s e t h e y do
that and          then they drive         o f f to p a r k s o m e w h e r e e l s e .

S o at 25 p a s t 2,a d d i n g to t h e  crowds that   were going
i nto that area were c o a c h l o a d s    —    A.   Well, there
y^gj*g s o m e c o a c h — — —   I was aware of a coach.     I am not
s a y i n a that every c o a c h aid that but I was aware of a ccach.

C a n y o u h e l p us o n t h i s ?        You may not b e c a u s e , of c o u r s e ,
it w a s a ll v e r y c o n f u s e d .     T h e r e is s o m e s u g g e s t i o n t h a t
of t h e T u r n s t i l e s A - G w h i c h w e r e t h e t e r r a c e t u r n s t i l e s , t w o
w e r e n o t w o r k i n g , n o t in o p e r a t i o n .    C a n y o u h e l p u s on
t h i s as to w h e t h e r         A.            I w a s n o t a w a r e o f t h a t , no.
                                  -




 T n e v a l l s e e m e c to b e ? A.        T h e y a l l s e e m e d to b e w o r k i n g ,
 ves'. it w a s j u s t t h e d i f i c u l t y o f g e t t i n g to t h e m .

 Y o u t h e n g o t i n t o t n e g r o u n o --

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:                 C e r t a i n l y t h o s e o f us w h o
 n a v e s e e n the v i d e o , t h o u g h , m i g h t be u n o e r the i m p r e s s i o n
 tnat a l t h o u o n t hey w e r e worKi no they w e r e not all w o r k i n g
 at t h e s a m e e f f i c i e n c y .

              mc     hyT     E F.:    •s s , = : : .    I think that       is z r c b a b 1 y
 z r, e   s   x o - « “ a 11 o n .

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLCR:                W e a r e p o s s i b l y g o i n g to h e a r
 a o o u t t n a t b u t it s e e m e d t o be q u i t e n o t i c e a o l e t h a t it
 t o o k q u i t e a l o n g t i m e for s o m e D O O v t o e m e r g e f r o m o n e
 t u r n s t i l e ss a g a i n s t t h e o n e n e x t to it.

            MR. H Y T N E R :      M y s t a t e m e n t s t h a t I am p u t t i n g t h e s e
  q u e s t i o n s f r o m , t he w i t n e s s m a y , o f c o u r s e , h a v e b e e n
  s l i o n t l y c o n f u s e d ss to w h e t h e r a t u r n s t i l e w a s p e r m a n e n t l y
  c u t o f o p e r a t i o n or w n e t h e r it w a s t e m p o r a r i l y o u t o f
  operation.
              LORD JUSTICE           TAYLOR:           Yes, quite.

              MR. H Y T N E R :       I t h o u g h t th a t o u g h t to be i n v e s t i g a t e d .

              LORD JUSTICE           TAYLOR:           Y es.
                                                                          19


                                                                                            F. J. E C C L E S T O N

         _                                 h y t n ER*
                                             T h e r e c o u l d no t be an y d o u b t at a l l ,
         “ •    c o u l d t h e « ! t h a t as y o u r e a c h e d t h e r a i l i n g . , w h i c h w o u l d
                u-
                be 2 . 2 5 - is t h a t f a i r ?        A. Yes.

             '• " ■ T l n ^ ' r               thO f t a r i ert h . ” !, t c h e r ! e ” a « b e ^ t o ^ i s
                s e a s o n ^ t h a t w a s t h e w o r s t s i t u a t i o n I h a d c o m e to - t r i e d
    B               to          get      to' a" t u r n s t i l e . . ,


             =• T
                c ohat
                    u r s els
                            ,              it m a y be s
                                                       t n/e s w;o r: ^; ^                         ^     .fc ^        ^
                    b e e n d ® " g ® r °“ ® ; s t a f f t o a n y o n e l o o k i n g t h a t s e e i n g t h i s
                    p l a i n as a P ^ e                    a n d t h e n s e e i n g the h o r d e s c o m i n g
                                w i t h i n th              L e p p i n g s Lan e , that a d a n g e r o u s
O                   c   r   u   s   n
                    t o w a r d s the a r e a d o w n L e p p i g ^                 ^                     were
                    s i t u a t i o n was                   ^ join that c r ush then, yes, I
                     3          J o t a i l v a c r e ® w i t h v o u b e c a u s e it wa s b a d e n o u g h
                     " 0 U t i n t hi t l i t t l l a r e a f r o m the p e r i m e t e r g a t e to t h e
                     turnstile.              To add to t h a t w i t h h o r d e s of p e o p l e w o u l d
                     be -- well, it w o u l d be. t e r r i b l e .
                                                        ■ *■       e a w l s r G s nufnbsrs o f f s n s c o m i n g
    D                   a * 1 ^ ° B - n l ! a r c e o f L - p p i n c s L a n e t o w a r d s the t u r n s t i l e s ?
                        s o w n the ,0                                  o f fans c o m m , t h a t - a y .    There
                        « r e far * m o r e * c c m i n c t n a t w a y t h a n c o m i n g a c r o s s t h e b n ge
                        h o w ' hK,=
                                   a arl oe n rt e r es a i n t o t h a t a r e a .
                                                  - c S v t h a t it.was over a d i s t a n c e of a b o u t              /u
                        Is                        “ " ■            -»  '    Ye s.     Yss.
                        varcs            t h a t you s a w : h e m i
        Ei
o               •
                        ,,                 <c       s i t u a t i o n o u t s i d e t h e o r o u n a 35 m i n u t e s
                                  hpfnro‘k r x- o f f .          As v o u i n d i c a t e d , it t o o k y o u
                                                   ! n t c t h e a r o u n d a n d t h e n a t 15 m i n u t e s b e r o
                                                                                                                       _

                        s o m e -:-T-e . ;r ° ! f o - G a t e c ' w a s oo.ened for t h e s e c o n d
                        k i C K - o . . «no ..r i : _ „ . . j n i t v - 0 i o o k c o w n on to t h e c e n t r e
                        t i - e . yo u ■“= _ =                 ,rt. s  ss c i a i n as a c i k e s t a f f t h a t
                        pens.           Now-                    i.     A.'       Most d e f i n i t e l y ,
                        t h o s e pe ns we r e -~ve. . k - - . -
        Fi      ■        not-           -ust    full      to c a o a c i t y    cut   overfull.
                                                                                               A.        Thev were
                "           c r a m m e o - c r a m m e o ' o i l at q u a r t e r to t h r e e


                            ^ri-rs s.%ssrrss arsrrt&r
                            m y s te
                            anc
                            v e t t h e * a r e e c u i c p e o w i t h a b a t t e r y of m o n i t o r s        f.om
                            cU aa m  e ra s ' t
                                  m e • w w   -
                                                h a t a r e s e t up b y t h e C l u b .
                                K» a n r 'r ’ n a t i n q a l l s o r t s of Q u e s t i o n s t h a t o t h e r
                = . Y o u m a y be * ^ . c . p      b e 9 p u t t i n g , Hr. E c c l e s t o n , b u t n e v e r
                    P “°5        P o > “ e m e n i n t h e C o n t r o l Box, c o u l d y o u s e e
                    " i ' ‘       in*the West Stand immediately above the Leppings
                    L a n e  terraces?         A'        I - s n ' t really looking at the Stand,
                                no .

        H       D . Old                  you                    s t e w a r d s ^       pitch losing u p w a r d s ^
                                towards         the t e r r o c e s .          ,, ^
                                                20



                                                                     F. J. E C C L E 5 T 0 N

     D o y o u go to a l o t o f f o o t b a l l m a t c h e s ?             A.     Yes .        Yes.
           ^ 5 g v e r y c o m m o n s i g h t a t f o o t b a l l m a t c h e s , is it n o c ,
     for s t e w a r d s to be p a t r o l l i n g the p e r i m e t e r o f t h e p o p u l a r
     s i d e , the t e r r a c e s --         A.     Yes.
     A n d s e e i n g w h e r e t h e r e is a c r o w d a n d w h e r e t h e r e a r e
     s p a c e s an.d, g e t t i n g p e o p l e to m o v e a c r o s s . A.       Yes.                  Yes.

     S o m e t i m e s t h e y a r e d o i n g it b y s i g n a l a n d s o m e t i m e s
     t h e r e are m e s s a g e s o v e r the tannoy.           A.     T h a t is c o r r e c t .

      S a y i n a "Will s p e c t a t o r s i n s u c h a n d s u c h a s e c t i o n p l e a s e
      m o v e to th e r i g h t , t h e r e is l o t s o f spacrf1, a n d s o f o r t h .
      You have seen that?                  A.     N e a r l y e v e r y game , yes.

      N o t h i n g o f t h a t s o r t w e n t o n at H i l l s b o r o u g h ?     A.     No.
      T h er e was none of t h a t .             T h e r e w a s no m e s s a g e s o n t h e
      tannoy.          I w a s n o t c o n s c i o u s of s t e w a r d s t r y i n g t o
      d i r e c t f a ns i n t o s a f e r a n d b e t t e r p o s i t i o n s .

      You see. there m a y be s: s u g g e s t i o n that t h e r e w e r e m e s s a g e s
      p a s s e d over the t a n n o y .       D i d you h e a r any m e s s a g e s of any
      s o r t o v e r t he t a n n o y t e l l i n g p e o p l e at the L e p p i n g s L a n e
      e n d tc m o v e to o n e s i d e cr a n o t h e r ?         A.   N o, t h e r e w a s
      n o t h i n g of t h a t at a i l .

       T K p n e x t t m n a I .want to s s k y o u a b o u t is t h e s o - c a l l e d
       i - ' s " - n v i s i o S . 'The                 "pitc.n i n v a s i o n " h a s . v e r y
       s p e c i f i c m e a n i n g i n f o o t b s i l n o w, h a s it n o t ?        A.    Yes.

       H o o i i u s n s i n v a a i n a t h e p i t c h e i t h e r to s t o p t h e g a m e
       o: -tc " c e l e b r a t e a c o a l or to a o u s e t h e r s f e r e e o r a b u s e
       an o D D O s i n a p l a y e r , c r e v e n - a b i g g e r p i t c h i n v a s i o n
       to c e t at the f a n s s t t h e o t h e r e n a .              Is-tnat a f a i r .
         s . : ' j , n e of t h e r e a s o n s f o r p i t c n i n v a s i o n ?    A.       That
                   .s e i v c 3:

       3 u t * ne p r e r e a u i s i t e c f t h e p h r a s e , " p i t c h i n v a s i o n       is
       t h a t f ans oe t o n t n e p i t c n .              W h a t was h a p p e n i n g at
       H i l l s b o r o u g h w a s p e r f e c t l y o b v i o u s l y t h i s , w a s it n o t ,
       t h a t f a ns w e r e g e t t i n g o v e r t h e p e r i m e t e r f e n c e b u t
       r e m a i n i n g in t h e a r e s o e t w e e n th e p i t c h a n d t h e f e n c e
       initiaiiy?              A.     Y e s , t h a t is c o r r e c t .         T h e r e w a s no
       a t t e m p t to r u s n c u t a c r o s s t h e f i e l d .             They were just
       a l a o to g et o v e r t h o s e f e n c e s a n d f e e l s o m e f o r m o f
       s a f e t y a n a u n f o r t u n a t e l y it w a s n o t r e a d a s t h a t i n the
        first place.
■>      I w a n t to k n o w h o w y o u r e a O it, as a s p e c t a t o r , a l b e i t
        as a n e x p e r i e n c e d o n e .      A.      T h a t is w h a t I p u t i n m y
        statement.            Yes, I h a v e got m e d i c a l e x p e r i e n c e w h i c h
        q i v e s m e a uniqu-e, p e r h a p s , v i e w o f t h i n g s b u t a l s o m a n y
        y e a r s of g o i n a to f o o t b a l l m a t c h e s .    IJ<new t h e r e was
        s o m e t h i n g w r o n g w i t h i n two m i n u t e s of those t e a m s g o i n g o f f
                                                             F. 3. E C C L E S T O N

        LORD J U S T I C E TAYLOR:                Going off?          A.         Going off,
yes.                                                                                 ---
          H R . HYTNER:           I a m a s k i n g you a b o u t a l i t t l e e a r l i e r
t h a n t h a t w h e n t h e f i r s t p e o p l e b e g a n to c l i m b t h e f e n c e s .
It w a s f a i r l y o b v i o u s w h e n t h e y w e r e c l i m b i n g t h e f e n c e s
a n d g e t t i n g o v e r t h e f e n c e s t h a t t h e y w e r e n o t up to
m i s c h i e f , t h e y w e r e trying, t,o ge t out. o f s o m e d i f f i c u l t y .
A.      They were indeed.                  I can a p p r e ciate, th o u g h , that
u n l e s s vou —        t h e r e c o u l d be h e s i t a n c y ' i n unde'rs'Fsfmting
t h a t f r a m .the . p o i n t o f view, of a u t h o r i t y .          That I have
g o t to, yo u k n o w - - -             You could question, "Why were they
c o m i n g o v e r " f i r s t --
Hr. E c c l e s t o n , I t h i n k e v e r y o n e is g o i n g      to b e f a i r a b o u t
this.         As t h e f i r s t f a n s w e r e b e g i n n i n g    to c l a m b e r o v e r
t h e r e m a y h a v e b e e n s o m e p u z z l e m e n t or d o u b t a s to w h a t
t h e y w e r e up to.         A.      C o r r e c t , yes.

O n c e s o m e f a n s g o t o v e r it w a s c l e a r t h a t t h e y w e r e n o t
g e t t i n o o v e r to i n v a d e t h s p i t c h .  A.      That's right.

B u t to g e t o u t o f t r o u b L e .          A.        They were a c tu a l l y
p l e a d i n g a n d t h e L i v e r p o o l g o a l k e e p e r n o t i c e d it a s w e l l .

                       C r e s s - e x a m i n e d bv HR. J A C K S O N :

J u s t : n e n a t t e r . Mr. E c c i e s t o n .         19B8 - the n u m b e r of
rciics O f f i c e r s : s : w e e n t h e t u r n s t i l e s an a t h e t u n n e l ,
a r e vou a c s o l u t e i y c e r t a i n t h a t y o u a n a y o u r a a u g n t e r
w e r e ' c r e v e n t e c g o i n g d o w n t h e t u n n e l by a l i n e o f O f f i c e r s
A.        C c m o i n e a w i t n s t e w a r c s, most definitely.

Ana can you t i m e y o u r o b s e r v a t i o n of 1969 t h a t the c e n t r a l
p e n s were too f u l l ?         A.      ' h i s w a s at e x a c t l y q u a r t e r tc
t h r e e : e c s u s e t h a z is w n e n I : : c k m y p o s i ' i o n on t h e
terracing..
                     Cross-examinea               bv MR. K A l l I P E T I S :

Mr. E c c l e s t o n . y o u m a d e y o u r s t a t e m e n t on 1 8 t h A p r i l ,
three cays a f t e r the e v e n t s wnich you d e s c r i b e.                        In t h a t
s t a t e m e n t , t o o , y o u s a r . "Vfirhin t w o m i n u t e s o f t h e t e a m s
l e a v m o the p i t c n I r e a i i s e o s o m e t h i n g was w r o n g . "
I i u s t ' w a n t to f i x a t i m e , i f I m a y , for t h e b a s i s o f t he
question            I w a n t y o u to c o n s i a e r .     S o m e t i m e b e f o r e you
l e f t y o u r p o s i t i o n o n th e t e r r a c e to go d o w n to t h e p i t c h
to a i v e a s s i s t a n c e , y o u h a d b e e n o b s e r v i n g t h e p e n s b e h i n o
t h e * g o a l m o u t h as a r e s u l t o f t he s u r g e d o w n t h a t y o u
descnced.                A.      T h a t ' s right.

 W h e n Mr. B e a r s l e y h i t t h e p o s t at t h e o t h e r e n d .           If
 p e o p l e w h o w e r e u n c o n s c i o u s or i n j u r e d h a d b e e n p a s s e d up
  th e p e n to t h e t u n n e l a n d o u t , c o u l d y o u h a v e s e e n t h a t ,
  if that was h a o p e n i n g ?              A.   I c o u l d , yes.
                                            I I
                                                           F. J. E C C L E S T O N

At any time f r o m th e t i m e that you s t a r t e d w a t c h i n g t h e
p e n b e h i n d t h e g o a l m o u t h to t h e t i m e t h a t y o u d e c i d e d
to l e a v e y o u r p o s i t i o n a n d go d o w n to t h e p i t c h to a s s i s t ,
d i d y ou s e e a n y b o d i e s , w n e t h e r u n c o n s c i o u s or c o n s c i o u s ,
h o r i z o n t a l or b e i n g c a r r i e d , b e i n g p a s s e d up t h e t e r r a c e s
t h r ough the t u n n e l ?          A.        No, t h e f e w t h a t w e r e b e i n g
m o v e d tha t w a y w e r e g o i n g d o w n t o w a r d s th e f r o n t .
                                                              T. S.   ECCLSSTON



Proo your vantage point, Mr. Eccleston, is there any way
that anvone who was injured or passing out could have mace
theirway up against the crush of the people that you nave
described in the pens behind the goal? - A. tlo way at all.
Eauallv when you cot on to the pitch and you went behind_
      a o L nets to assist in pulling people out iron benina
I I I fence and the gate which was now open, could you have
seen if any bodies were being passed up the .terrace again
to CO out through the tunnel and out the other side7 - A .
M be fair I could not because I was concentrating on the
gate and the people that were cascading cown on to that
gate.


               y°So ^ " t n i n H t l s likely that anybody c o u l d ha v e
                        j r c m t h e f r o n t o f t h a t F en, u p througr. t h a t
    c r o w d " a n d o u t t h r o u g h t h e t u n n e l ? - A. T n e r e w a s n o c..ancs
    at all.
             MR. KALLZrETIS:              Thank you very much.

           tnan JUSrr'rCZ TA'iLOR: Well you say that. You are ^
    -al1'*nc as t understand it, about the stage when you anc
    czhers^* Police Officers were frantically getting people
    out.
            a« - nr.cers-anc it from the evidence there was a _ _
      -ar-'sT-'*'nr’    cut frcr. the pens of people who were asie
                   that right? Some being hauled up on to tne
              s-=a and sc on? - A. When I actually startec_to
                            'police O f f i c e r s I w a s o n l y c o n s c i o u s o r p e o p l e
    " ^ e d - a M l y around that gate and then they were oeing
    - u U = " outbv me and others                  a n c t h e n Iw a s o e c i n n i n g to
                 - , - n ‘ at the sid e of the pitch. A l t e r t n a - i am
    n°t"c^nsc1.=us cf w h a t w « g o i n g en in the pens.
            - was       reaiiv asking is this:  are you able to say one
       " wc z   -ne     other whether everybody who ciec or who v»as
    1 ° e::trsrais, w a s b r o u g h t o u t o n l y i n t h e p i t c n c i r e c . . o n
    or n ay sone have be e n taken out a n o t h e r u ! y ; ' * j ed ^ a t
    o b v i o u a l y j r o n what I gleanec atterwarc. i realiseo — u
     some had gone bach cut cr the tunnel.

. T o m e of the injured and dead? - A. Some of the injured                                    and
           _had gone bacit out or the tunnel > si-, yes.

                MR. KALLIPETIS:            Sir, perhaps it is my fault for
     n o t a s k i n g it clear:          X w a n t e d to e s t a a l i s n a p a r t i c u l a r ;
     and it is up till about 20-past-j.
                LORD JCSTICS TAYLOR:                      Up to about 20-past-3,_thougn,
'     y o u w e r e n o t a w a r e of a n y b o d y g o i n g out t haw way.
     That is correct, sir, yes.
                 _________          r>r-r n n V T n p ,         Vflll .   t   think it is
                                               24

                                                               F . J . ECCLESTON



                            Cross-Examined bv MR. WOODWARD;

Q. M r . E c c l e s t o n , may I a s k y o u a b o u t 1 9 8 8 p l e a s e . I n 1 9 8 8
   y o u a r r i v e d a t t h e g r o u n d a t s o m e w h a t l a t e r t h a n uhi s
   y e a r ? - A. T h a t is c o r r e c t s i r , y e s .

Q    A n d o n t hat o c c a s i o n y o u w e r e abl e to m a k e y o u r w a y in
     c o n s i d e r a b l e f r e e d o m a l o n g L e p p i n g s L a n e ? - A. Y e s , t h a t
     i s - t r u e . ......
Q. T h e r e w e r e h a r d l y a n y p e o p l e a b o u t , c o m p a r a t i v e l y s p e a k i n g ?
   - a . Well there was n ot any crush.                        I t v/as a n o r m a l s o r t
   of *ootball crowd g o i n g to a game o n t h a t occasion.                                 Of
   c o u r s e 'remember e v e r y b o d y w a s hurrying at 10-to-3.                        I was
   a m o n g s t the late c o m e r s on t h a t day.
o. A n d y o u b e c a m e a w a r e c f t h e P o l i c e n e a r t h e g a t e s , w a s i t ?
   - A. T h a t is r i g h t , a s f a r a s I c a n r e m e m b e r .

n    'vhen t h e s e c a t e s a r e o p e n e d o b v i o u s l y t h e r e a r e f e n c e , g a t e
     f e n c e , * g at e , o n e c a n s e e i t o n t h e p i c t u r e s ? ~ A. T h a t is
     r i g h t , yes.
q.   Y o u s a y y o u w e r e a s k e d , w h e t h e r y o u h a d g o t a t i c k e t ? - A.
     T h a t is r i g h t , yes.
     whereabouts was the Officer that askec you? - A. I think,
Q.
         -          C£ V        j_s t w e l v e m o n t h s a g o a n d I n a v e b e e n t o a l o t
     o f f o o t b a l l m a t c h e s , b u t I t h i n k it w a s t h e e n t r a n c e to
     *-he s e r i m e t e r c a t e s .    T h e y c o n s c i o u s l y w a n t e d to m a x e s u r e
     w e h a d a t i c k e t a n a h a d a r i g h t to b e t h e r e to g o thrcugr. t
     the turnstile.
Q. I t w a s s o m e w h e r e b y t h e p e r i m e t e r g a t e s ? - A. Ye s .

     v c w a r e v o u ^ u s t c o n s c i o u s c f a n O f f i c e r s p e a k i n g to
     ■/cu a t tr.at pcir.t/ ~              ;- s •
■*!. r t is not, y o u ar e r.ct s u g g e s t i n g t h e r e w a s a c o r d o n ^ o f ^
     P o l i c e m e n t h r o u g h w h i c h e v e r y p e r s o n h a d to p a s s ? - A. Uo,
     I c o u l d n o t h o n e s t l y s a y -c n a t , n o .
0    S o t o be f a i r y o u r r e c o l l e c t i o n is t h a t 1 9 3 8 w h e n y o u c a m e
     t o the g r o u n d y o u w e r e a s k e d b y t h e P o l i c e O f n c e r w h e t h e r
     y o u h a d g o t a t i c k e t ? - A. T h a t is r i g h t , ye s .
c               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:          Can you help me as to w h a t
      y o u m e a n t b y "lines or P o l i c e O f f i c e r s c h a n n e l l i n g you
      o f f " ? ~ A. A s f a r as I c a n r e c a l l w e w e r e m a c e -o g o m
      as a queue.
q. What, before the perimeter gates or after? - A. Well I
   am conscious it was round about the perimeter S * t e s .
      We were channelled into the turnstiles, wnereas ^
      y e a r it was just a m i l l i n g crowd. A s I s a y I g o uO
      m a n y football matches.
                                                i '-i .
                                                      25
                                                                    g-.T. ecclsstor


                                  ..    £i**icult, isn't it. There is
a            HR. WOODWARD: It i                  things you read and the
       the experiences then there^                  which you have been?
       film you see and the            ^ ers thi> as well. She *“
       - A. ve s . ay d »“ | n t e r ^    n o t m o w e d t o approach W iJiou-
       ^Xing°s*re we had our tickets in our hands.
                          . w h a t y o u a r e s a y i n g is c o n c e r n i n g
Q. Doing th« ^ * sL y?“e gate you were asked whether you hao
                                  - A. *Sat is correct.
                                           _ s there w a s a line of O n i c e r s
n A n d y o u a r e n o t s u g g e s t i n g th e .                         that every.
Q ' d o i n g tb>c t o e v e r y d a y ?                  thsrs uiS a conplete
    body that                            ^ w n . U „ e o f O f f i c e r s , no.
    l i n e , y o u n o c t o .v b i a .
                   .... nothing foraal like a ==rcon set up
Q. 1 suggest tnere v.s n o t m n g
          t h e r e ? - A. No-
 q.        Y O U   w o u l d a g r e e w i t h t h a t ? - A. Y e s .                     ^

 q    . A n d t h e n y o u s a y y o u aaae. y o u r ^ y r J ° h ^ e a l t h 0 u g h at
        y o u 5 0 V i n M ^ q u . « . « ? w [ i - ~ q u e u e t h e p r e v i o u s yea r .




                                                                1    ves      but -aaicing sure
                              —   1   i   /~o   * ECU* ... -                                 __
           "-srs were                           ”     .  ^o’-;a,'ds ^he           tur n s t - - e s .
    '*• ---     p— ’"- ’
                       T. i~ crcer -o./a.cs -*ab
        we were ?--*•- -*♦
                                                                        a   E a c h i n d i v i d u a l wb.rr.
     q. T h e y w e r e ^c -s ~
                              . ear -i- i. ~c;
                                           - . v*o u to . . t.u.r n s t i l e .
           stile.  Y°u “ac — “
                                                    r i ’- e c t e d v o u , w a s h e b y t h e
           Where was the P o i i c e r n a n ^ h ^ a - . e c                ^     a r * und the
              — t-’ies? ~
            --------------                            =-was ::rsu r''>oc*°d
                                                                  c---c — ^ tcwarcs.

            r ' T - " / ’! .               picture that you_have or the^recollectio,
            t h a t " v o u h a v e , o f * ,? o 1 l c ! ? * n . | o ( « t ? a n d h e t h e n p o i n t e d
            ticket?”! y o u s h o w e c                              ‘“ 7 . A . w e l l i t w a s s o
            y o u o f f to a                         ; ies w«r«'«nd t h e r e w a s not .
            o b v i o u s v;n e r e u..e t —
            c ^ u s h tr.en•                                                                        .^
                                                                •t-hic is t h e p r o b l e m . Y o u
      q   . H e l l t h a t is r:ignt,                       i n tS aueue*s a t t h a t t i m e ?
             did not neea                                    -.he t r o u b l e t o P * ™ ; * e k , s
             - A. .lo, 3 U . " V " y O U ii)ce, to m a h e s u r e y o u n a c
             s : 4 r ; : ; ; * 5 r - *». « * .                        Pu c .

       Q . Y O U - d i d n o t n e e c t o ® % “ i ” ® ^ 0 p 5 ? i c e i e n a b o u t who, i«
           s e e v a e r e to c o                          uaderstana,-- t h a w                          0
           t h i s w h a t y o u would. hu                   . d i - e c t y o u , b e c a u s e une
           J,e n -'oulo Jd ii rr pe cc t vou
                                         . , a n c w ed ri ea c io *b ev ui uo u js i y s l o u i g o e o p l e
                                        to q e t i n t o th e g r o u n c , a n d 1-
                                                   26
                                                                   ? . J.   S eC L S S T O M




    a k n o t of three or four at one you wo u l d be directed to
    another turnstile? - A. Yes.
. And is that the picture? - A. Yes.
  Can I cone to when you cot into the ground in 19SS. you
' have a recollection o f there being people a t the access er
  entrance to the tunnel a r e a ? - A. That is correct, yes.

        Mow those people included stevards? - A. Yes.
-       can you say how             n a n y ? - A. Mo, X c a n ' t , b u t i t w a s c e r t a i n l y
                     to m a k e     sure vou m ust not go cown that tunnel,
        because at than             stage" : d i d n o t k n o w H i l l s b o r o u g h a t all
        a n d t h a t is t h e      place I w o u l d have gone.
Q . That would be at what                       turn     i n 1988? - A. T h a t is a p p r o : < i = a t e l
         lC-minutes-to-3.

         <=o f - e r e w e r e p e o p l e a : t h e e n t r a n c e t o t h e t u n n e l . VIerii
         the y ' i n a l i n e o r a g r o u p ? - A- A l i n e o r a g r o u p ,            x can.-.c.
         r e a l l y r e m e m b e r exactly-.
Q. Y o u w o u l d i d s n t i f y t h e : s t e w a r d s b y t h e i r t a b a r d s ? - A. T h a t
         is r i g h t , y e l l o w .
-         y o u s a y t h e r e w e r e P o l i c e m e n as w e l l ? - A. I a m c e r t a i n o !
^                  ves, t h e r e w a s a m i x e d g r o u p .
         M •- -av            -e d ’ - ^ ' - u l t to r e c a l l , b u t a r e y o u s a y i n g             that
          tnere        we     m e
                             -c_:^t'°” P o l i c e m e n there,
                                                            ^    t h a n S t e w a r d s     o r r e a l
                                                                                         Jfc is yery nucal y

                      ::ib!ie«rcT.          Chinn there were perhaps more Stewards
          1
                    ^ ~
                u.* —*1'* • -
                                -
                              w “
                                  w o u l d  n o t l i k e to b e e n t i r e l y c e r t a i n
          about..
■-                .c      d i f f i c u l t b u t w h a t y o u a r e s a y i n g is y o u r
                       * ■ „                   " e ’ n c ^.ore S t e w a r d s .and p e r h a p s o n e
          ir ^ n c U r n                                  « t h a t the P ictu re? - A. v e s ,
          I t h i n k so.
           - - <      ct-owa-cc - e a i l Y v/ho w e r e                     stopping you going m ?
    ~.    «"1C 1-
           _ ^ Yes , combir.ec.
    5. T h e y h a d t h e a u t h o r i t y of a P o l i c e m a n t h e r e b u t i t w a s t h e
       S t e w a r d s w h o w e r e s t o o p i n g y o u g o i n g in. - A. Y e s .
              T h a t is y o u r b e s t r e c o l l e c t i o n ? - A. T h a t is i n d e e d , y e s .

    0         N O W n a y I a s k y o u a b o u t .1989 . T h e a p p r o a c h t h a t y o u h a d
              w ! s o v i r t h e b r i d g e ? - A. T h a t is r i g h t .
    -         y ou cans i r o n the south side an d the approach o v e r the
              b r i d g e w a s a p e r f e c t l y n o r m a l a p p r o a c h . - A. Y e s .

     q   . I n t e r m s o f c r o w d a n d v o l u m e ? - A. Yes.
                                             27

                                                            F . J . ECCLESTON



Q. D i d y o u e n c o u n t e r a n y p e o p l e a s k i n g f o r t i c k e t s ? - A. Ho,
   I d i d not a t all.

Q. I s i t y o u r r e c o l l e c t i o n n o t a s i n g l e p e r s o n a s k e d y o u f o r
   a t i c k e t ? - A. I d o n ' t t h i n k t h e y d i d no, b u t t o b e f a i r
   I k n o w people turned up w i t h o u t tickets. I know that.

Q. H o w - do- y o u know, tha&2. - A. B e c a u s e t h a t is .... L i v e r p o o l
   a r e t h e m o s t s u c c e s s f u l c l u b -in E u r o p e a n d e v e r y a w a y n a t c h ,
   w h e t h e r i t is a n F . A . C u p o r t h e L e a g u e y o u h a v e t o h a v e
   tickets. The only place you get tickets from are actually
   in L i v e r p o o l a n d a lot of p e o p l e t u r n up in the nop e they
   w i l l g e t s p a r e t i c k e t s a n d a l s o a l o t of a w a y g a a e s t h e y
   actually open turnstiles when they have not sold enough
   t i c k e t s , s o t h e r e m a y h a v e b e e n a t h o u g h t , y o u k n o w , "If
   t h e r e is r o o m i n t h e g r o u n d I m i g h t b e a b l e to g e t i n a n d
   pay cash".
Q. B u t q u i t e a l o t o f p u b l i c i t y w a s g i v e n b e f o r e t h e n a t c h ,
   v/as i t not, in t h e A n f i e l a R e v i e w a n d i n t h e l o c a l m e d i a ?
   - A. Yes .
Q . "'lot t o c o m e if y o u h a v e n o t g o t t i c k e t s " ? - A. 3 u t i t s t i l l
     does not follow.         I h a v e b e e n to g r o u n d s t h i s s e a s o n t h a t
     they have still o p e n e d turnstiles.
 q.               LOPwD JUSTICE TAYLOR:            F o r p e o p l e to p a y o v e r t h e
      c o u n t e r ? - A. Yes..
 2. H a v e y o u e v e r b e e n t o a m a t c h w h e r e t h e y h a v e o p e n e d th e
    c a t e s * ar.c l e t p e o p l e in w i t h o u t t i c k e t s c r a n y t h i n g ? - A.
    N'o n e v e r sir., no.
 q. S o as f a r as y o u k n o w t h e r e is n o r e a s o n f o r n o n - t i c k e t
    h o l d e r s to c o to a m a t c h i n t h e e x p e c t a t i o n c r h o p e t h a t
    t h e c a t e s m i g h t j u s t be t h r o w n o p e n ? - A. ‘.To, no, t h e y
    w o u l d e x p e c t to p a y if t h e y c o u l d n o t . g e t a s p a r e t i c k e t ,
    I a m a b s o l u t e l y c e r t a i n c f that.
 q.             m r . WOODWARD:         T h e s e n o n - t i c k e t holders if they
      c a n ' t g e t a ticket, t h e y h a v e i n v e s t e d in t h e j o u r n e y ,
      t h e y w i l l d o t h e i r d a r n e d e s t to g e t in ? - A. T h a t is a
      f a i r c o m m e n t bu t 1 h ave n o t w i t n e s s e d any o t h e r m e t h o d
      b a r f a i r m e a n s o f t r y i n g t o g e t in, p u t it t h a t w a y .

 Q. B u t c o m i n g a l o n g o v e r t h e b r i d g e y o u s a w t h e c r o w d a t t h e
    L e ppings L a n e e n trance and you noticed a considerable amou n t
    o f * p e o p l e c o m i n g a l o n g f r o m L e p p i n g s Lane t r a v e l l i n g in
    t h e 1, o p p o s i t e d i r e c t i o n ? - A. Yes, t h e r e w a s f a r m o r e f r o m
    t h a t s i d e t h a n t h e r e w a s f r o m t h e s i d e I h a d c o n e fro m .

  Q. D i d y o u s e e a n y p e o p l e c a r r y i n g d r i n k ? D i d y o u s e e a s i n g l e
     c a n o f b e e r ? - A. Y e s , I a m s u r e I d i d . U n f o r t u n a t e l y it
     is s o m e t h i n g y o u g e t u s e d t o g o i n g to f o o t b a l l m a t c h e s .
     It is not s o m e t h i n g I c o n d o n e but yes, I am a f r a i d there
          *.                  anri t a m sure t h e r e w e r e , a n d o f c o u r s e
                                                                    F.J.    ECCLS5TQN


t h e y have the cans until the v e r y last n o n e n t b e f o r e going
i n t o the ground and then they leave them outside the ground
o n the floor or anywhere.

T h e y d r i n k i t ? - A. T h e y d r i n k i t o r ^ j u s t d o n ' t f i n i s h i t
a n d drop it on the g r o u n d I am afraid.

          LORD, J U S T I C E T A Y L O R : If i t is a n y h e l p t o y o u , t h o s e
o f us that w e n t to th e g r o u n d the day a f t e r w a r d s 1 s a w b e e r .
c a n s o n the ground, on the gr o u n d side of the t u r n s t i l e s .

         MR. W O O D W A R D :   T h a n k y o u sir.

W h e n v o u c a m e t o t h e c r o w d o u t s i d e t h e g a t e w a s i t, a s y o u
have* b e e n a s k e d b y M r . Kytr.er, q u i t e o b v i o u s t o y o u t h e r e
v/as a c r e a t c r u s h i n s i d e ? - A. I n s i d e t h e g r o u n d ?

I n s i d e t h e g a r e ? - A. O h i n s i d e t h e g a t e s , y e s , I w a s
surprised.            I k n e w I h a d t c j o i n i n b u t I w a s n o t ar.ti c i p a t
t h e e n j o y m e n t cf h a v i n g to j o i n t h a t t h r o n g .

S o vou could see it as I s u p p o s e c ould e v e r y b o d y e l s e that
was" a c c r o a c h i n g i t ? - A. O h yes , t h e r e w a s n o c o u b t a b o u c
                                               29


                                                                                F.J.    EGGLESTON




         q   . A n d g e t in t h r o u g h t h a t c r o w d w i t h r e a s o n a b l e s a f e t y a n d
               w i t h r a a s o n a b l s c o n v e n i e n c e ? - A. T h a t is r i g h t .

         q   . G i v a n that it's a football match.                     -    A. Y e s .

         Q.
                S o it w o u l d b e w r o n g t o h a v e t h e i m p r e s s i o n f r o m y o u r
    B
                e v i d e n c e t h a t a t ' t h e trms' t h a t y o u c a m e to t h e gates* y o u
                s h o u l d n ' t h a v e j o i n e d t h e c r o w d ? - A. W e l l , I m e a n I h a d
                a t i c k e t a n d I w a n t e d to g e t in t h e g a m e s o I w o u l d j o i n
                t h a t c r o w d b e c a u s e I .cnew t h a t w a s t h e o n l y w a y to g e t in.

                H u e y o u s e e it h a s b e e n o u t to y o u it w a s p l a i n a s a
                oi c a s t a : : t h a t t h e - s i t u a t i o n w a s s u c h . Nlow l e t us l o o < at-
O               t h a c *c a r e f u l l y .   Y o u w e r e g o i n g to t h e m a t c h .     Y o u had got
                y o u r ticket.           Y ou saw the crowd.              It w a s q u i t e c r o w d e d .

                rieverthaless according to your experience and judgment and,
                if I :nav say so, sir, your responsible attitude, you
                d e c i d e d * ! ! : was reasonable to advance and to go in. - A.
                ‘
                That isrignt.
    D
                 and 7 0 u didn't have any cualms about going on.                               -   A. No I
                 didn '

                 We T.uat gc in and go to the turnstiles,                                  A.   That is
                 riiht.

                 This wo a id he at aoout what time?                           A. I would sav around

o                aocui halt pas- two.

                 Sc vou were macing your way through tc the turnstiles when
                 vou*say you were catapulted forward?  - A. The last ten
                 yards only.
                 So somathin:: rr.usc have happened behind you did it? - A.
                 ;;ov; -that I couldn't say, but. I can't imagine an enormous
        Fi       crowd “oinins in Cive minutes.       I don't ‘
                                                              <now but I'm. just
                 us in:: mv iir.ag inacion because I didn't look behind me.

                 You wouldn't have exoacted anything like that.                                      A. No.

                       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Have you ever watched the bath
                  water soing cut?  It accelerates as it gets nearer the plug
                  hole doesn't it? - A. That is right.
        G
                       MR. WO00WA30:   May I ask you about the plug hole?
                  Did suddenly the turnstiles allow morepeople to go
                  through?      A. Ke.

                  It wasn't as          if there was a           great relief ahead of              you into
                  whicr. peoole         ran?  - A. ^o.
                                                 30


                                                                                   F.J.   ECCLESTON




          Q. T h i s w a s p r e s s u r e f r o m b e h i n d ?           -   A. It m u s t h a v e b e e n
                   p r e s s u r e f r o m b e h i n d , yes .

                         MR. W O O D W A R D :        I ' a n o t s u r e , sir, h o w f u l l o n e ' s b a t h
                   is a t t h e e n d :
     B
          v> T h e r e w a s a let oc people came in behind you?                                  -    A. Yes -
             O h undoubtedly must have done.

          Q.       Anri vou had not oesn expecting that. - A. No.   I have
                   never experienced being actually catapulted through the tan
                   yards.
O         Q. Did you see people barging into the crowd, getting in the
             -.side, thrusting" themselves in? - A. I wasn't aware cf
             people barging in.     It was very much a jostling crowd.
             There was no form of order at all, some people getting
             ouite irate, but there was still, as I pointed out in my
             own experience, there was still a little bit of humour
             around at that staie.

     D                          sae Policemen. about? - A. There were three
                   mounted Officers who actually we knew by face because they
                   are from Liverpool and experienced in handling at
                   Li vs r o o d .  There were also some Officers on foot too at
                   the side ov the river.

          ■2. Thev ware matins valiant efforts ware they?                                     -       A. Y =-.
     Ei    Z>. Tc ccntroL the crowd?   - A. Because i: it became worse
S'
               tr.e river ~ust hav® bean a dancer I presume, I don't know.

           «fc •    •    r.avina cot to the crowd at two thirty, you got through
                                                                   thin< j us z
                    t.-.e t u r n s t i l e s it a o o u t w n a t time."

                    Did you hear anything on the public address system, that is
                    the tannoy, not a Landrcver, round about twenty to three? -
                       .‘■iothinc at all s no •

                    Tellinc oeoole to not push, tailing the crowds to hold
                    oac-c, nothin: to that affect? - • A. I wasn't aware cf it,
                    out it that way.

                    Was there much noise?                            A. Oh yes, there was a lot oc
                    n o i s e in t h i s ....

           Q.       Chanting, shouting         -                            a . Oh no
                    was some chanting behind us in the Lappings Lane end, but
                    you concentrated cn your efforts to get through those
                    turnstiles.   people were, you know, they were being pushed
                    and ■iostl=d.
     H
                                                                 i     L
                                  31


                                                                F . J . ' ECCLESTON



o.    if t h e r e w a s a m e s s a g e a t t h a t t i m e it d i d n ' t a p p e a r to
      have any effect?          - A. N o I w a s c o n c e n t r a t i n g t o o m u c h .

q     Y o u w e n t i n t o t h e g r o u n d a n o d e c i d e d t o t a x e uo t n e
      o o s ition, and too* up the po s i t i o n w h i c h y ou aimed for?                     -
      A. T h a t is right.#, w.hich is t h e s a m e as l a s t y e a r .
Q. T h a c w o u l d be a b o u t t w o f o r t y f i v e w o u l d it ?       -   A. Y e s .

n.     Are vou sure about that?              -    A. I am ye^s.

n.     Now what you cold the Inquiry is that at two forty five the
      state of ths pens 3 and 4 was jammed packed.   - A. Yes.

Q. No room for anybody m                 there.        ~   A. I wouldn't have
   tnought so.

      And you had a good view of it did you?                         -       A. Yes.

       Would you'have a look please at the composite b u n d U of
    ‘' ohoto.jraohs, alaua 2. The first photographs in that_bundle
       ara timed, and ths corrected time for ths first one is two
       forty six.   Do you have the photograph in front of you?
       A. Yes.
      .';ow that shews cats 4, pen   , a liutle to t.ie *-2.* -f i-
      ons ca:‘, £22 the*fence dividing pan 4 from pan 3. Do you
      see the Scottish    flag in the foreground? - A. Yes I.do.

       And tnen one can see into pen 3, down at the front there
       behind the goal.    Would you look at tho^e pictures.  You
       see"one can*see room round the fence, one can see
       suooorters standing and turning and looking in different
       directions.    There would appaar tc be quits a lot of cree-
       doT.'icC-n at the front there, certainly in that area at that
       time r^ould you agree.    - A. Tnere is some space, yes, I
       wouid agree.
    Z. It is not jam packed there is it?                    -   A.       It would appear
       not.
       And anybody looking at tht might have the impression that
       there was room to come into the terrace.  - A. If you were
       standing in front cf it as the photographer was, yes.

    Q. Of course it depends on your viewpoint.                           -     A. That is
       right.
    r'. And it deoends wnat you are looking at, but looking a- -he
                                                                                                t/j (r II)




        first, the ’second and the third photographs in that aundl
        showing that area - it doesn't show the whole area, but i
        shows the area down by the corner cf the goal oetwean pen
        4 and 3 and that foreground, so the photographs are

                                             i < -is
                                         22



                                                                     P . J . ECCLESTON



nutnaacea DB1629, DB1630, DB1631.                                 Now that is at two forty
SXX ••••
          LORD J U S T I C E TAYLOR:      I'm sorry, I ' m t r y i n g to ra l a t a
t V s to t h e s c h e d u l e of t i m e s b u t I t h i n * t h e s c h e d u l e of
t i m e s p u t in before.me o n l y r e l a t e to a l b u m 1. Is t h e r e a
s c h e d u l e 2? •
            MR. WOODWARD:                     There is sir, yes.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   It is a couple ot sheets is it
in all, or is thera an extra one?

          ‘•1R WOODWARD:       Thsre is a schedule cor 1, sir, and c
schedule for 2, and they are both a couole oc sheets Ion-?.
(Produced)            I have handed you two in ca^e either of your
A s s e s s o r s . • ••
               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:                   Have you got one more?

      MR. GLASGOW:   Sir the bundle 2 that I handed .u? to;
 V ^ > U   v » *
                 cf Vist week ws took the lioerty of writing
                    •   i*   »   •   ;                        _       |   _ L

 the ccrract time on the opposite page, i: you vs still -ot
 it.
               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:                    Yes indeed.

        >jR. GLASGOW:    You can take it frcr rr>2 'hat those are
  _      t .^2 wrote them on ourssivas, 50 you can aoanson
  those..
           LORO JUSTICE TAYLOR:         Thank you, so I can dispar.se
  with those. I think the others have not got them. (Copy
    c r~.'Jc 3 t tc v*• . *7o n n £cn )
                   ■AK. WOODWARD:
                          " understand,                              sir, you will have on
   the left hand sics .. ••
                   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:                 Yes IVve cot it now, two forty
   SIX     .
         MR. WOODWARD:   Thau relates-to the photograph on tne
   rignt* and net to the back .of the picture. It relates to
   the facing page.
                   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:                 Yen.
           MR. WOODWARD:  DB1S29, that condition, that state,
    certainly in that acea, is one where you were going to wan
    to stand and you would have no nouots about going to stana
    th“ ^ , according to the state of the crowd thera. - A.
    e’rom the ooint o£ view of the photograph yes, out it ---


                                                    I -» C>
                              23


                                                                           F.J.




Well you seem to have some reservations. What are they?   -
A. To set to there you couldn't get from the behind to
there.” It is well packed behind.  I would never attempt to
get anybody else into that situation just because thecs's a
little*bit oc room at the front.  It is well packed in my
opinion,.,

If you look at the next photograph, DB1630, that is a view
taken, you can see at the tc? oc the back there the
entrance to the tunnel and then a further view along the
front cf those people facing the perimeter fence.   -
Ana tnat ii? 3a is iv»?

Thau". 051630.           -    A. 30 yes.

And then D316 31, all taken at about the same time,                                        tvo
fortv six.  - A. There is enough people in there,                                          bearing
in mind that as soon as the gate starts the crush,                                         people
cush to the front, for people's comfort to last an                                         hour and
a half.
      LORD JUSTICE TAYtCR:     Presumably,  looking at 31, the
man whose head you c a n ’t see, and whosehands are on the
underside of the seating stands, is standing on the
dividiiig fence it the entrance to the tunnel, or the exit
;ro:« tr.= tunnel. Must be mustn't it?

     MR. wcCOWARD:                 “hat seems to be the only foothold
tnere sir.
       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  And the man to the left we can
 £2 e cn the ether photograph as well must oe sitting on
 something.
                                    T Ti 3 . "   1-5    C ;1 2   W a l l   -         SI!


        LORD J U S T I C E TAYLOR:                     Oh yes,         t h a t is t h e b i t of
 oric.-: w a l l t n a t p r o j e c t s .
      MR. WOCD X:A R D : Yes, there are two buttresses that
 come out either s i d e of the tunnel, and one can see those
 in 31 on the right, either side.     T thin'', they remain a
 constant feature cn most of the pictures.

      T“E WITNESS:   From what the previous gentleman said T
 would exoect on 29 tnat a steward would encourage people to
 move into that space.
      MR. WOODWARD:     Ye>:, you would expect stewards to be
 encouraging oeopie to come down.   - A. That is right.
 And that does happen in other games.



                                                 i—
                                                  »a
                                                                           F . J . ECCLESTON




Q.     So the i m p r e s s i o n on t h o s e photographs, that sort of
      ^ ^ j u t i o n t h a t y o u s e e o n t h o s e p h o t o g r a p h s , is o n s w h i c h
      if i t ' s g o i n g to b e i n t e r f e r e d w i t h or d i r e c t e d b y a n y b o d y ,
      w o u l d be b y s a y i n a to t h e p e o p l e a t t h e b a c k , " C o m e d o w n a
      bit, come fo r w a r d ' "           - A. Y e s b u t m o r e l i v e l y , t h e
      e a s i e s t to c o m m u n i c a t e w i t h a r e t h e p e o p l e in t h e f r o n t .
      If t h e v f i l l t'he f r o n t in p r o p e r l y t h o s e a u t o m a t i c a l l y w i l l
      c o m e f corn t h e b a c k .       Y o u w o n ’t g e t c o m m u n i c a t i o n s t h r o u g h
      to t h o s e at t h e b a c k .
£.    Sc the packing wculd be dons by saying to the people at the
      front i "Com 2 c n , oac ** up a ext closer, t e we ^ mot e r o m •
      _•   a
           *4*     V
                   i a i   •

n.    "Let thoss at the back have mors room".                              -    A. That is
      correct yes.

q   . And -we-know that snortly after this the cry ran up "Go
      back. Go oack" because the situation changed.   You, in
      your *statement, describe surprise at seeing the lack of
      occupation    at the wings. - A. Yes.

      D ’d vcu know t."ie re were cates at the oac ^ of the ^2 * ^ ,
      at the too c: the terrace, to givs access to the wings?
      A. Yes. Well I gleaned that infcrmation. later, after the
      ay 2 0   w   '

r,' You did" 1t                know then?       - A.    I didn't know          atthe      time, no.

      a c c c rdir.rtc your stacemsnt i: one reads it through, would
      it be right to say that cr.ce you were in the ground and in
      vour ccs11ion you"really ooserved no problems or difficulty
      until'the cams had been in progress for aoout. five minutes?
          i. The canis steeped =.t      minutes past three.  One
      -a —=;,',3 aware zz sccrocimateiy tour minutes ostc three >- »a<.
               crowd were in troucle              oecause       they       re crying         wo get
      over      the'fences.

      v c u r a t t e n t i o n , and you were in a position to see all *-ha.>
                                                                             -
      was happening ....              - A. Thats correct.

r,..... was not really upon the state of the terraces until
      about five minutes, four minutes past three?                                 -    A.     That
      is eight yes.

q   . when people started to come                       over.       - A. Yes.

r,. And you in     fairness saidthat at that time theperception
      that this wasn't a pitch invasion might taka some time to
      dawn on people.   ~ A. Oh yes.

q    . And it would be understandable that soma might construe it
                            35


                                                                F.J.




as t h a t .     - A. Y e s , b u t h a v i n g s a i d t h a t , w h y s h o u l d I b e
t h a f i r s t , to d a w n o n m a w h e n ....
No r e a s o n at all.         The evidence that you gave r elates your
a t t e n t i o n to t h e p r o b l e m s in t h e t e r r a c e t o a s u r g e a n d
s o m e t h i n g happening, on the pitch.              - A. T h a t is r i g h t .

T h a t was the time that th e goal was nearly scored.                          -   A.
Yes.
Can I a y o u        now about the gates?              Is it your impression


around aboi
is, if I may express a personal opinion ....

Yes.  - A. I .thin* if there is a way the crowd could have
soread to the left ana to the right -in other words, it is
the~side partitions that cause the trouble. They aia'<e them
into pens'. If ycu'havs got a fencing in front of you you
can live with that, and I can understand that, but I don't
understand why v/e ha vs- to be penned in from the side
cecause when the crush caine you could have moved to the
left or ci-Jht.' That would have save-: life.

It was vour impression of where thera were people trapped
and caucht as opposed tc people being squashed, if I can
ma<a that distinction, down by the gates ....  - A. That
is   rign t   .
     Khors wsrs csools              who wsrs    all entangled and then
meshed.  - n. That is               correct, yes.

And is reallv your impression this:       that that enmeshing,
'-■-a- =   ••:n = , .-.at confusion, was in and around the area
of the cates?




                                     /A.    i thin'< it was spread            ---
                                             26

                                                                 F.J.   ECCLESTON


                      aI think it was spread out all the way alone, but then I
                  would think the place people would try to go to is the fates,
                  if they could find any room, it is the place we all try to go
                  through a door, is it not, to get out? So. yes, there nay
                  have been more than there was in the outer parts away from
                  the sates.
     B            If I can put it this way, the concentration of disaster seemed
                  to get greater- towards the gate? - A. I think that is, correct.
                  yes.
                  And the gates were so narrow? - A. That is correct, yes.
         c.

         Q.
                  And there were steps up to them? - A. Yes, so I gather.
C)       Q.
                  The Police., you had paid tribute to many of the Officers._ roc
                  desc**' bed their conduct and quick thinking ana presence ci ^
                  mind as magnificent? - A. That is right,^certain individuals,
                  they used their common sense ana initiative.

                  Wouid *t be risht also to note that as with spectators and
         o.
                  others there were people who were dumbstruck? - A. Yes.

     D   0.
                  They were perplexed and bewildered? - A. Yes.

                  Anc -oaiiy did not know what tc do? - A. It was as though it
         G    .
                  haa r.c:“:ome into their book of rules.They really had never
                  seen anything like this.
                          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Who are you talking about now? -
                  a     I sa talking about Police Officers.  I think, quite
                  hon®st’y some did not know. They had not been orders about
o                 r'-'-is sort of situation, whereas others they seemed to over-
                  r ,'3e tneir orders and use their caring humanity side to
                  realise what was happening.
                          m b . WOODWARD:  Sc the picture is not really one of
                   c^'-' cemer. just standing around wilfully  not doing tnings, sui
                   many officers perplexed? - A. Yes.      I have made the Statement,
                   just lackea ieaaership in my person opinion.

                  .,acken direction, something to galvanise them and go? - A.
                   Yes. We needed the old Sergeant witn his stick walking up anc
                   down to as you s a y galvanise people into some sort of order.

          0
                   When they got it there were those who responded? - A. Yes.
                   Well. some responded without it.

                   Oh yes.   But there was a time, was there not. when there were
                   Police Officers along the perimeter fence trying to nelp
                   people come over? — A. Some were.

                   Which because of their presence just could not let any more
                   Officers up. so numerous were they? -A. Yes.
     H
                   And there were Officers who went inside to try and help? - A.
                                                  I A 4
                                        37


                                                             F-yJ. ECCL5ST0N



         Q. They entered into it? - A. Yes.

         Q. Almost regardless of the risk to themselves? - a . Yes. that is
            a fair comment.

         0. Did you see any Officers come in from the back, from the
    B       tunnel? - A. No, I did not.

         Q. Would it be right, just as there may have been people looking
            from the front who did not appreciate what was happening,
            there were numbers in the terrace itself further back who
            plainly, did not appreciate what was happening? - a . That is
            quite possible, but I think the crush was such everybody in
            those two pens knew. But that is a general observation.
O   C
        Q. Did you see any response - whether it could have been
           responded to may be a matter to be looked at - did you see any
           response to those Officers' cries on the fence to get back,
           to get back? - A. No, I was too engrossed in what I was trying
           to do with individuals to note that.

    D   Q . Thank you.

                            Cross-Examined bv MR. GLASGOW:

             Mr. Eccleston. could you just help us as to timing. When you
             came into the ground the first thing you did was to go to the
             toilet. I think? - A. That is correct.

        C. Ana as you came out and turned round you could see the
           gate behind you just being opened? - A. That is right.
           My son remarked on this and he drew my attention to it.
O
        0. And anticipating wnat would happen when that gate was openec.
           you maae your wav quickly back towards it. in fact? - a . No .

        0. Weil, just turn round -o get this accurately.  I know you cic
           not intend to go towarcs it but you wouid have had to go...   -
           A. It ;.s that gap we came through.

        Q. So you have had to take a number of steps towards the gate? -
           A. I suppose so.

        Q.   Before going through the wall?   - A.' Yes.

        0.   But you were concentrating on making your way asquickly     as
             you could to a place of safety in what we know as pens    5 and
             6? - A. Y e s .

        0. Did you see for yourself what did happen when the gates
           opened? - A. No, I did not.  I didn't hang around.

        0. You simply saw them being opened? - 'a . Yes.
    H
        0. By the time you got round and up into the high area where you
           have indicated it was obvious to^you that the people who were
                                               38

                                                                              F.J.    ECCLESTON


     comins in throush the sate as you turned the corner would have
     been in the sround by then? - A. Yes. because they would so
     straisht down the tunnel.
q       w a s just your help with this, Mr. Eccleston. When you
     first came out on to the high terrace and sot your bearinss
     and looked down into pens 3 and 4 in the centre, the scene you
     saw there had already been joined by whoever had cone down the
     tunnel fron this opening gate? - A. Yes-, I would imagine so.

Q. I w o n d e r i f w e c o u l d l o o k . ...
             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:                    The first wave?

             MR. G L A S G O W :       For the first          t i m e , m y Lor d :

Q.
     I d i d n ' t w a n t t o c r i t i c i s e y o u a t a l l . Mr. E c c l e s t o n . b e c a u s e
     you a r e d o i n g a d m i r a b l y well, but I t hink I could f a i r i y t « l l
     v o u w e k n o w p r o b a b l y as a c e r t a i n t y t h a t t h e g a t e w a s
     a c t u a l l y o p e n e d at 2.47.       If I w e r e t o t e l l y o u t h a t I a m
     sure you would accept therefore you must have m fact been
     m a k i n g y o u r w a y o n t o t h e t e r r a c e s p r o b a b l y a t 2.<48 o r 2 . 4 9 ?
     - a . Yes.
q    Ana that was not a criticism.                        Perhaps you could help us w i t h
     the photographs.                T h e b u n d l e 2 y o u w e r e l o o k i n g at, c o u l a w e
     look at the t i ming cf those.                     You have been perfectly p r o p e r l y
     a n d h e l p f u l l y a s * e d a b o u t t h e s c e n e t h a t is s h o w n m t h e
     f-_r s z t h r e e p n o t c g r a p n s . C o u l d w e l o o k a t t h e s e c o n d
     t o ° s t n s r , w h i c h we k n o w was t a k e n at 2.46.              Just to help
     y o u T ' t h a t is t a k e n p r o o a b i y v e r y s h o r t l y b e f o r e y o u a r e
     c o m i n g o u t o f t h e t o i l e t , b e c a u s e i t is t a k e n n o t l e s s
     t h a n 6 0 s e c o n d s b e f o r e t h e g a t e is o p e n e d . - A. R i g h t .

~    A n a it w o u l d be         f a i r to s a y , w o u l d it not, d e s p i t e t h e
     c'-'“ sing on the wails at the back there is room at thefront
     G,3”-I~evidentlv for people to be turning round and free space
     to rscve? - A. Yes.
G    T h e r e is n o t n i n g y o u c o u l d p r o p e r l y c a l l a c r u s h a g a i n s t   the
      f e n c i n g ? - A. No.

0.
     A n a i n d e e d , t h e s e f i r s t t h r e e p h o t o g r a p h s , a l l t a k e n at
     a p c r o k i m a t e l y th e s a m e time, if w e go back to p h o t o g r a p h No.                1
                is     the   y o u n ? man w i t h    the S c o ttish    fla g    w ith   rea lly
     q u i t e a l o t o f s p a c e a l l r o u n d h i m b y g a t e 4 ? - A. T h a t is
     correct.
      T h a t is t h e s i t u a t i o n a t 2 . 4 6 .       W o u l d you go on to the f o u r t h
      Dhotograpn. just 4 minutes later.                            I t is D B 1 7 / 1 4 . A g a i n , y o u
                       U      rc, me that is t a k e n at 15.00.                  In o t h e r w o r t s .
      precisely 3 o'clock.                   It i s r i g h t t o s a y , i s i t n o t . t h a t u e
      there do           s e e the s o l i d density, t he m a s s of people crushea
      together           a t t h e f r o n t , w h i c h is w h a t y o u w e r e d e s c r i b i n g a s
      t h e s o l i d , u n m o v i n g . w i t h n o b o b b i n g h e a d s ? - A. T h a t is
      correct.■
                                                     I A I,
                                                         39


                                                                                     F.J.    ECC LESTO N



         Q. And the situation Ms you first saw it oust have been, although
            from a different ancle, that which is illustrated in this
            photograph which is taken at 3 o ’clock? - A. I imagine so.

         q   . O r w i t h i n a m i n u t e o r s o o f t h a t ? - A. Yes .

         Q.       A n d i t is a l s o f a i r to s a y t h a t by 3 o'clock, w h e t h e r o r n o t
    B            y o u w e r e c o n s c i o u s of t h e p r e c i s e time, at least one f an w a s
                 c l i m b i n g o v e r t h e f r o n t f e n c e .- w e s e e h i m i n t h e p i c t u r e -
                 a n d t h e g a t e is open, a n d I a c c e p t w h o l l y d o c i l e l y and
                 p r o p e r l y f a n s a r e b e i n g a l l o w e d out. and as w e s e e on
                 t h e v i d e o a r e b eing f i l t e r e d a long the front to be taken i n t o
                 t h e p e n s 1 a n d 2 at t h e far end.               But what I wanted your h e i p
                 w i t h . Mr. E c c l e s t o n , is , w e r e y o u c o n s c i o u s o f t h a t s c e n e
                 g o i n g o n a t a b o u t 3 o ' c l o c k ? - A. No, I w o u l d b e c o n c e n t r a t i n g
O                v e r y hard on t he g a m e at that stage.

         0.       You were not aware of it until some moments later? - A.It was
                 moments later, yes. undoubtedly.

         Q.       But it is now clear you never had a sight of pens 3 and 4
                 before they had been hit by the impact of the firstopening                                   of
    D             the gate? - A. I suppose I had not, no, if your.....

         0.       Assume,     please, my timing is right. - A. Yes, I                       will, indeed.

         0.       Thank you.

         G.            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    By the time you got to your seat
                 ygT-0 z'r.s reams out ~ A. No, they wsre not, sir.


o        0. Can you give any idea how soon after you got to your seat they
            came oui? - A. I thougnt I reached my standing position at
            auarter-to-3. Obviously it was a couple of minutes later than
            that.  The Liverpool side must have come at about 7-minutes-
                 zo-3.

         Q. You haa been in position at any rate for a minute or two? - a.
                 Oh. yes.
         0. 3 efore the teams came out? - a. Yes, that is correct, sir.

         0   .        MR. GLA SGOW:  The other matter, Mr. Eccleston, I would
                 like your help on please, is the question of t h e ■presence of
                 stewards.  Did you see the yellow tops you have described down
                 on the pitch perimeter mingled with the Police? - A. I think I
                 saw some. yes.

         G. I simply wanted to know this.       Did you - perfectly fairly -
                 assume because you saw the yellow jackets, that they were
                 stewards? - A. Yes.

       Q. Just to clarify the point, if we look together at any of the
    tj   later pnotograpns, if you like, in the last section, flip
    **   through at your liberty, but PR 1 1 2 / A , PR 21 is perhaps the
          clearest, do you see that situation? - A. Yes.
                                                                       F.J.    ECCLESTON


Those are the sort of men you saw wearing those yellow
jerkins? ~ A. That is right, yes.
Did you or do you now appreciate they are in fact press men? -
A. I do now, yes.
And not stewards? ~ A. That is right.
A n d vou would have fairly got the impression those particular
m e n w e a r i n g yellow j e r k i n s d i d n o t d o a n y t h i n g t o h e l p b e c a u s e
t h e v w e r e t o o b u s y talcing p h o t o g r a p h s of p e o p l e ? - a. Y e s , I
c o u l d easily hav e m i s t a k e n that, yes. but I m u s t a d m i t I was
n o t a w a r e b o t h s e t s w e r e w e a r i n g y e l l o w j e r k i n s , no.

T h e only other matter about the stewards I would like your
helD o n Mr. E c c l e s t o n . i s y o u t o l d u s a b o u t t h e l i n e or
s t e w a r d s a n d P o l i c e w h o m y o u h a d s e e n on. t h e p r e v i o u s y e a r
ac-oss the tunnel entrance.                     I remind you of the way m wnicn
vou wrote your own statement.                       The statement we have been very
h e l p f u l l y g i v e n now. d i d y o u in fac t w rite this for y o u r s e l f ?
A r e t h o s e y o u r o w n w o r d s ? - A. It is.           I w r o t e it on t he
T u e s d a y a f t e r t h e e v e n t a s m u c h t o h e l p m y s e l f as w e l l a s t o
p u t down the facts a n d my observations.
B u t i t is a c t u a l l y y o u r o w n w o r k r a t h e r t h a n s o m e b o d y e l s e ’s ?
- A . ' i t is e n t i r e l y m y o w n w o r k .      My secretary typed it up
the'       s a m e d a y f c r me , i n f a c t .
T f i n a y s a y so. w i t h r e s p e c t , it j u s t s h o w s l a w y e r s o u g h t t o ^
^ e s v e p e o p l e to w r i t e t h e i r o w n s t a t e m e n t s , i t is s o g o o d .    If
w e ” look at v o u r p e r s o n a l o b s e r v a t i o n s , in y o u r o w n w o r d s y o u
nac~said as'your tnird personal observation:
        "When we ca m e t h r o u g h the t u r n s t i l e s for the 1988 g a m e we
        w e r e m e t by a l i n e o f s t e w a r d s a n d P o l i c e O f f i c e r s ” .

v o u w e r e a s k e c by rr,y l e a r n e d f r i e n d , Mr.      Woodward, on m y leit.
w h e t h e r or n o t w n a t y o u m e a n t , t o     say was     you sa w a lineof
s t e w a r d s w ith two or t h r e e P o l i c e m e n ?      Is t h a t - i n f a c t w h a t
y o u m e a n t t o s a y u n e n y o u w r o t e t h e w o r d s , "a l i n e of s t e w a r d s
a n a P o l i c e O f f i c e r s ” ? - A. If y o u w e r e t o p u t m e o n t h e l i n e I
wo u i d say there were m o r e stewards than Police Officers.                               That
i s a s m u c h as I c o u i d h o n e s t l y s a y .
v 0 u h a v e v e r y f a i r l y s a i d y o u h a v e s o m e d i f f i c u l t y in
recollecting p r e c i s e l y w h a t t h e s i t u a t i o n wa s , b u t y o u a r e
c e r t a i n a r e you. t h a t t h e t u n n e l w a s c l o s e d ? - A. A b s o l u t e l y
certain.* b e c a u s e I w o u l d h a v e b e e n d o w n t h a t t u n n e l , b e c a u s e
t h a t is t h e n e a r e s t a p p r o a c h t o g e t t i n g o n t o t h e t e r r a c i n g .
 I s h o u l d m a k e c l e a r . Mr. E c c l e s t o n , I a m a c c e p t i n g t h a t a s
 b e i n g b o t h accurate a n d t r u t h f u l , o f c o u r s e .       The only
 c r i t i c i s m I h a v e , if ’’c r i t i c i s m " i s n o t t o o s t r o n g a w o r a is
 t h a t i n f a c t it w a s s u b s t a n t i a l l y P o l i c e m e n . Almost the
 e n t i r - line was P olicemen.               But with that difference b e t w e e n
 B y friend on »y left and myself, c a n y o u he l p t h e Inquiry as
                            ■—                  ^ n o v m t r a v i n e it is r e a l l y j u s t a
                                             F.J.   ECCLPSTO N



matter of impression? - A* It is a matter of impression,
because perhaps the yellow sticks more in my mind. I could
not really, .hand on heart, say there was more of one group
than the other.

I won't press you in that case.   Thank you for your patience
with me.




                         /LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      I am.
                                                42


                                                                          F. J. E C C L E S T O N

             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   1 dm very grateful to you
       for coming twice, Mr. Eccleston, and not only for your
       evidence but obviously for the enormous help you gave
       that day.
               THE WITNESS:             Thank you.
                               ADAM JAMES PEMBERTON .. called
                                  E x a m i n e d b v M R. G O L D S A C K :

 Q. A r e y o u A d a m J a m e s P e m b e r t o n , a s o l i c i t o r i n S h e f f i e l d ,
    w h o o b t a i n e d t i c k e t s for the m a t c h on 1 5 t h A p r i l ?            A.        Yes,
    I am.

 Q.    And were those t i c k e t s for the N o rt h Stand?                        A.     They      were.

Q.     At w h a t t ime did y o u a r r i v e at the g r o u n d ?                A.      Can I
      j u s t m e n t i o n , w i t h r e f e r e n c e to the s t a t e m e n t , t hat the
      s t a t e m e n t I o r i g i n a l l y m a d e , I m a d e on the day f o l l o w i n g
      the i n c i d e n t on the S u n d a y m o r n i n g at a b o u t 6 o ' c l o c k in
      the m o r n i n g , w h i c h I s ent to the I n q u i r y .              I t h i n k the
      s t a t e m e n t y o u h a v e is a s t a t e m e n t t h a t w a s t a k e n b y P o l i c e
      Officers later.                 I a m q u i t e h a p p y w i t h it b u t t h e r e is
      another statement which I made almost contemporaneously
      w i t h the day.

C.     T h a n k yo u f or p o i n t i n g t h a t o u t .       I c e r t a i n l y h a v e not
      - s e e n --

Q.           LORD J U S T I C E TAYLOR:          W h a t d i d you do w i t h the
      f i rst one?         A.     I sent one c o p y to my M.P., one c o p y
      to t h e I n q u i r y a n d o n e c o p y to t h e C h i e f C o n s t a b l e o f
      the West M i d l a n d s Police.

2   . Yes.       I have seen the one that you sent then but I
      have     net:c o t it i m m e d i a t e l y b e f o r e m e n o w .    It i s w i t h
      s d o u - a thousand    others somewhere.                  A.       I think the
      two are very s i m i l a r .

              LORD JUSTICE          TAYLOR:          I h a v e got t his one,           anyway.

G.             MR. G O L D S A C K :   M r. P e m b e r t o n , at w h a t t i m e d i d y o u
      a r r i v e at t h e g r o u n d ?     A.         Well, we p a r k e d a b o u t 2 m i l e s
      f r o m th e g r o u n d i n W a l k l e y a n d w a l k e d to t h e g r o u n d a n d
      we e n a e d up at t h e P e n i s t o n e R o a d e n d o f t h e g r o u n d w h i c h
      was a mistake.                 I am u n s u r e why t h a t h a p p e n e d .     I think
      it w a s b e c a u s e I h a d n o t s e e n t h e t i c k e t s t h a t w e h a d , t he
      four t i c k e t s , and we w a n d e r e d f r o m W a l k l e y a c r o s s H i l l s b o r o u g h
      P a r k a n d e n d e d up at P e n i s t o n e R o a d a t a b o u t h a l f p a s t t wo,
      a n d w e h a d a r r a n g e d to m e e t a f r i e n d at h a l f p a s t t w o *

0. W h e r e h a d y o u a r r a n g e d to m e e t t h e f r i e n d ?   A.     We had
   a r r a n g e d to m e e t t h e f r i e n d o u t s i d e G a t e A at L e p p i n g s L a n e .
