SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
11 OCTOBER 1991, JOINT SECRETARIAT, BARNSLEY

PRESENT:   Councillor G Gallimore (in the Chair)
           Councillors: D A Axe, C J C Betts, J M Cromar, R Fisher, D W George,
           R W Gillies, R P McCormick, C Swindell, R Whitfield.
           Magistrate Members: Mrs B R Bullivant, Mr K Goodall, Mr J Ludlam,
           Miss J F Staniforth, Mr D E Wilburn.

52    URGENT ITEM
     The Chairman announced that he was adding to the agenda^an item dealing
     with an International Conference in view of the imminence of the event.
53   POLICE AUTHORITY CERTIFICATE OF COMMENDATION
►    The Chairman presented the Police Authority's Certificate of Conmendatlon
      to Mr Anthony Gittens in..recognition of his courageous, determined and
      public spirited action which had ensured that the perpetrator of a crime
      had been brought to justice.
54   MINUTES
     RESOLVED - That the minutes of the meeting of the Authority held on
     30 August 1991 be signed by the Chairman as a correct record, subject to
     the amendment of minute 35 to delete all the words after Sheffield City
     Council and substitute "Community Safety Unit1'.
55   RETIREMENTS
     The Chairman reported that three Officers of the Force, Chief
     Superintendents Tom Broomhead and Terry Wain and Superintendent Roger
     Marshall would shortly be retiring.
     RESOLVED - That on behalf of the Police Authority letters of thanks and
     appreciation be sent to these Officers.
56   DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
     Further to the reference to domestic violence in minute 34 of.the meeting
     of the Authority on 30 August 1991 members considered the different
     interpretation which appeared to have been applied to provocation in two
     cases of domestic violence which had come before the Courts.
     RESOLVED « That the Home Office be approached and asked to advise the
     Authority on the interpretation of provocation which is applied by the
     Courts in cases of domestic violence.
57   ANNUAL INSPECTION
     Further" to minute 39 of the meeting of the Authority on 30 August 1991 the
     Clerk and Financial Officer reported that the Annual Inspection of the
     Force would now take place from 19 to 22 November inclusive and on 27 and '
     28 November 1991.
CHARGES FOR POLICING QF FQQT8ALL M A T C H E S
Further to minute 50 of the meeting of the Authority on 30 August 1991
when it had been reaffirmed that-the Authority's intention had certainly
been that the formula for payments from Football Clubs in 1990/91 applied
to Cup games, and that if payment was not forthcoming legal action would
be taken.
RESOLVED - That the Clerk and Financial Officer write to all members of
the Authority advising them of tire present position and in addition a
report be made to the next meeting of the Finance.and General Purposes
Committee.
MINUTES OF COMMITTEES
(a) Accountability, Complaints and Discipline
       RESOLVED - That the minutes of the meeting of the Accountability,
       Complaints and Discipline Committee held on 13 September 1991, as set
       out in Appendix 1, be received.
(b) Force Establishment
        Further to the second paragraph of minute 4 of the meeting of the
        Accountability, Complaints and Discipline Committee on 13 September
        1991, the Clerk and Financial Officer reported that the Association
        of Metropolitan Authorities had met the Home Office on the question
        of police establishments. The Home Secretary had been sympathetic to
      . the problem facing police forces but no concrete result had been
        apparent.
(c) Finance and General Purposes
       RESOLVED - That the minutes of the meeting of the Finance and General
       Purposes Committee held on 27 September 1991, as set out in Appendix
       2, be received,, subject to item 12 - Sale of Police Houses - being
       submitted again to the Committee for further consideration.
(d)    Poll Tax/Community Charae/Business Rate - Arrest Warrants
        Further to minute 10 of the meeting of the Finance and General
        Purposes Committee on 27 September 1991, the Authority noted that the
        four District Council Leaders had met the Chief Constable prior to
      - the meeting of the Authority.
       The issue was whether the service of Poll Tax Warrants should be the
       responsibility of the Police, the District Councils, or the
       Magistrates Courts, The District Council Leaders and the Chief
       Constable had all agreed on a common approach to the Home Office and
       the Department of the Environment although the District Council
       Leaders had some continuing concerns about existing unserved
       warrants. They would be concerned about any civilians, whoever the
       employer, serving Poll Tax Warrants in the present climate.
       The Chief Constable confirmed his agreement to the common approach
       referred to by the District Council Leaders. He would certainly
       accept that there was a role for the police in cases where there was
       a threat of violence. He would be writing to the four District
       Council Leaders to make his position clear on the issue.
