                ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                                       951

    Case No.       Licence Type                    Decision

    96/95          Hackney Carriage and            (a) No action be taken to suspend or revoke the Private
                   Private Hire D river’s          Hire Vehicle Licence and (b) refuse the Hackney
                   L icence and Private            Carriage and Private Hire D river’s L icence and the
                   Hire Vehicle Licence            applicant be informed that (i) this Sub-C om m ittee takes
                                                   a serious view of unlawful plying for hire, (ii) in the light
                                                   o f the representations now m ade and in view o f his
                                                   previous conduct, the Sub-Com m ittee will be prepared to
                                                   reconsider the position if an application is m ade
                                                   following a period o f three months and (iii) in the view
                                                   o f the Sub-Committee the applicant does not have a valid
                                                   Hackney Carriage and Private Hire D river’s L icence at
                                                   the present time.

    3/96           Hackney Carriage and            Grant for full term but a w arning be given to the
                   Private H ire D riv er’s        applicant as regards his future conduct.
                   Licence

    1/96           Hackney Carriage and             Defer consideration to a future m eeting to enab le the
                   Private H ire D riv er’s         applicant to attend before the Sub-Com m ittee.
                   Licence

    4/96            Private Hire Vehicle Licence    Defer consideration to a future m eeting to enable the
                                                    applicant to attend before the Sub-Com m ittee.

    5/96            Hackney Carriage and           Grant for full term but a w arning be given to the
                    Private Hire D river’s Licence applicant as regards his future conduct.

    ( n o t e : (a) C o uncillors A yris, H inm an, Price and M s. W right entered the m eeting follo w ing
    c onsideration o f C ase No.2/96 and (b) Councillors Hesketh and Mrs. M idgley left the m eeting
    follow ing consideration o f Case No.96/95).



       M eetin g of the L icensing Sub-Com m ittee held 25th January, 1996. Present— C ouncillors M. C.
    B relsford, M rs. C hadw ick, M acfarlane, Mrs. N ew ton, Mrs. E. Smith. Mrs. W hite and M s. W right.

    ( 1 ) A PPO IN TM EN T O F CHAIR
       In the absence o f the C hair and D eputy C hair (Councillors D. Jo nes and M rs. M idgley,
    respectively), C ouncillor Mrs. W hite be appointed Chair of the meeting.

    (2)    A PO LO G IE S FO R ABSENCE
       A pologies for absence were received from Councillors A yris, H esketh, D. Jones, Law ton an d Mrs.
    M idgley.

★   (3) SA FETY OF SPORTS G R OUNDS—SH EFFIELD W EDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB— 3RD FLO OR. SOUTH STAND
       T he City Solicitor and Head o f Administration subm itted a report on action he had taken, in
    consultation with the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory G roup, in granting perm ission under the
    provisions o f paragraph 22.1 of Schedule 2 to the General Safety C ertificate in force in respect of
    the H illsborough Stadium , for Sheffield W ednesday Football Club to open the third floor o f the new
    South Stand Developm ent.

       R esolved: That confirm ation be given to the action o f the City S o licito ran d Head o f Administration
    in app rov ing the opening o f the third floor o f the South Stand at the Hillsborough Stadium , subject
    to the agreem ents now reported with the Club on the operation of the electro-m agnetic security
    system and the fire alarm system serving the third floor.

★   (4) PU B LIC ENTERTAINM ENTS LICENSING
    S h e ffie ld A rena, Broughton Lane
        Pursuant to the decision o f this Sub-C om m ittee o f 4th January, 1996, the City Solicitor and Head
    o f A dm inistration subm itted a report on the discussions that had been held betw een representatives
    o f the Sheffield A rena, the event prom oters (D A C M usic), the South Y orkshire Police and officers
    from the D irectorate of Environm ental Services and Standards and the Licensing Section regarding
    the event which was to take place at the A rena on either the 22nd or 29th M arch, 1996. T h e report
    952            ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND STANDARDS PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

        stated that (a) in addition to the normal stewarding, the prom oters had agreed to provide stewards
        w ho had m ore experience o f all night dance events, (b) the promoters had agreed to pay for special
        p olice services which would include 10 constables and two sergeants, (c) the police, in addition,
        w ould ensure that a police inspector and drugs officers were at the premises for the duration o f the
        event, (d) arrangem ents w ould be m ade to check the premises and custom ers for drugs and a team
        o f drug counsellors would be present at the event, (e) in addition to the first aid facilities at the
        A rena, there w ould be one doctor, tw o paramedics, two medical technicians and am bulance service
        facilities on site and (f) a start time o f 8.00 p.m. w ould ensure smooth entry to the prem ises and
        that the event should finish at 6.00 a.m. the following morning, with the prem ises rem aining open
        until 7.00 a.m. to serve breakfast.

           R esolved: T hat the contents of the report now submitted be noted.

    ★   (5) H ACKNEY CARRIAGE A N D PRIVATE H IR E LICENSING—UNLAW FUL PLYING FOR HIRE
           The S ub-C om m ittee received and noted a report submitted by the City Solicitor and Head of
        A dm inistration which stated that following the decision of this Sub-C om m ittee o f 10th N ovem ber,
        1995 to introduce proposals to com bat unlawful plying for hire, a letter had b een circulated to all
        hackney carriage and private hire licensees explaining that plying for hire w as an offence and this
        had been follow ed by an enforcem ent exercise which could result in eight persons being prosecuted.
    ★   ( 6 ) H A CK N EY CARRIAGE FARES

            T he C ity Solicitor and Head o f Administration submitted a report stating that although it was
        illegal for taxi drivers to dem and or take m ore than the rate o f fare allow ed by the C ouncil for
        passenger jo urneys, customers regularly com plained to the Council, as the licensing auth ority, that
        they had been overcharged. The report cited instances w here an additional charge, in excess of that
        shown on the taximeter, was charged for journeys ending outside the City boundary and the problem
        w as com pou nded by drivers displaying misleading signs in vehicles which gave an inaccurate view
        o f the law and im plied that an extra charge could be made, w hether the custom er agreed it or not.

           The Secretary o f the Taxi Trade Association addressed the Sub-C om m ittee and explained that
        the practice o f a '‘fare and a h a l f ' had been used for m any years and was intended to apply to jo urneys
        w ell outside the City boundary and in any event, was subject to an agreem ent being m ade by the
        p assenger and driver before the hiring commenced.

            R esolved: T hat, in the circum stances now reported (a) authority be given for the City Solicitor
        and Head o f A dm inistration to prepare and distribute a circular letter to taxi owners rem inding them
        o f the law on fares where it is illegal for journeys ending outside the City boundary to be charged
        at a higher rate than that allowed by the table o f fares, unless the passenger and driver have agreed
        a fare or rate o f fare before the hiring commences; and

           (b) this Sub-C om m ittee considers that any vehicle w hich displays a sign w hich does not clearly
        and accurately state the law on fares to be unfit for use under Section 68 o f the L ocal G overnm ent
        (M iscellaneous Provisions) Act 1976 and this will mean that the vehicle licences can be suspended
        by authorised officers if inappropriate notices are displayed and not rem oved on request.

★       (7) PR IV A TE H IR E VEHICLE LICENSING— ADVERTISING ON REAR OF VEHICLES
           The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on a proposal received from
        the S heffield C onfederation o f Private Hire Companies for permission for Private Hire V ehicles to
        display advertisem ents on the back o f the vehicle and mounted adjacent to the num ber plate.
        A ppended to the report was a letter from the Secretary, o f the Sheffield C onfederation o f Private
        Hire C om panies w hich gave details o f the display unit which was proposed and stating that similar
        conditions to those which were recently approved by the Sub-Com m ittee for advertising on hackney
        carriages could be applied to the Private Hire trade.

           R esolved: T hat approval be given (a) under Private Hire Vehicle L icence C ondition 4, for the
        display of advertisem ents on the back o f private hire vehicles, subject to the conditions outlined
        in the report now submitted; and

          (b)    for Mr. Frayne, Secretary o f the Sheffield Confederation o f Private H ire C om panies to be
        appointed as an “authorised supplier” o f the advertising inserts and display units.

★       ( 8 ) PRIV A TE H IR E LICENSING—LICENCE CONDITIONS—DRIVER DETAILS
           T h e City Solicitor and Head o f Administration subm itted a report stating that under the licensing
        legislation, it was generally illegal for private hire vehicle licensees and private hire operators to
