            HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                                        765

      (b) the standard periods of the licences will apply where
         (i) the premises concerned are considered to have been maintained to a satisfactory
         standard; and
         (ii) the applicant undertakes in writing to maintain the premises to a reasonably safe
         standard for the period of the licence.
    Applications for Consideration
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report summarising current
    applications for the grant or renewal of public entertainment licences.
      Resolved: That (a) the applications now submitted in respect of the following premises be
    granted for a period of 12 months—
      Granada Hotel, 340 Prince of Wales Road, Sheffield
      Yorkshire Electricity, Parkway Avenue, Sheffield
      The Crofts, Quarry Hill, Mosborough
      Ice Arena, Queens Road, Sheffield
      Sinatras, Carver Street, Sheffield
      (b) the application now submitted for a public entertainment licence in respect of Sheffield
    United Executive Suite and Lane Social Club, Cherry Street, Sheffield, be granted for a period of
    three months from the date of expiry of the existing licence;
      (c) on the application now submitted in respect of Kikis Nightclub, Charter Row, Sheffield, the
    Head of Administration and Legal Department be authorised, on the completion of outstanding
    works to the satisfaction of the Director of Health and Consumer Services, to issue a public
    entertainment licence for a period of six months from the date of expiry of the existing licence;
      (d) on the application now submitted in respect of The Limit Club, West Street, Sheffield, The
    City Solicitor and Head of Administration be authorised, on the completion of outstanding works
    to the satisfaction of the Director of Health and Consumer Services, to issue a public
    entertainment licence to expire on 31st December, 1990; and
      (e) consideration of applications in respect of Assisi Hall, Sandygate Road, Sheffield,
    Woodthorpe Tenants’ and Residents’ Association Meeting Room, Ulley Road, Sheffield,
    Sheffield Polytechnic (various sites) and The Mappin Art Gallery, Weston Park, Sheffield, be
    deferred to the next meeting of this Panel.
    City Hall
      Pursuant to the request made by the Panel at its meeting held on 3rd August, 1990 (page 483 of
    the printed minutes), the Director of Arts submitted a report on action taken to improve the
    condition of the roof, the seating and the electrical wiring in the City Hall.
      The Panel noted the contents of the report now submitted and that a further full report would
    be submitted to the Panel at its meeting in February, 1991, together with a request for the
    renewal of the Public Entertainment Licence issued in respect of the building.
    (2) LIM ITATION OF HACKNEY CARRIAGES
      Pursuant to the request made by the Panel at its meeting held on 7th September, 1990, the City
    Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report reviewing the Council’s practice of
    limiting the number of hackney carriages licensed in the City.
    reso lv ed   :   That (a) the contents of the report now submitted be noted; and
      (b)    the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be authorised to institute a consultation
    process between the Council's officers and representatives of the Sheffield Taxi Trade
    Association on the Council’s policy of limiting the number of hackney carriages in the City and to
    report back to this Panel on the outcome of such consultation.
★    ( 3 ) MEADOW HALL SHOPPING CENTRE
      Resolved: That confirmation be given to the action taken by the City Solicitor and Head of
    Administration, in consultation with the Chair of this Panel, to issue in respect of premises at the
    Meadowhall Shopping Centre (a) a cinema licence and (b) a public entertainment licence with
    non-standard conditions.
766        HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

★ (4) AM USEMENT ARCADES
     Resolved: That (a) the application now submitted for the renewal of an amusement arcade
  licence in respect of premises at 5 Fitzalan Square be granted for a period of 3 years; and
     (b) consideration of the application now submitted for the issue of an amusement arcade
  licence in respect of premises at 13/15 Castle Street be deferred.
★ (5) SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
  Annual Inspections
    The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action taken in
  consultation with the Chair of the Panel to serve notice on the proprietors of the three designated
  sports stadia in the City to undertake works identified during the annual inspection of the stadia
  by members of the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group.
    Resolved: That (a) confirmation be given to the action taken by the City Solicitor and Head of
  Administration, in consultation with the Chair of this Panel, in serving notice on the proprietors
  of the three designated sports grounds in the City to undertake the works detailed in the
  schedules attached to the report now submitted;
   (b) annual inspections of designated stadia for the year 1992 be undertaken by the Advisory
  Group as detailed in Section 4.3 of the report now submitted; and
     (c) the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested to report back to this Panel as
  soon as possible after the expiry of the time limits imposed on the clubs to undertake works
  arising from follow-up inspections by members of the Advisory Group.
  Bramall Lane Sports Ground—Turnstiles
    The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action taken, in
  consultation with the Chair of the Panel, in approving a proposal submitted by Consultants on
  behalf of Sheffield United Football Club for the repair of turnstiles serving the Bramall Lane
  Terrace at the Bramall Lane Sports Ground.
    Resolved: That confirmation be given to the action taken by the City Solicitor and Head of
  Administration, in consultation with the Chair of this Panel, in approving the proposals
  submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners, Consulting Engineers and detailed in their letter of
  30th July, 1990 and Plans Nos. 12268/17A, 18A and 7276/1.
  Closed Circuit Television
    The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on (a) action taken, in
  consultation with the Chair of the Panel, in approving a proposal submitted on behalf of Sheffield
  United Football Club to improve the closed circuit television system in operation at the Bramall
  Lane Sports Ground in line with a recent report of the Association of Chief Police Officers and
  (b) the action taken by Sheffield Wednesday Football Club in response to such recent report.
     Resolved: That (i) confirmation be given to the action taken by the City Solicitor and Head of
  Administration, in consultation with the Chair of this Panel, in approving the proposal submitted
  by D. P. Limited on behalf of Sheffield United Football Club to improve the closed circuit
  television system in operation at the Bramall Lane Sports Ground; and
    (ii) the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club be requested to submit details of any progress made
  by them to comply with the report of the Association of Chief Police Officers.
  Hillsborough Sports Ground—Emergency Lighting
    The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on a proposal submitted by
  Consulting Engineers on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club for the alteration of the
  emergency lighting system at the Hillsborough Sports Ground. The report indicated that the
  proposal involved the replacement of a battery system by a system powered by a diesel-engined
  generator.
    Resolved: That (a) approval be given to the proposal detailed by Messrs. Eastwood and
  Partners, Consulting Engineers, in their letter of 23rd July, 1990, for the installation of an
  emergency lighting diesel-engined generator at the Hillsborough Sports Ground subject to
  compliance with the comments of the Director of Health and Consumer Services in his
  memorandum of 26th July, 1990 and of the Building Surveyor in his memorandum of 14th
  August, 1990, enclosed with the report now submitted;
        HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                                       767

   (b) work on the emergency lighting installation at the Hillsborough Sports Ground be required
to be completed by 31st October, 1990.
Sheffield Sports Stadium (Owlerton)
  The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action taken in
consultation with the Chair of the Panel to issue a new General Safety Certificate and an
amended Prohibition Notice in respect of the Sheffield Sports Stadium (Owlerton). Copies of the
new Certificate and Notice were attached to the report.
  Resolved: That confirmation be given to the action taken by the City Solicitor and Head of
Administration, in consultation with the Chair of this Panel, in issuing a new General Safety
Certificate and an amended Prohibition Notice in respect of the Sheffield Sports Stadium
(Owlerton).
Final Taylor Report Recommendations—Action Taken
   The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report detailing the action
undertaken so far by the appropriate bodies to satisfy the 76 final recommendations of Lord
Justice Taylor so far as the Hillsborough (Sheffield Wednesday) and Bramall Lane (Sheffield
United) sports grounds were concerned. The report enclosed a copy of the final recommend­
ations of Lord Justice Taylor and copies of letters to the two football clubs concerned, dated 29th
August, 1990.

  Resolved: That (a) the contents of the report now submitted be noted; and

  (b) this Panel expresses its appreciation of the efforts of members of the Panel and Officers of
the Council and all interested outside organisations in dealing with matters relating to the safety
of sports grounds.

Pitch Perimeter Fences at Certified Football Grounds
  The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action taken, in
consultation with the Chair of this Panel, in approving proposals submitted by Consultants on
behalf of the Sheffield Wednesday and Sheffield United Football Clubs to remove the pitch
perimeter fences at Hillsborough and Bramall Lane Sports Grounds, respectively. The report
enclosed copies of letters from Messrs. Eastwood and Partners, Consulting Engineers, dated 12th
and 31st July, 1990, letters to the Sheffield United Football Club dated 17th August, 1990 and to
the South Yorkshire Police dated 10th September, 1990 and a memorandum from the Building
Surveyor dated 14th August, 1990.

  Resolved: That confirmation be given to the action taken by the City Solicitor and Head of
Administration, in consultation with the Chair of this Panel, in approving proposals submitted by
the Consulting Engineers on behalf of the Sheffield Wednesday and Sheffield United Football
Clubs for the removal of the pitch perimeter fences at their respective Sports Grounds, subject to
compliance with the comments of the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group in connection
therewith.

Designated Sports Grounds—Plans
  The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on a request submitted by
Consulting Engineers on behalf of the proprietors of the three designated sports grounds in the
City for an extension of the time limit imposed on the Clubs concerned by the City Council to
submit, by 30th September, 1990, a full set of plans of their respective Sports Grounds, drawn in
accordance with the regulations of the Council relating to such sports grounds. The report
enclosed copies of two letters dated 28th September, 1990, from Messrs. Eastwood and Partners,
Consulting Engineers.

  Resolved: That the time limit imposed by the City Council for the production of plans in
respect of Hillsborough (Sheffield Wednesday) and Bramall Lane (Sheffield United) Sports
Grounds and Sheffield Sports Stadium (Owlerton) be extended from 30th September, 1990 to
31st December, 1990.

( n o t e : An item on the agenda for a further report of the City Solicitor and Head of
Administration on hackney carriage fares was withdrawn from consideration.)
768         HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

3 Consumer and Regulatory Services Sub-Committee
r e s o l v e d : That, except so far as they relate to matters delegated to the Consumer and Regulatory
Services Sub-Committee, the following minutes be approved—
    Meeting of the Consumer and Regulatory Services Sub-Committee held 24th October, 1990.
  Present— Councillors Butler (Deputy Chair), Damms, Hartley, Lawson, Mrs. Midgley, Webster
  and Ms. Whitty.
  ( 1 ) SALE OF HARM FUL SUBSTANCES
     The Director of Health and Consumer Services reported orally on the sale by two retail outlets
  in the City of “Liquid Gold” , a noxious substance whose use could prove to be fatal.
    Resolved: That support be given for action to be taken under the provisions of Section 10 of
  the Consumer Protection Act, 1987 to investigate sales within the City of the substance “Liquid
  Gold” now reported.
  (2) RESULTS O F LEG AL PROCEEDINGS
    The Sub-Committee received a report of the Director of Health and Consumer Services
  detailing the following results of legal proceedings instituted in relation to offences under the
  statutes indicated—
  Statute                                            Result of Proceedings
  Trade Descriptions Act, 1968                       Defendant fined £250.
  Food Act, 1984                                     Defendant fined £800 and ordered to pay
                                                     £231.70 costs.
  Health and Safety at Work etc. Act, 1974           Defendant fined £250 and ordered to pay £50
                                                     costs.
  Health and Safety at Work etc. Act, 1974           Defendant fined £250 and ordered to pay £50
                                                     costs.
  (3) SUPERM ARKET PRICE CHECK SURVEY
     The Director of Health and Consumer Services submitted a report on a survey which had been
  conducted by Officers of his Department into the accuracy of the various methods of price
  marking commodities retailed at supermarkets throughout the City and he stated that a total
  number of 13 supermarkets were monitored, which included stores operating individual price
  marking charge systems as well as those utilising bar coding linked to electronic transfer points.
  The survey had revealed two incidents of incorrect billing and in both casesthe less sophisticated
  billing processes were employed, which seemed to indicatethat despite a perceived lack of
  customer confidence, bar coding of products was a more satisfactory system than individual
  pricing.
      Resolved: That (a) the contents of the report now submitted be noted; and
    (b) the Director of Health and Consumer Services be requested to (i) undertake a similar
  survey amongst City based Do-It-Yourself Centres to determine the validity of product pricing of
  consumer goods and (ii) convey the appreciation of this Sub-Committee to those Officers of his
  Department who had participated in the supermarket survey now reported.
  (4) TRADIN G M ALPRACTICES
     The Director of Health and Consumer Services submitted a paper summarising a report of the
  Director General of Fair Trading into trading malpractices and he explained that (a) the purpose
  of the report was to review the provisions of Part III of the Fair Trading Act, 1973 in order to
  empower enforcement authorities to take swift and effective action to prevent objectionable
  trading malpractices and (b) the report did not address problems experienced over the
  safeguarding of deposit payments in the event of companies becoming insolvent.
   Resolved: That (i) the proposals outlined in the report now submitted to target harmful,
 defective or objectionable trading practices which may not be controlled by existing legislation be
 welcomed; and
   (ii)   the Director General of Fair Trading be requested to investigate measures to safeguard, on
 behalf of the consumer, advance deposit payments made on the lines now indicated.
