        ENVIRONMENTAL. HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                             151

the Sheffield and District Post and Telecommunications Advisory Committees and (ii) the
substitution of the name of Councillor Mrs. Askham for that of Councillor Webster on the
Yorkshire and Humberside Home Safety Council.

2 Licensing Sub-Committee
r e s o l v e d : That, except so far as they relate to matters delegated to the Licensing Sub-Committee
the following minutes be approved—

      Meeting of the Licensing Panel held 8th May, 1992. Present— Councillors Butler (Chair),
    Chaplin, Mrs. Midgley, Mrs. Shepherd, Mrs. E. Smith, Mrs. P. M. Smith and Webster.

★   ( 1 ) SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB
    Temporary Offices
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action he had taken,
    following informal discussions with the members of the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory
    Group, in approving a proposal submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on behalf of
    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to site temporary offices to the rear of the gymnasium at the
    Hillsborough Sports Ground in accordance with the correspondence appended to the report.

      Resolved: That confirmation be given to the action taken by the City Solicitor and Head of
    Administration in approving the siting of the temporary offices now reported at the Hillsborough
    Sports Ground.

    Reseating—South Stand
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action he had taken,
    following consultation with the Safety of Sports Ground Advisory Group, in approving in
    principle a proposal submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners Limited on behalf of Sheffield
    Wednesday Football Club to reseat the South Stand during the 1992 close Football Season. He
    stated that since preparation of the report, a further set of revised plans had been received from
    Messrs. Eastwood and Partners because it was intended to site cameras at the rear of the South
    Stand, which would involve further modifications to the seating arrangements.

      Resolved: That (a) confirmation be given to the action taken by the City Solicitor and Head of
    Administration in authorising work to commence to reseat the South Stand at the Hillsborough
    Sports Stadium, subject to the work being completed to the satisfaction of the Council’s Safety of
    Sports Grounds Advisory Group prior to the start of the new 1992/93 Football Season and (b) the
    City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested to submit a further report to this Panel
    on the revised modifications now discussed.

★ (2) REVIEW OF LICENCE FEES-ANIM AL HEALTH LICENSING
     Pursuant to the decision of this Panel of 7th February, 1992 to defer consideration of the
  licence fees relating to pet shops, riding establishments, dog breeders, animal boarding
  establishments and dangerous wild animals pending a further report on the Council’s costs in
  relation to the operation of those particular licensing functions (page 1237 of the printed
  minutes), the City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report giving a breakdown
  of the costs incurred by the relevant Departments, namely Administration and Legal and Health
  and Consumer Services, in administering the procedures relating to animal health licences.

      Resolved: That approval be given for the fees in respect of animal health licensing to be
    revised, with immediate effect, in accordance with the details contained in the report and
    appendices now submitted.

    (3) RESULT OF LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on the outcome of an appeal
    made by Sheffield City Council to the Crown Court against the decision of the Rotherham
    Magistrates Court to grant a private hire and hackney carriage driver’s licence to the applicant in
    respect of Case No.19/91 in which the Panel had originally refused to grant a licence at the
    meeting held on 27th June, 1991. He stated that despite the City Council’s concerns about the
    protection of the public, given the nature of the convictions against the applicant and the position
    of trust in which drivers of private hire vehicles were placed, the Judge had upheld the decision of
    the Rotherham Magistrates Court and granted the applicant a licence.
152    ENVIRONMENTAL. HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

     Mr. Frayne, Secretary of the Sheffield Confederation of Private Hire Companies, addressed
   the Panel and expressed the grave concern of his members at the decision to grant the applicant a
   private hire licence and his comments were endorsed by Mr. Harrison, Secretary of the Sheffield
   Taxi Trade Association.
     Resolved: That the contents of the report now submitted and the comments now made by the
   Secretaries of the Confederation of Private Hire Companies and the Sheffield Taxi Trade
   Association be noted with grave concern.


    Meeting of the Licensing Sub-Committee held 28th May, 1992. Present— Councillors Mrs.
   Midgley (Chair), Dunworth, Pratt, Ms. Robinson, Mrs. E. Smith and Webster.
   ( 1 ) EXCLUSION OF THE PUBLIC AND THE PRESS
     Resolved: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before discussion takes
   place on the following item of business relating to hackney carriage and private hire licensing on
   the grounds that, in view of the nature of the business to be transacted, if the public and press
   were present, there would be a disclosure to them of exempt information as described in
   paragraphs 7 and 12 of Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act 1972, as amended by the
   Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985 relating to the financial or business affairs
   of other persons and legal matters and advice, respectively.
★ (2) HACKNEY CARRIAGE AND PRIVATE HIRE LICENSING
    The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted details in respect of 11 cases relating
  to hackney carriage and private hire licensing. Eight applicants attended the meeting to address
  the Sub-Committee and the applicant in Case No. 24/92 was accompanied by his Solicitor.
      Resolved: That (a) the applications now submitted be determined as follows—
   Case No. Licence Type                                   Decision
   14/92     Private Hire and Hackney Carriage             Grant for 9 months by reason of
              Driver’s Licence                             previous conviction.
   26/92     Private Hire and Hackney Carriage             Refuse on the grounds that the applicant
              Driver’s Licence                             is not a fit and proper person by reason
                                                            of his previous convictions
   27/92     Private Hire and Hackney Carriage             Grant for 9 months by reason of
              Driver’s Licence                             previous conviction.
   28/92     Private Hire and Hackney Carriage             Grant for 6 months and issue a warning.
              Driver’s Licence
  29/92      Private Hire and Hackney Carriage             Grant for 6 months and issue a warning.
              Driver’s Licence
    (b) the applications for Hackney Carriage Vehicle Licences in Case Nos. 23/92, 25/92, 30/92
  and 31/92 be deferred to a future meeting of this Sub-Committee in order that the recently
  completed Hackney Carriage Vehicle demand survey may be considered by this Sub-Committee,
  before a decision is made on the above cases;
    (c) in respect of Case No. 24/92, the licensee be issued with a warning as to his future conduct;
  and
    (d) this Sub-Committee notes that the licensee in Case No. 41/92 has surrendered his Private
  Hire and Hackney Carriage Driver’s Licence to the City Solicitor and Head of Administration.
  ( n o t e : (i) Councillor Webster left the meeting for a short while during consideration of Case No.
  27/92 and did not speak or vote thereon and Councillor Pratt left the meeting after consideration
  of Case No. 28/92; and (ii) at this point in the proceedings the meeting was re-opened to the
  public and press.)
★ (3 ) PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT LICENSING
     Resolved: That consideration of the application now submitted in respect of Millionaires,
  Carver Street be deferred to a future meeting of this Sub-Committee to enable the applicant to
  attend before the Sub-Committee.
