       ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                              863

   the applicant’s Solicitor, an objector and an officer from the Health and Consumer Services
   Department addressed the Panel and (b) were addressed by a Solicitor representing the applicant
   for a licence in respect of the Mad Greek, 117 Fitzwilliam Street, and by an officer from the
   Health and Consumer Services Department.
     Resolved: That the applications now submitted for the grant or renewal of public
   entertainment licences be determined as follows—
   Premises                                        Decision
   The Travellers, The Common, Ecclesfield         Grant for a period of 12 months and the Director
                                                   of Health and Consumer Services be requested
                                                   to monitor the conditions of the licence
   The Mad Greek, 117 Fitzwilliam Street           Grant for a period of 12 months
   Rebels, Dixon Lane                              Grant for a period of 12 months
   Kiki’s, Charter Row                             Grant for a period of six months
   Sinatra’s, Carver Street                        Grant for a period of six months
   The Roxy, Arundel Gate                          Grant for a period of six months
   ( n o t e : ( i) Councillor Mrs. Midgley did not participate in the decision relating to a licence in
   respect of the Mad Greek, (ii) Councillors Chaplin and Mrs. Leach left the meeting following
   consideration of the application for a licence for The Travellers and (iii) the applicants, objectors
   and officers of the City Council involved in the applications for licences in respect of The
   Travellers and the Mad Greek were excluded from the meeting while the Panel was making a
   decision thereon.)
★ (4) DON VALLEY-PLAYING OF ASSOCIATION FOOTBALL
     Further to the decision of this Panel of 27th June, 1991, (page 310 of the printed minutes) to
  issue a General Safety Certificate to Sheffield For Health Limited in respect of certain activities at
  Don Valley Stadium, the City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action
  he had taken following a request he had received for the Safety Certificate to be amended to
  enable Amateur Association Football to be played at the Stadium at matches involving the
  Sheffield Football Club.
     Resolved: That (a) the contents of the report now submitted be noted;
    (b) confirmation be given to the action of the City Solicitor and Head of Administration in
  approving the request now reported to amend the General Safety Certificate issued to Sheffield
  For Health Limited on 9th July, 1991, in accordance with Section 4 of the report now submitted;
  and
    (c) the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested to confirm to the owners of Don
  Valley Stadium that this amendment to the General Safety Certificate will be formerly
  incorporated into the Certificate at the next Annual Review.
★ (5) DON VALLEY/THE SHEFFIELD SPORTS STADIUM—DESIGNATION
    The Panel received a report submitted by the City Solicitor and Head of Administration stating
  that the Home Office was giving consideration to (a) the possibility of the Don Valley Stadium
  being fully designated under the provisions of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 and (b) the
  possible de-designation of the Sheffield Sports Stadium and arising therefrom it was—
     Resolved: That (i) the contents of the report now submitted be noted; and
   (ii) the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested to submit a report to a future
  meeting of this Panel clarifying the position relating to Designation Orders.
  ( 6 ) FOOTBALL (OFFENCES) ACT 1991
    The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report summarising the main
  provisions of the recently implemented Football (Offences) Act 1991 and outlining the action
  which the Council was required to take as a consequence of the legislation.
864      ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

      Resolved: That the contents of the report and the Football (Offences) Act 1991 now
    submitted, be noted.
★ (7) SHEFFIELD SPORTS STADIUM—ALTERATIONS AND REFURBISHMENT TO PANORAMA ROOM
    The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action he had taken, in
  consultation with the Council’s Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group, in approving a
  proposal by the Sheffield Sports Stadium Limited to alter and refurbish the Panorama Room of
  the Panorama Stand at the Sheffield Sports Stadium (Owlerton).
     Resolved: That (a) confirmation be given to the action taken by the City Solicitor and Head of
    Administration in approving the proposals now reported to alter and refurbish the Panorama
    Room at the Sheffield Sports Stadium;
      (b) the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested to obtain from the owners,
    confirmation of the exact date when works were commenced; and
      (c) authority be given for the City Solicitor and Head of Administration to amend the General
    Safety Certificate issued in respect of the Sheffield Sports Stadium, if required, on or close to the
    completion of the works to the Panorama (First Floor) Room.
    ( n o t e : At this point in the proceedings Councillor Chaplin returned to the meeting and
    Councillor Whitfield joined the meeting.)
★   ( 8 ) SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY-NEW TICKET OFFICE (SOUTH STAND)
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action he had taken,
    following consultation with the Council’s Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group, in
    approving a proposal submitted by Wortley Construction Limited on behalf of Sheffield
    Wednesday Football Club to alter an existing TV/Security Room at the Football Ground into an
    additional ticket office.
      Resolved: That confirmation be given to the action of the City Solicitor and Head of
    Administration in approving the proposals now reported and submitted on behalf of Sheffield
    Wednesday Football Club to alter an existing room situated next to the Players Entrance at the
    ground and fronting onto the South Stand external concourse into an additional ticket office.
★ (9) FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY-INITIAL CONTACT
    The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report stating that informal
  contacts had been made between the Inspector of the Football Licensing Authority and the Chief
  Licensing Officer, Sports Grounds and that the Chief Licensing Officer had visited Sheffield
  United and Sheffield Wednesday Football Clubs with the Inspector to familiarise him with the
  developments which had taken place at the Stadia over the past two seasons.
      Resolved: That (a) the contents of the report now submitted be noted; and
       (b) the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested to regularly update this Panel
    on the contact between the Council as Certification Authority under the provisions of the Safety
    of Sports Grounds Act 1975 and the Football Licensing Authority.
★ (10)   SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY AND SHEFFIELD UNITED FOOTBALL C L U B S-N EW GENERAL SAFETY
    CERTIFICATES
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action he had taken, in
    consultation with the Council’s Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group, in approving the issue
    of revised and amended General Safety Certificates to both Sheffield Wednesday and Sheffield
    United Football Clubs on the 16th and 20th August, 1991, respectively. He stated that the revised
    Certificates had been amended to take account of the substantial improvement works undertaken
    by both Football Clubs at their respective grounds and also various other changes made during
    the year June, 1990, to Ju n e,1991.
      Resolved: That confirmation be given to the action taken by the City Solicitor and Head of
    Administration, in consultation with the Council's Safety of Sports Ground Advisory Group, in
    amending and reviewing the General Safety Certificates for Sheffield United and Sheffield
    Wednesday Football Clubs, respectively, prior to the commencement of the 1991/92 Football
    Season.
          ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                              865

     (1 1 ) VISITS TO SPORTS GROUNDS
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration reported orally that it had been proposed that
    members of this Panel and those members representing the Police and Community Safety Panel
    for matters relating to Safety of Sports Grounds should visit Sheffield Wednesday and Sheffield
    United Football Clubs and also other designated grounds in the City.
      Resolved: That the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested to prepare for
    submission to a future meeting of this Panel, a proposed timetable for members to visit, on a rota
    basis, designated sports stadia in the City.
    (n o t e :   Councillor Whitfield left the meeting during the consideration of the above item).
★    (12) NURSES AGENCY LICENSING
      Resolved: That in the circumstances now reported, authority be given for the minutes of this
    Panel of 9th August, 1991, to be amended by the substitution of the words “189 Ecclesall Road
    South” for the words “189 Ecclesall Road” in respect of an application by Blenheim Nursing
    Home for a Nurses Agency Licence (page 489 of the printed minutes).
    (13) CONFERENCE
      Resolved: That the Chair of this Panel (or his nominee) be appointed to attend a Conference
    organised by the Association of Metropolitan AuthoritiesAVolverhampton Metropolitan
    Borough Council on “Taxi Licensing—Providing a Better Service” to be held in Wolverhampton
    on the 13th/14th November, 1991, and that attendance at the Conference be recognised as an
    approved duty for the purposes of the payment of appropriate allowances under the Members’
    Allowances Scheme.
    (14) AMUSEMENT ARCADE ACTION GROUP
      The Panel considered a letter received from the Chairman of the Amusement Arcade Action
    Group inviting the City Council to take up membership of the Group which was originally
    established in 1983 by a consortium of Local Authorities, led by the City of Westminster, to deal
    with problems associated with amusement arcades and the need for Local Authorities to seek
    effective control over them.
      Resolved: That the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested to seek further
    information on the Amusement Arcade Action Group on the lines now discussed and report back
    to a future meeting of this Panel.

4 Environmental Services and Standards Sub-Committee
r e s o l v e d : That, except so far as they relate to matters delegated to the Environmental Services and
Standards Sub-Committee, the following minutes be approved—
      Meeting of the Environmental Services and Standards Sub-Committee held 20th November,
    1991. Present— Councillors Mrs. Midgley (Chair), J. Moore, Moscrop, Mrs. P. M. Smith and
    Ms. Whitty.
    ( 1 ) MEDI-CARE SERVICE
      The Director of Cleansing Services submitted a report on a meeting between representatives
    from Sheffield Community Health Care Services and the Cleansing Services Department to
    discuss the collection of clinical waste, at which it was proposed to change from the black sacks
    presently used by the Cleansing Services Department on the Medi-Care Service to yellow sacks in
    order to comply with current legislation and ensure that there was no possibility of different types
    of waste being mixed at collection points.
      Resolved: That (a) approval be given to the proposed change now reported from black to
    yellow sacks for use on the Medi-Care Service and that it be implemented as soon as possible; and
       (b) the Director of Cleansing Services be requested to submit a report to a future meeting of
    this Sub-Committee giving a comparison, on the lines now discussed, of the provision of the
    Medi-Care Service five years ago with that available at the current time.
    (2) PROMOTION OF CLEANSING SERVICES TO HOUSING AREA TENANTS
      The Director of Cleansing Services submitted a report on an initiative undertaken by the Client
    Side to promote an understanding of the services offered to the general public by his Department
    and stated that following a number of meetings with tenants representatives from Area 10 of the
    Housing Department, a half day seminar had been held for them at Bernard Road Depot. This
866        ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

  had proved to be productive for both tenants and officers of the Department and it had resulted
  in the preparation of a leaflet on the services provided, which was appended to the report, and a
  request from the Office Manager, Housing Area 10, that a presentation be made to his staff about
  the range of services offered by the Cleansing Services Department.
    Resolved: That the Director of Cleansing Services be requested to (a) pursue with the Director
  of Housing, the concept of promoting the initiative now reported to all Area Housing Officers
  and report back to a future meeting of the Sub-Committee on the procedures to be adopted and
    (b) convey the appreciation of this Sub-Committee to all those who had contributed to the
  success now discussed, of the Bernard Road Open Day.
  (3) TELEPHONE STACKING SYSTEM
     Pursuant to the decision of this Sub-Committee of 25th September, 1991 (page 619 of the
  printed minutes), the Director of Cleansing Services submitted a report on the monitoring
  programme which had been carried out on the effectiveness of the telephone stacking system
  which had been introduced on certain telephones in his Department and he stated that random
  tests had concluded that the lowest waiting time was 2.4 seconds, whilst the longest wait recorded
  was 2 minutes 36 seconds. The Director stated that customer reaction to the use of a stacking
  system was generally favourable, although some complaints had been received.
      Resolved: That (a) the contents of the report now submitted be noted; and
    (b) the Director of Cleansing Services be requested to investigate on the lines now discussed
  the music and message sequence used on the telephone stacking system and submit a report to a
  future meeting of this Sub-Committee.
  (4) DEPARTMENTAL JOINT CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE AND SAFETY COMMITTEE
    The Sub-Committee received and noted the minutes of the meetings of the Departmental Joint
  Consultative Committee and Safety Committee held on the 9th October, 1991.
  (5) YORKSHIRE AND HUMBERSIDE REGIONAL HOME AND WATER SAFETY COUNCIL
    The Sub-Committee received and noted the minutes of the meeting of the Yorkshire and
  Humberside Regional Home and Water Safety Council held on 17th July, 1991.
  ( 6 ) CONSUMER WORKING PARTY
      Resolved: That the following minutes be approved—
       Meeting of the Consumer Working Party held 23rd October, 1991 Present— Councillors
      Ms. Bullement, Butler, Hartley, Memmott, Mrs. Walton and Webster.
      1 . CHAIR
       Resolved: That, due to the absence of the Chair (Councillor Mrs. P. M. Smith), Councillor
      Butler be appointed Chair of the meeting.
      2.   THE CREDIT CARDS (PRICE DISCRIMINATION) ORDER 1990
         Pursuant to the decision of the former Consumer and Regulatory Services Sub-Committee
      of 27th February, 1991 (page 1316 of the printed minutes), to request that any changes in price
      displays involving credit cards and discounts for cash purchases as a result of the
      implementation of the Credit Cards (Price Discrimination) Order be monitored, the Director
      of Health and Consumer Services submitted a report stating that a survey of a variety of retail
      outlets had been carried out in August, 1991. The conclusion of the survey indicated that
      traders appeared not to have taken advantage of the legislation and no case of dual pricing was
      observed in any of the retail outlets visited.
           Resolved: That (a) the contents of the report now submitted be noted; and
        (b) the Director of Health and Consumer Services be requested to maintain a watching brief
      on events and to report back to this Working Party on any changes which are detrimental to
      the consumers’ interests.
      3.   CREDIT ENQUIRIES
        The Working Party received and noted a report submitted by the Director of Health and
      Consumer Services which cited examples of consumer credit enquiries which had been
      referred to his Consumer Affairs Unit.
