        MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

     (b) the theme of the delegation should be based on the development plan for the International
    Unit applicable at the time the visit is planned;
      (c) the composition of the delegation should, wherever possible, reflect the delegation theme;
      (d) the Principal International Officer be asked to draw up, in liaison with Sheffield’s twin-town
    authorities, a more formalised method of forward planning to ensure that both incoming and
    outgoing delegations have an agreed programme of work which is acceptable to both partners
    and which is agreed well in advance of the visit; and
      (e) the Principal International Officer be requested to take appropriate steps to encourage
    greater public participation in Sheffield’s twinning activities.
    (3) W ORKING VISIT TO DONETSK, USSR
      Further to the decision made by the Panel at its meeting held on 24th November, 1989, to
    approve a proposal by the Chamber of Commerce to fund a study by a researcher into trading
    opportunities with the Donbas Area of the Ukraine, the Principal International Officer
    submitted a report on a proposed working visit to Donetsk, USSR.
      Resolved: That (a) arrangements be made for the Chair of this Panel (Councillor Pye), the
    Principal International Officer and a Researcher/Interpreter to undertake a working visit over
    not more than one week in January/February, 1990, to Donetsk, USSR, in accordance with the
    details contained in the report now submitted;
      (b) attendance on the working visit be recognised as an approved duty for the purpose of the
    payment of allowances under Section 177(2)(b) of the Local Government Act, 1972; and
       (c) in view of the substantial saving in time, authority be given for the visiting party to travel by
    air.
    (4) TOWN TW INNING GRANT
      The Panel considered one application for financial assistance.
      Resolved: That authority be given for the making of a town twinning grant of £650 towards the
    cost of a visit to Bochum in April, 1990, by 51 members of Handsworth Boys Football Club.

4 General Purposes Panel
r e s o l v e d : That, except so far as they relate to matters delegated to the General Purposes Panel,
the following minutes be approved—
     Meeting of the General Purposes Panel held 22nd December, 1989. Present— Councillors
    Butler (Chair), Chadwick, Ms. Fiore, Hussain, Mrs. Nelson, Saunders, Mrs. E. Smith, Mrs.
    Walton and White. Also in attendance— Councillor Cromar.
★    ( 1 ) SAFETY O F SPORTS GROUNDS
      The Panel considered a number of items relating to the Safety of Sports Grounds. The meeting
    was attended by representatives of the South Yorkshire Police, the Building Surveyor, Sheffield
    Wednesday Football Club, Sheffield United Football Club, Owlerton Sports Stadium Limited
    and the Consultant Engineers for the proprietors of the sports grounds concerned.
    Sheffield (Owlerton) Sports Stadium
      With reference to the resolution passed by the Panel at its meeting held on 27th November,
    1989, that, subject to the completion of all necessary works at the Sheffield (Owlerton) Sports
    Stadium to the satisfaction of the Head of Administration and Legal Department, authority be
    given for the issue of (a) a General Safety Certificate as indicated in the report submitted at that
    meeting and (b) an appropriately amended Prohibition Notice in respect of the remainder of the
    Stadium, the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report enclosing copies
    of the General Safety Certificate and Prohibition Notice issued pursuant to the resolution.
      The Panel noted the report now submitted.
    Hillsborough Sports Ground (Sheffield Wednesday)
       (a)   The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report enclosing a letter
    from the South Yorkshire Fire Service which recommended a number of improvements to the
    emergency lighting system at the Hillsborough Sports Ground (Sheffield Wednesday).
    MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

   Resolved: That the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club be required under Additional
Condition 9 of the General Safety Certificate issued in respect of the Hillsborough Sports Ground
(i) to carry out by 31st January, 1990, the items referred to in paragraph 4.1(a) of the report now
submitted; and
   (ii) in respect of the remaining items specified by the South Yorkshire Fire Service in their
letter dated 24th November, 1989, to submit schemes for consideration by the Council covering
the proposed extensions and improvements to the emergency lighting system at the Sports
Ground as soon as possible and in any case within two months of the date of this meeting.
   (b) the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report enclosing a report
by the Consulting Engineers to Sheffield Wednesday Football Club on tests carried out to the
barriers on the North-West Terrace (Upper) section of the Leppings Lane Terrace at the
Hillsborough Sports Ground.
   Resolved: That (i) the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club be required under Additional
Condition 9 of the General Safety Certificate issued in respect of the Hillsborough Sports Ground
to carry out the works detailed in the barrier test report of the Consulting Engineers now
submitted and dated 21st November, 1989, as soon as possible and in any case within two months
of the date of this meeting; and
   (ii) the Head of Administration and Legal Department be advised that, in future, this Panel
does not wish to see the technical reports of the Consulting Engineers relating to barrier testing.
   (c) the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on correspondence
from the South Yorkshire Fire Service and the South Yorkshire Police relating to a recent survey
of the West Stand at the Hillsborough Sports Ground (Sheffield Wednesday) by officers of the
Fire Service and on action taken to reduce the capacity of the West Stand from 4,465 to 3,840
spectators.
   The Panel expressed their concern that the South Yorkshire Fire Service had not found it
possible to provide a representative at the meeting.
  Resolved: That (i) confirmation be given to the action of the Head of Administration and Legal
Department in consultation with the Chair of this Panel in (A) amending the General Safety
Certificate issued in respect of the Hillsborough Sports Ground (Sheffield Wednesday) so as to
reduce the spectator capacity for the West Stand to 3,840, (B) requiring the re-designation of the
emergency exits from the West Stand as normal exits; and (C) requiring the Club to remove the
radial segregation barrier and segregation fencing on the West Stand;
   (ii) the South Yorkshire Police and the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club be requested to
monitor the ease with which spectators leave the West Stand and to observe which exits are used
and in what proportion and what time is taken to empty the Stand with a view to reporting back
to the Panel at the end of the current football season;
   (iii) the Head of Administation and Legal Department be authorised to require Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club under the terms and conditions of the General Safety Certificate issued
to the Club (as amended) to remove the segregation wall on the West Stand open air concourse as
soon as possible and in any event prior to the beginning of the 1990/91 football season;
  (iv) the Head of Administration and Legal Department be authorised to require Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club to do such other minor works as are required by the South Yorkshire
Fire Service in their letter of 17th November, 1989, now submitted; and
  (v) the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group be requested to review, at their next
meeting, the layout of the final exit gates leading from the West Stand onto Leppings Lane; and
  (vi) the Head of Administration and Legal Department be authorised to require Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club under the terms of the General Safety Certificate issued to the Club (as
amended) to submit by 31st March, 1990, a scheme to widen the gangways in the stand as detailed
by the Fire Service in paragraph (e) of their letter to the Sheffield City Council dated 17th
November, 1989.
Bramall Lane Sports Ground (Sheffield United)
  (a)    the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on a request by
Sheffield United Football Club for the amendment of the General Safety Certificate issued in
respect of the Bramall Lane Sports Ground to permit an increase in the spectator capacity of the
Spion Kop from 11,040 to 12,960.
        MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

      Resolved: That (i) Councillors Mrs. Nelson, Mrs. Walton and White be authorised to visit the
    Bramall Lane Sports Ground with the Chief Licensing Officer (Sports Grounds), Mrs. F.
    Woodhead (Assistant Solicitor) and Mr. A. Butler (Council Building Surveyor), together with a
    representative from the South Yorkshire Fire Service on Saturday, 23rd December, 1989, to
    investigate whether or not the works approved by the Panel on 27th November, 1989 for the
    upgrading of the staircase leading from the back of the Spion Kop have been completed to the
    satisfaction of the Council;
       (ii) depending on the outcome of such investigation, the Head of Administration and Legal
    Department in consultation with Councillor Mrs. Nelson be authorised to take appropriate steps
    to issue a prohibition notice in respect of certain areas of the Sports Ground or to amend the
    General Safety Certificate issued by the Council in respect of the Bramall Lane Sports Ground to
    permit an increase in the spectator capacity of the Spion Kop from 11,040 to 12,960.
      (b) the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on the situation
    regarding the carrying out by the Sheffield United Football Club of Works at the Bramall Lane
    Sports Ground required by the Panel at its meeting held on 27th November, 1989, to be carried
    out by 23rd December, 1989. The report indicated that all the works had not yet been completed.
      A copy of the schedule of required works served on the Club by the Council was attached to
    the report. The items in the schedule which had not been completed were reported as follows—
      Items 4.0, 7.1, 7.2 (sheet adjacent to seats 21/22 only), 9.3, 9.4 (handrail to vomitory 8 only),
    9.5 (Mr. D. Capper on behalf of Sheffield United Football Club undertook that the gas supply to
    the John Street Stand was isolated on match days), 15.0 and 16.0.
      Resolved: That Sheffield United Football Q ub be required under the terms of the General
    Safety Certificate issued to the Club (as amended) (i) to carry out by 31st January, 1990, works to
    rectify the following outstanding items detailed in the schedule of works attached to the report
    now submitted—
      Items 4.0, 7.1, 7.2,9.3, 9.4 and 15.0; and
       (ii)   to carry out by 31st March, 1990, works to rectify the following outstanding items detailed
    in the schedule—
      Items 9.5 and 16.0.
       (c) the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on proposals of the
    Sheffield United Football Club to remove and replace boundary walls on the Shoreham Street
    side of the Bramall Lane Football Ground. The report indicated that, since the submission of the
    proposals by the Club, the Head of Administration and Legal Department in consultation with
    the Chair of the Panel had authorised the carrying out by the Club of the proposals under the
    terms of Section 78 of the Building Act, 1984 in order to secure the removal and replacement of
    the boundary walls which had now become dangerous. (The new boundary walls are to be
    constructed in accordance with drawings numbered 11238/6 (17) and 7 as amended by drawings
    numbered 11238/17D and 7E submitted by Eastwood and Partners on behalf of Sheffield United
    Football Club.
      The Panel noted the information now reported.
★    (2) PUBLIC ENTERTAINM ENT
      The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported verbally on an application for the
    renewal of the Public Entertainment Licence issued in respect of Kiki’s Nightclub, 40 Charter
    Square, Sheffield. The licensee, a representative of the proprietors of the premises and their
    Solicitor attended the meeting to support the application. The Head of Administration and Legal
    Department stated that the South Yorkshire Fire Service and the Director of Health and
    Consumer Services considered the ground floor of the premises to be reasonably safe although
    minor works were still required to be carried out and that the first floor of the premises had been
    closed to the public although its use was still covered by the licence.
      Resolved: That (a) the application now submitted for the renewal of the Public Entertainment
    Licence in respect of Kiki’s Nightclub, 40 Charter Square be granted for a period of three months
    and with the exclusion of the first floor of the premises; and
          MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

    (b)    the Head of Administration and Legal Department be requested to investigate whether or
  not an offence has been committed under the conditions attached to the existing licence.


     Meeting of the General Purposes Panel held 2nd January, 1990. Present— Councillors Butler
   (Chair), Chadwick, Ms. Fiore, Hussain, Lamb, Mrs. Nelson, Mrs. E. Smith, and White. Also in
   attendance— Councillors Cromar and Whitfield.
   (1 )   SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
★ Responses o f the Police
    The Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a report on the responses of the
  South Yorkshire Police to Lord Justice Taylor’s Interim Recommendations arising from the
  Hillsborough Disaster, so far as the Hillsborough (Sheffield Wednesday) and Bramall Lane
  (Sheffield United) Sports Grounds were concerned.
      Resolved: That (a) the contents of the report now submitted be noted;
     (b) the Chief Licensing Officer be requested to seek further advice from the Home Office on
  proposals for the improvement of closed circuit television systems at Sports Grounds and the
  Head of Administration and Legal Department be requested to keep the Panel informed each
  month on the action taken by officers to progress the proposed improvement of the closed circuit
  television systems at both the Hillsborough and Bramall Lane Sports Grounds;
     (c) the Sheffield Wednesday and Sheffield United Football Clubs be required under the terms
  of the General Safety Certificate to engage independent experts approved by the Police to survey
  their respective Sports Grounds and liaise closely with the Police with a view to producing, as
  soon as possible and in any case within three months of the date of this meeting, a scheme to be
  submitted to the Council for the provision of an emergency landline telephone system within
  their respective grounds. (The scheme for Sheffield Wednesday must detail a direct line between
  the Police Control Room and the Referee’s changing facility);
    (d) the Sheffield Wednesday and Sheffield United Football Clubs be given advance notice that,
  when details of the proposed closed circuit television systems, landline telephone systems and
  public address systems are approved, the Clubs will be asked to submit to the Council within a
  further period of two months, proposals for new Police control room facilities at their respective
  grounds; and
    (e) the Chief Licensing Officer be requested to enter into discussions with the South Yorkshire
  Police on the proposal raised in the report that appropriate parts of the agreement made between
  the Police and each Q ub setting out their respective responsibilities at the Sports Grounds be
  incorporated as conditions in the relevant General Safety Certificates when these are next fully
  reviewed.
★ First A id Facilities
    Further to the decision made by this Panel at its meeting held on 27th November, 1989 (page
  945 of the printed minutes), the Head of Administration and Legal Department submitted a
  report on action taken by the Sheffield Wednesday and Sheffield United Football Clubs to obtain
  medical equipment as specified by the Director of Health and Consumer Services in a
  memorandum to the Head of Administration and Legal Department dated 16th November, 1989,
  and on the response of the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group to the references in the
  memorandum to the provision of first aid facilities at certificated sports grounds in the City.
     Resolved: That (a) the Sheffield Wednesday and Sheffield United Football Qubs be required
  under the terms of their respective General Safety Certificates to submit as soon as possible and
  in any case within two months of the date of this meeting, appropriate schemes for the provision
  of new or improved first aid rooms at their respective sports grounds, the schemes to take account
  of the comments made by the Director of Health and Consumer Services in his memorandum of
  16th November, 1989;
    (b)     the objections of the Police to the suggestion of the Director of Health and Consumer
  Services that additional space for the first aid room at the Hillsborough Sports Ground (Sheffield
  Wednesday) could be provided by using adjoining premises currently used by the Police as a
  detention room, be noted; and
           MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

      (c)   the stated intention of Mr. John Strange of Eastwood and Partners to ask the Sheffield
    United Football Club to submit alternative proposals for the provision of a first aid room be
    noted.
    Survey o f Football Supporters
      Pursuant to the request of the Panel at its meeting held on 27th November, 1989 (page 947 of
    the printed minutes), the Communications Co-ordinator reported further on the survey carried
    out by the Communications Unit of the Publicity Department on behalf of the Football
    Supporters’ Association.
       The Panel noted the information reported.
    Visits to Football Matches
      The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported on proposals for visits by
    members of the Panel to future football matches in the City. He suggested that arrangements
    should be made in consultation with the Police for groups consisting of not more than four
    members of the Panel to attend each of a number of selected matches.
       Resolved: That the Head of Administration and Legal Department be requested—
      (a) to make arrangements along the lines now suggested for Panel members to attend football
    matches at the Hillsborough (Sheffield Wednesday) and Bramall Lane (Sheffield United) Sports
    Grounds; and
      (b) to investigate the possibility of members of the Panel attending events at the Sheffield
    (Owlerton) Sports Stadium.
    Safety o f Sports Grounds Advisory Group
      The Panel received and noted the minutes of a meeting of the Safety of Sports Grounds
    Advisory Groud held on 20th November, 1989.
    (2 )   m em bers’ allow ances

      The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported that the Secretary of State for the
    Environment had announced the introduction, with effect from 1st January, 1990, of increased
    maximum rates of motor mileage and overnight subsistence allowances payable to members of
    local authorities and other appropriate bodies.
       The Panel noted that details of the new rates had been sent to all members of the City Council.
    (3) REPRESENTATION ON OTH ER BODIES
    Sheffield Community Health Council
      The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported that a vacancy had arisen on the
    Sheffield Community Health Council arising from the resignation of               ane of the
    City Council’s nominees.
       The Panel noted the information reported.
    South Yorkshire Valuation and Community Charge Tribunal
      The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported that, under the authority given
    by the Municipal Enterprise and General Services Programme Committee at its meeting held on
    12th December, 1988 (page 988 of the printed minutes)]               had been appointed a
    member of the South Yorkshire Valuation and Community Charge Tribunal.
★    ( 4 ) FILM CLASSIFICATION
      Resolved: That confirmation be given to the action taken by the Head of Administration and
    Legal Department in consultation with the Chair of this Panel in authorising the exhibition in
    category “Sheffield 12” of the film “Roselyne and the Lions” .
    (5) PETITION
      The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported on a petition signed by 47
    residents of Westfield objecting to noise and vandalism arising from the “disco” at The Mill
    public house, Westfield, which petition had also been referred to the Health and Consumer
    Services Programme Committee.
       The Panel noted that the Chief Licensing Officer was investigating the complaint.
           MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

    (6 )   GAMING ACT 1968— AMUSEMENT W ITH PRIZES
      The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported verbally on an application for a
    permit for the provision of amusements with prizes at the Tinsley Transcafe, 1A Shepcote Lane,
    Sheffield. The applicant attended the meeting to support his application.

      The Head of Administration and Legal Department pointed out that, as the premises
    concerned were accessible to the public, they did not comply with the Council’s policy for the
    granting or renewal of applications for permits for the provision of amusements with prizes as set
    out in the resolution of the Panel of 5th September, 1988 (page 521 of the printed minutes).
       A t this stage in the proceedings, the Panel—
       Resolved: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before a decision is made on
    the application now under consideration and before discussion takes place on the remaining item
    of business on the grounds that, in view of the business to be transacted, if the public and press
    were present there would be a disclosure to them of exempt information as described in
    paragraphs 7 and 12 of Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act, 1972, as amended, relating
    to the financial or business affairs of other persons and legal matters and advice.
      The Panel then considered the application for the grant of a permit for the provision of
    amusements with prizes at the Tinsley Transcafe, 1A Shepcote Lane, Sheffield.
★      Resolved: That (a) consideration of the application now submitted be deferred; and
     (b)    the Head of Administration and Legal Department be requested to report back to the next
    monthly meeting of this Panel on the Council’s policy for the control of amusements with prizes.
★ (7) HACKNEY CA RRIA G E AN D PRIVATE H IR E LICENSING
    The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported verbally on five individual cases
  relating to hackney carriage and private hire licensing. The applicants in cases
        ittended the meeting to speak on their cases.
      Resolved: That (a) the holder of the hackney carriage vehicle and private hire and hackney
    carriage driver’s licences now mentioned be given a severe warning as to his future conduct (Case

      (b)    the private hire and hackney carriage driver’s licence now mentioned be revoked on the
    grounds that the holder is currently disqualified from driving ('
       (c) the application now submitted for the issue of a private hire and hackney carriage driver’s
    licence be granted for a period of nine months (Case No. 3/90);
       (d) with regard to the two hacknev carriage vehicle licences now mentioned, the licence
    relating to the older vehicle (Licence        be revoked on the grounds that the vehicle had not
    been maintained in a reasonably safe condition, and the other vehicle (Licence No       be tested
    as soon as possible and preferably within seven days and that vehicle be tested on the maximum
    number of occasions allowed by the legislation (Case Nc         and
      (e)     consideration of Case No. 4/90 be deferred to enable the applicant to attend before the
    Panel.

    5 Trading Services Panel
    r e s o l v e d : That the following minutes be approved—


    Meeting of the Trading Services Panel held 4th January, 1990. Present— Councillors Ms. Fiore
    (Chair), Crowder, Godber, Moscrop, Mrs. Mulheam, Mrs. Nelson and Mrs. E. Smith.
    PRINTING SERVICES
      The Manager of Design and Print submitted a report reviewing the current situation and
    containing proposals for restructuring within Design & Print.
       Resolved: That (a) approval be given for (i) the redeployment of five members of staff from the
    Origination Section, five members of staff from the Bindery Section, one member of staff from
    the Reprographics Section and one maintenance operative, (ii) the retention of existing levels of
    staff within the Press Room, (iii) the reorganisation of the Bindery Section to form a
       MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

   bindery/finishing area with a Despatch Section; (iv) the closure of the Reprographics Section and
   (v) the replacement of the current four-day week with a double-day shift of five days, from
   Monday to Friday;
     (b) the Manager of Design & Print be requested to commence immediate discussions with the
   appropriate trade unions upon the above decisions; and
    (c) subject to the submission of further reports to this Panel, approval be given in principle
  for—
        (i) the transfer of numbering and perforating processes from the Bindery Section to the
        Press Room and the purchase of additional machinery, at an estimated cost of £20,000, for
        carrying out such processes;
        (ii) the working of overtime to deal with any initial increase in business; and
        (iii) an increase in prices in the financial year 1990/91.

6 Markets Hearing
  The Head of Administration and Legal Department reported that on 18th December, 1989, a
group consisting of the Chair, the Deputy Chair and Councillors Godber and Lamb had heard a case
involving an allegation by a member of the public of misconduct by a market trader. He stated that
the group had expressed their concern at the complaint and also the hope that all market tenants
would undertake responsibility for ensuring that incidents such as that leading to the complaint did
not take place and had added that they would expect all persons in charge of market stalls to adopt a
conciliatory attitude to the public.
reso lv ed   :   That (a) the details of the markets hearing now reported be noted; and
  (b)    the General Manager, Markets, be authorised to inform market tenants of the views
expressed by the group as to the relationship between market traders and the public and to point out
that these views indicate the policy of the Council regarding such relationships.

7 Personnel—Four-Monthly Reports
   The Committee received and noted the four-monthly reports on personnel matters of the Head of
Administration and Legal Department, the Chief Publicity Officer and the Managers of the five
trading operations—the Central Supplies Organisation, Design & Print, the Markets Undertaking,
the Central Transport Service and the Catering Service.

8 Administration and Legal Department
  The Committee received and noted reports of the Head of Administration and Legal Department
on his Department’s Personnel and Training Plans for the financial years 1990/91.

9 Revenue Budget—Monitoring
  The Committee received and noted reports on the monitoring of the revenue budget of the Head
of Administration and Legal Department and the Chief Publicity Officer and of the Director of
Land and Planning in respect of the Town Hall and Annexes.

10 Driver Registration Scheme
  The Committee received a report of the Driver Licensing Group, which was a group of Council
officers set up to consider and make recommendations on the Government’s proposals for the
review of road vehicle driver licensing and on the use of Council minibuses. The report proposed the
establishment of a scheme for the registration of and issue of permits to all persons intending to
drive Council minibuses whether or not they were employed by the Council, to take effect from 1st
April, 1990, and indicated that the scheme would be self-financing.
reso lv ed: That approval be given to the proposals contained in the report now submitted for the
establishment of a scheme for the registration of and issue of permits to drivers of Council
minibuses.

11 Conference
reso lv ed: That the Chair of this Committee, or her nominee, be appointed as a delegate to attend a
conference on Housing and Direct Services to be held by the Association of Metropolitan
Authorities in Newcastle from 13th-15th February, 1990.
         MUNICIPAL ENTERPRISE AND GENERAL SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

12 British Printing Industries Federation
reso lv ed : That the City Council take up membership of the British Printing industries Federation
at the current membership fee of £450.00 per annum.

13 Exclusion of the Public and Press
reso lv ed: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before discussion takes place on
the remaining item of business on the grounds that, in view of the nature of the business to be
transacted, if the public and press were present there would be a disclosure to them of exempt
information as described in Paragraph 1 of Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act, 1972, as
amended by the Local Government (Access to Information) Act, 1985, relating to a particular
employee.

1A   A             o n /1 T a n a 1      ________________________________________________________________________
