                                                                     Sheffield
                                                                      City Council
Legal & Administrative Services
      Head o f Legal & Administrative Services (City Solicitor):
      M ark Webster   llb


      Town Hall • Sheffield • SI 2HH
                                                                      Chief Executive's
      Tel: 0114 273 4 0 1 9 • Fax: 0 1 1 4 2 73 6989
                                                                        Directorate
      Email:

      Your Ref:

      Our Ref:          E B /P B

      Date:             8 January 1999




       Ms. I                 I
       South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat,
       P.O. Box 37,
       Regent Street,
       BARNSLEY,
       South Yorkshire.    S70 2PQ


       Dear Ms.

       As discussed I enclose a copy of a letter dated 23 December 1998 from Dr. Ed
       Walker and a copy of my response dated 8 January 1999. I should be grateful if
       you could respond direct, as agreed.

       Yours sincerely,




       LIZ BASHFORTH
       Assistant Head of Legal and Administrative Services


       Encs.




       The Officer dealing w ith this enquiry is:
    Chief Executive: R. W. Kerslake Bsc, IPFA
                                                                              Sheffield
                                                                               City Council
    Town Hall • Sheffield • SI 2HH
    Tel: 0114 2 7 3 4 0 0 0 ■ Fax: 0 1 1 4 2 7 3 6844



               ChEx/EB/PB

               8 January 1999




     Dr. Ed Walker,



     BATLEY,
     West Yorkshire             WF17


     Dear Dr. Walker,

     Thank you for your letter dated 23 December 1998.

     The decision to underwrite legal costs in these circumstances is one that is made through the
     South Yorkshire Police Authority and the South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat. I have therefore
     spoken to the officer dealing with this matter and arranged to pass a copy of your letter to her
     for a response. The Secretariat is in the best position to respond to the issues you raise.

^    Yours sincerely,




     CHIEF EXECUTIVE
                SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL - MEMORANDUM
                  LEGAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES

From:    Liz Bashforth                        To:     Chief Executive
         Assistant Head of Legal and
         Administrative Services
Date:    11 January 1999
Ref:     EB/GJ
®        34019 - Mrs Bashforth                Ref:



RESPONSE TO DR WALKER - HILLSBOROUGH

The Joint Secretariat is dealing with all enquiries on this matter as: -
      a) it is a Police Authority issue and they are advising the Authority
      b) the position is complicated in that there are 3 separate and different
          applications for financial assistance (this is probably not yet public
          knowledge)
      c) the position is changing all the time and the Secretariat have all the relevant
          information
      d) The Hillsborough Families Support Group (represented by Trevor Hicks) has
          asked to make representations to a special meeting of the Police Authority.
          This has been agreed.
      e) We are discussing privately with the Secretariat whether Sheffield members
          need to declare an interest

        In the circumstances I have agreed with                  from the Joint
        Secretariat that the attached response is the most appropriate one.

        N.B. Dr Ed Walker treated patients at the Northern General Hospital on the day
        of the disaster. He has always been critical of a number of things, including the
        response of the emergency services. In the review of the tragedy, ordered by the
        Home Secretary Jack Straw, his evidence, together with the evidence of others,
        was included in the submissions. The particular submissions were found to be
        unfounded.
                          CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM
                       ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT

    From          City Solicitor & Head of Admin             To             Chief Officers
                                                                            (Please see distribution list overleaf)
                                                             CC:            Committee Chairs
    Date         ^ t h March 1996
    Ref           MW/PS W
    Tel No        4018 - Mark Webster                        Ref




    HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER GRANADA TELEVISION DRAMA
    PRODUCTION

   Further to my communication of 18th January 1996 concerning the above matter in which I undertook
   to write again informing you of developments, the current position is that a meeting took place on
( ^Wednesday, 28th February with Granada Television, involving the Leader of the Council, myself and
   other officers. Granada were represented at the meeting by David Price and Katy Jones who appeared
   to be the individuals making enquiries of officers within the organisation.

    During the course of the meeting, the Leader made it clear that the Council’s concern was of the effect
    on everyone, including staff.

    For their part, the representatives of Granada indicated that they were interested factual information ie
    in knowing where things were and how things were set out when the Inquiry and the Inquests were
    dealt with in the Old Town Hall and the net result was that it was agreed that if they wished to make
    enquiries of the organisation, they must route those through Phil Andrews. Consideration will be
    given to each request but to the extent that if information is publicly available then obviously that
    information will be passed on. Accordingly, if approaches are made direct to anyone within your area
    then they should be referred back through Phil Andrews before any response is made as the agreed
    process.

(   )Also, I would be grateful if you would make it clear to staff within your area that the Council’s
     position is that no one is required to co-operate and if they do not wish to talk to Granada, they will be
     supported in that stance by the Council.

    Finally, you will note that I have copied this communication to Committee Chairs, some of whom
    were directly personally involved in the issue and I therefore thought it appropriate that they be made
    aware o f developments.



                                                                            iCHiEF E>     ITIVE
                                                                   C.P.U.                          C.P.O.
                                                                                SHE?
                                                                   RES.
                                                                                                    PR.
                                                                                - MAR 1996          UNIT
                                                                   STRAT

                                                                    U.P                    A /L
Distribution:
Chief Executive
City Treasurer
IT Management Team
Property Services Management Team
General Manager, Purchasing
Chief Personnel Officer
Director of Design & Building Services
Act Director of Education
Director of Housing
Director of Social Services
General Manager, Planning & Economic Development and Act Director of DEED
Director of Environmental Services and Standards
Director of Leisure Services
Director of Arts & Museums
Director of Recreation
Director of Works
Director of Markets
Director of Catering
Director of Cleansing Services

Councillor Mike Bower, Chair of Policy
Councillor Steve Jones, Chair of Finance Sub
Councillor Jan Fiore, Chair of Personnel
Councillor Jean Cromar, Chair of Operational Services
Councillor Pat Midgley, Chair of Environmental Health
Councillor Viv Nicholson, Chair of Education
Councillor Tony Arber, Chair of F & CS
Councillor Sandra Robinson, Chair of Housing
Councillor Mike Pye, Chair of Leisure
Councillor Jan Wilson, Chair of Planning



pw /cm taem be/4M H ills.doc
                                CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM
                             ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT

From                City Solicitor and Head of      To          Councillor M Bower
                    Administration                              Leader
                                                                Chief Executive
Date                6 February 1996
Ref                 A H /EB /G J
Tel No              4019 - Mrs Bashforth            Ref




GRANADA TELEVISION - DRAMA DOCUMENTARY - HILLSBOROUGH
DISASTER
’i
)


I thought it m ight be useful to let you have brief details of recent approaches by Granada
Television.

1          I enclose a copy of a letter dated 12 December 1995, the contents of which are self
           explanatory. Granada also approached Sheffield City Hall for information. Such
           informal approaches are being discouraged on the basis that until the Council has
           taken a decision as to whether or not to co-operate with Granada then no response
           w ill be given to these approaches. In any event, it would seem more appropriate on
           the Council's part to have some common contact point to co-ordinate the Council's
           response.

           Radio Sheffield lodged certain cassette tapes of broadcasts at the time of the
           Hillsborough Disaster with Sheffield Archives. Radio Sheffield has given permission
           for those tapes to be released to Granada Television and appropriate arrangements
           are being m ade through Sheffield Archives.

           G ranada approached Sheffield Archives asking to be allowed access to the videos of
           the Disaster Inquiry/Inquest. Those records were deposited by the Coroner's Office
           and are deemed to be public records .and subject to closure periods laid down in the
           Public Records Act, ie 75 year closure. The Coroner alone can grant permission for
           the material to be viewed. However, those records have in fact been w ithdraw n by
           the Coroner's Office from Sheffield Archives (on the same day as Granada Television
           m ade the enquiry).


                                                                                        'T(VE

g j/liz /m e m o s/06021dr




                                                                     U.P.
                                                                                        A /L
                                                                                                                      24 J/iij
Operations Manager
Catering for Sheffield
Sheffield Town Hall
Sheffield 1                                                                       December 12 1995

Dear

Following our phone conversation here is an outline of our task and the way you could
perhaps be of important assistance to us.

We are in the early stages of researching a drama documentary based on the aftermath
of the Hillsborough Disaster.

It will be a two hour factual drama written by the award winning, Jimmy McGovern,
the creator o f ‘Cracker’ and it is due to be screened either late Autumn 1996 or early
Spring ‘97.

All the main organisations concerned have promised assistance in the making of the
film and we have contacted all the bereaved families who have given unqualified
support to the project.

Jimmy McGovern will begin writing the drama in the new year and professional actors
will play the characters involved in the aftermath. It is proposed that there will be
several scenes which will concern the lengthy inquest which, as you know, was held at
the City Hall.

These scenes will include members of the families talking in the VIP lounge which was
used as the canteen. This will obviously concern some of your past staff who got to
know some of the families during the lengthy proceedings.

Which is Why I am trying to trace those who served in the canteen around the time of
March 1991, first to inform them as a matter of courtesy that they may be portrayed on
television, secondly to try and get actors who bear a resemblance to them and also to
ask for their recollections of the time.

Any assistance you - and they - can give would be most welcome.
                                                         F:   '                                                   .

V r \ n r r n i ^ o r a K f _______ •




i ^ a v i u x u i'C                  7_^ J
Assistant Producer
Factual Drama
Tel: 0161 832 7211 ex 2407.

     G     R    A     N     A    D      A    T   E   L    E       V   I   S   I   O   N        L   I   M     I   T ;E       D

     M A N C H E ST E R M 6 0 9E A T E L E PH O N E : 0161 832 7211 G E N E R A L FA X : 0161 872 2029 T E L EX : 668859.
                         CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM
                      ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT

From            City Solicitor & Head of Admin        To           Chief Officers
                                                                   (please see distribution list)

Date            18th January 1996
Ref             MW/PSW
Tel No          4018 - Mark Webster                   Ref


URGENT

HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER 1989 - APPROACHES FROM GRANADA
TELEVISION

It has just come to my attention that Granada Television have made approaches to certain members of
staff regarding their contribution to a proposed drama/documentary on the Hillsborough disaster to be
produced by Granada.

Would you please take immediate steps to inform all staff within your department that at the present
time, they should not agree to take part in such programme nor make any contribution whatsoever. I
would, however, be grateful to receive details in writing of the type and nature of any approach made
by the Company.

Sheffield City Council has not made a decision on whether to co-operate with Granada but will be
meeting representatives of the Company shortly and I will write to you again following suchjneeting
to let you know the outcome. Until such time, and in view of the sensitive nature of this subject,
please ensure all staff are made aware of this communication as soon as possible.



 Distribution:
lilH H e c u tiv e                                                      ececvrnvs
 City Treasurer
 IT Management Team
 Property Services Management Team
 General Manager, Purchasing
 Chief Personnel Officer
Director of Design & Building Services
 Act Director of Education
Director of Housing
 Director o f Social Services
 General Manager, Planning & Economic Development and Act Director of DEED
 Director of Environmental Services and Standards
 Director o f Leisure Services
 Director of Arts & Museums
 Director o f Recreation
Director of Works
 Director of Markets
 Director o f Catering
 Director of Cleansing Services
pw/cmimembers/1801Hils.doc
                            CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM
                         ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT

From             City Solicitor & Head of Admin       To           Councillor Mike Bower
                                                                   Councillor Peter Price
                                                                   Councillor Pat Midgley
Date             3rd January 1996                     CFI:         GhiefExecutive ?
Ref              MW/PSW                                            E Bashforth, Assist Head of A & L
Tel No           4018 - Mark Webster                               Dir Environmental Services
                                                                   P Andrews, Head o f PR Unit


GRANADA TELEVISION DOCUMENTARY - HTIXSBOROUGH DISASTER

Further to the discussion which took place before Christmas and to the letter which went on the 13th
December 1995 to Mr Price, I now attach for your information and attention, copies of recent
correspondence from Richard Wells, the contents of which are self explanatory.

 will of course let you know as and when we receive a response to our communication to Granada.




                                                                                               fl
pw/councs/301Bower,doc
          South Yorkshire
          POLICE                                                           Richard Wells QPM, MA(Oxon), CIMgt.
                                                                           C hief Constable
          JUSTICE     with   COURAGE


M Webster Esq                   I ADMINISTRATION & LEGAL DEPT                                 22 December 1995
                                            asst hsad   a   i   resource
City Solicitor and Head of Admin                •J>j»T0R g
Town Hall                        1 '
Sheffield SI 2HH
                                                                                       2 - J/1H 1996

                                                                                      -= ?             :

                                                             C c^ x \ : 7
Granada Television Documentary/Drama production on the Hillsborough Tragedy

In common with yourselves, I have recently been approached by Granada Television who have
commissioned Jimmy McGovern (the author of the books upon which the 'Cracker' television
series were based) to write a drama/documentary dealing with the aftermath of the 1989
Hillsborough tragedy.

I had a meeting with the Production Team yesterday together with a number of South
Yorkshire Police staff in an attempt to establish what exactly defines the genre
'drama/documentary', what was meant by Granada's claim to "strictly factual" drama and what
support was sought for the programme from the South Yorkshire Police.

The team intend to conduct research with a large number of those who were involved with,
and affected by, the tragedy with particular emphasis upon the view of the relations of those
who died. On the basis of the material obtained by this process McGovern will write the
piece, which will probably be screened some time in the Spring of 1997. My suspicion is that
the 15 March anniversary, or close to it, will be favoured by Granada. The Granada team
sought my support in allowing access to South Yorkshire Police officers who were involved
and to statements obtained in the aftermath of the tragedy.

The view we expressed to Granada at the meeting was that the weight of medical opinion
suggested that people who suffered from Post Traumatic Stress Disorder would all find such a
programme to be both distressing and disturbing and that, therefore, no possible good could
accrue to anyone involved with the tragedy as a result of the programme being made. The
sole benefit would be to Granada and to Mr McGovern. Moreover, one of Jimmy
McGovern's previous books was dramatised in a 'Cracker' episode which dealt with the
murderous effects of the tragedy on a Liverpudlian man, and suggests that the author is
unlikely to produce an objective account of any aspect of the tragedy.

As a result, the South Yorkshire Police have taken the unusual step for an organisation which
prefers and promotes openness and have withheld co-operation from the programme makers.
I thought that you should be aware of our decision as well as the fact that we have referred
Granada to several other independent sources of advice on the likely effects of the
programme.


                           • Vc.

     "A":.'.


Richard Wells               ^— — -------- ---------------------- — ^
         South Yorkshire
         POLICE                                          Richard Wells QPM, MA(Oxon), CIMgt.
                                                         C hief Constable
         JUSTICE   with   COURAGE



                                                                            3 January 1996




                                                                                             1S96
 - « •


1\ ■ - i
h is

Graham Mackrell of Sheffield Wednesday FC has written to me as shown on the
attached copy letter.

Graham has agreed that I might copy this letter to you in order to keep all parties
informed of each other's responses.

In the same spirit, I'm writing to let you know that we are sending out a pre-emptive
press release informing the media of our unusual stance of non-co-operation. A copy
is attached for your interest.




Richard Wells


Encs
                                    t




Chris Dorries (HM Coroner)
Cathy Hamlyn (Sheffield Heath)
Brian Mole (former Chief Superintendent, SYP)
Ken Threlfall (SYMAPS)
Mark Webster (Sheffield City Council)

Copy to Graham Mackrell
               Sheffield
                             Footbal

                                                                >h Yorkshire Police
                                                                                                Hillsborough
         GHM/LJL                                                 Z   9 DEC 1995 .                Sheffield
                                                                                                  S6 1SW
         28 December 1995                                       Chief Constable _               Tel.: (0114)
                                                                                                 234 3122
                                                                                                Fax.: (0114)
                                                                                                 233 7145
         Richard Wells
         Chief Constable v 3
         South Yorkshire Police
         Snig Hill
         Sheffield
         S3 8LY


         Dear Richard

         Thank, you for your letter dated 22. December 1995.

         Like yourself I have severe doubts about the motives behind the Granada
         documentary/drama. In fact, in earlier correspondence, I made the initial observation
         that Mr McGovern’s opinions of Hillsborough are well documented and I would
         question any such balance.

         Out of courtesy, however, I had a meeting with Granada who have offered to write
         me a formal letter setting out the basis on how such a programme would be
         produced.

         This is still awaited but I can assure you that I will make no decision without
         discussing the matter with you and my initial reaction still stands that such a
         programme is best avoided.

         Yours sincerely




C.      <g6rH~ftflactogn
          SECRETAm




     Chairman: D. G. Richards, Secretary: G. H. Mackrell F.C.C.A., Team Manager: D. J. Pleat
     Directors: K. T. Addy, G. K. Hulley, R. M. Grierson F.C.A., J. Ashton M.P., G. A. H. Thorpe, H. E. Culley
     Registered in England No. 62478
 PR no 76
                                                                      3 January 1996

                      Police concern over plans for Hillsborough drama


 South Yorkshire Police have been approached by Granada Television, asking for co­
 operation in their making of a two-hour drama documentary about the aftermath of the
 Hillsborough disaster.


 The author of the drama documentary is to be Jimmy McGovern, who writes the popular
 "Cracker" series, one episode of which featured the Hillsborough disaster.


After a meeting before Christmas with Granada representatives, attended by serving
officers of the South Yorkshire Police and representatives of the force's Occupational
Health Unit, both past and present, the Chief Constable decided that the force will not
co-operate with the making of the programme.


"This is against our normal policy of openness with the media and I want to explain why
I have taken this decision," said Mr Wells.


"Best medical advice tells me that the screening of dramatic incidents can trigger, in the
minds of those affected by the trauma - whether families, friends, members of the
emergency services or simply onlookers - serious emotional reactions. These reactions
will range from various anxiety states to a virtual reliving of the events and all the
implications of such an experience.


"This leads me to the belief that there can be only two beneficiaries of such a
programme: the television company and the author. Though it is said that the bereaved
families unanimously support the making of the programme, the professional advice I
am given suggests that they may be unaware of the longer-lasting and negative effects
of what they are entering into."




            Press and Public Relations Department
            Police H eadquarters                    FOR F U R T H E R IN F O R M A T IO N CONTACT
            Snig Hill, Sheffield S3 8LY                 Gillian Radcliffe
            Telephone: 0114 276 8522
                                                    TELEPHONE
                                                                   >8150
 PR 76, page 2
                                                                  3 January 1996

 Another reason for the force deciding not to endorse the programme comes from a
  Cracker episode from the same author, which gave rise to doubts about Jimmy
 McGovern's ability to see the aftermath of Hillsborough with a sense of objectivity and
 resulted in the force complaining to Granada at the time.


 Said Mr Wells: "A further complementary objection lies in the fact that the events of the
 day have already been exposed to a number of judicial processes, none of which has
produced conclusive agreement on even all the facts, let alone the many theories
arising from those facts. A two-hour drama-documentary, however balanced the authors
try to make it, is unlikely to succeed where extensive judicial process has tried and
failed.


"Finally, the programme makers are quite clear that the story will be written from the
families' viewpoint, which further minimises the realistic chances of achieving balance.


"I am not prepared, therefore, to lend the name of the South Yorkshire Police to bolster
the credibility of a programme which is, in my view, made without the best and long-term
interests in mind of any of the suffering parties."


South Yorkshire Police have referred Granada to clinical authorities in the field of post
traumatic stress disorder in the hope that the programme-makers will reconsider their
proposed project and have offered them further discussion if they substantially alter their
view.
Our reference:
                  CEX/MW/PSW                                                          COUNCI L
         Date:
                  13th December 199.

                 Mr D Price
                 Assistant Producer
                 Factual Drama                                                        "own Hall
                 Granada Television
                 MANCHESTER
                 M60 9EA                            '1 s " C



                 Dear Mr Price

                 HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

                 Thank you for your letter of 16th November 1995 concerning the above.

                 I feel a meeting with my colleagues would be helpful and to this extent, would be
                 grateful if you would respond by supplying dates in the New Year when such a
                 meeting would be convenient with yourself and any colleagues you would wish to
                 accompany you. The Council will be represented by Councillor Mike Bower, the
                 Leader of the Council; Mark Webster, City Solicitor, and his Assistant, Liz Bashforth;
                 David Purchon, Director of Environmental Services and Standards and Phil Andrews,
                 Chief Publicity Officer.

                 I look forward to hearing from you shortly.

            a    Yflfixrs sincerely



0

                 Chief Executive

         ! I             •
             CC:             Councillor Mike Bower
           • -               Mark Webster, City Solicitor and Head of Administration
                             Liz Bashforth, Assistant Head of Department & Contract Administrator
                             David Purchon, Director of Environmental Services & Standards
                             Phil Andrews, Chief Publicity Officer


                 pw/letters/1312Gran.doc
          G       R       A     N       A    D         A                T   E     L      E     V        I   S       I   O   N




Mrs. Pamela Gordon
Chief Executive
SheffieldTown Hall
Sheffield SI 2HH                                                                 November 16th 1995




Dear Mrs Gordon,

Granada television is in the early stages of preparation for a drama/documentary based
on the aftermath of the Hillsborough disaster.

The two hour programme will be strictly factual and it will be written by the dramatist,
Jimmy McGovern. It is intended for screening Autumn 1996 or Spring 1997.

A great deal of research will be involved in the project and we are writing to you first
as a matter of courtesy and also to solicit your co-operation with the project.

All the bereaved families involved with Hillsborough have been contacted and notified
of our intentions. Mr. McGovern, myself and my colleague Katy Jones recently
attended a meeting of the Hillsborough Family Support Group who have given their
support to the project.

A similar meeting with you would be most welcome.

Your comments on the matter would be greatly appreciated.


Yours faithfully



David Price
Katy Jones                                                                      C.P.U.       CH|EF#XFCUTfVE
                                                                                                  SMjpjIgLO                 C.P.O.
Assistant Producers
Factual Drama                                                                   RES ‘
Granada Television                                                                                              m
Manchester
M60 9EA                                                                                      H .E.U .           A/L




  : (',   R   A       N   A     D . A            T    F.   L   F.   V
   M A N C H E ST E R M 6 0 9E A T E L EPH O N E : 0161 832 7211 G E N E R A L FA X : 0161 872 2029 T EL EX : 668859.

    REGISTERED                OFFICE :      36       GOLDEN         SQUARE ,      LONDON        W 1 R       4 A H

    REGISTERED                NO :   8 40 5 90       ENGLAND
. ^ ' ' l e l e p h o n e f ' (0742) 726444


          Facsimile: (0742) 735003


Telecom Gold 79: LLA 3020


                  Telex:                                                                          COUNCI L

 Your reference:                     GP/262/WJD

    Our reference:                   1 2 th   D ecem b er/   1994

                                                                                                  A d m in is tra tio n & Legal
                   Date:
                                                                                                  D e p a rtm e n t
                                     Mr. K. Co r n s ,                                            Head of Department
                                     Head of committee and                                        Mark Webster, city solicitor
                                     Member Services,                                             Town Hall     .
                                     The city of Liverpool                                        Sheffield
                                     Personnel and Administrative Directorate,                    SI 2HH
                                     PO Box 88,
                                     Municipal Buildings,
                                     Dale Street,
                                     Liverpool,
                                     L69 2DH.

                                     Dear Mr. Corns,

                                     COMMENTS OF BRIAN CLOUGH HE: HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

                                     I refer to your letter of 29th November,     1994 to the chief Executive,
                                     which has been passed to me for reply.

                                     Not having read Mr. Clough's book or indeed seen any of the television
                                     interviews you refer to I don't |feel it appropriate to comment on the
                                     thoughts of Mr. Clough.

                                     The city Councils position is however clear. The Public Inquiry and
                                     resultant reports; the criminal investigation; and the individual
                                     inquests conducted by the South Yorkshire Coroner into the tragic deaths
                                     have provided a substantial amount of information concerning the events
                                     on the day. I see no reason to dispute the findings of Lord chief Justice
                                     Taylor or the South Yorkshire Coroner.

o                                    MaY 1 take this opportunity, on behalf of the city Council, to offer the
                                     sympathy of the people of Sheffield to the families of those bereaved. I
                                     am sure that comments of the nature described in your letter must have
                                     caused only anguish to the families concerned.

                                     Yours sincerely,




                                     city Solicitor and
                                     Head of Administration

                                     pol31




      Keith Treifa
      Sen io r A s s i s t a n t H e a d                                                                                     Elizabeth B ashforth
      (A tirr w uscration)
                                                                                                                             A s s is tan t   (legai)




                                                                    ,.,734264   M r . Derricott
                                                                                               U N     C I L
           w ith compliments                                fct
                                                         tePi B


U X X 3D   Q a u   a c tio n   4 r x |Q > r v ,   o r*   q
                                                                                       Chief Executive
                                                                                       Pamela J, Gordon   ma

 V -e ^ p n s jz   (p^adLa      fjU?aoj2.                                              Town Hall
                                                                                       Sheffield
                                                                  n,B. .M
                                                                  •
                                                                          10.DK
                                                                        ^ i. o u - J   S1 2HH
                                                                                       Tel: (0742) 734000,,
            R360                                                      CL.              Fax: (074i) 73684
                                   The City of Liverpool
                                    P e rs o n n e l & A d m i n i s t r a t i o n D ir e c to r a te
                                   Head of Committee & Member Services
                                   Ken Corns
                                   PO Box 88, Municipal Buildings, Dale Street, Liverpool L69 2DH.
                                   Tel: 051-225 2430 Fax: 051-225 2427
      C L \\\» \w m \\\v


29 November 1994                                 Enquiries to: Mr C
                                                 Direct Line: 051 225 2431
                                                 Your Ref:
                                                 Our Ref:      CMS/CM/LM

The Chief Executive
Sheffield City Council
Town Hall
SHEFFIELD
SI 2HH




Dear Sir
RE:   COMMENTS OF BRIAN CLOUGH RE: HILLSBOROUGH -------
                                                                                                        V|vx
I have been requested to write to you on behalf of the
Hillsborough Disaster Working Party of the City Council to request
your views regarding the comments made by the former Nottingham
Forest Manager Mr Brian Clough in his autobiography and
subsequently repeated on television, that Liverpool supporters
were responsible for the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster in 1989.

The full membership of the Council has expressed its unified^
disgust at the remarks of Mr. Clough as not only has he provided
no evidence to support his "opinion" but he also admits in the
book that after the Disaster "we sat in our dressing room not
knowing what to do or even what was happening outside". If he did
not know what was happening outside, how does he claim to
understand the causes of the Disaster, particularly when the
overwhelming and comprehensive weight of documentary evidence
gathered by Lord Justice Taylor's immense investigation led to "the
conclusion that Liverpool supporters were most clearly not to
blame. This conclusion was recently endorsed by Stephen Dorrell,
the Secretary of State for National Heritage. Why does Mr. Clough
insist on portraying as his own, what is by definition a "second
hand" account of the Disaster and why will he not reveal any
source of his information given that he has clearly admitted no
direct personal knowledge of the events inside or outside the
Leppings Lane terrace on 15 April 1989?
Representatives of the Council and of bereaved families ^and
survivors have travelled to Manchester, London and Nottingham to
attend book signing sessions by Mr. Clough. The attached letter
from the Council has been delivered to him but he has refused to
respond and has also acted with considerable discourtesy in
refusing to speak with any members of the delegation. What has
made this deliberate snub to the people of Liverpool more


al /cttee/p.andr                                                    ration: Derek Griffin
                    Commercial Services; Committee & Member Services; Human Resources;
               Information Technology; Legal Services; Management Support; Public Relations.
offensive has been his willingness, in order to promote a
commercially produced autobiography, to talk at length with
sympathetic elements of the media who have failed abysmally to
engage him in any rigorous form of cross-examination about his
accusation.

As if his views on the Disaster were not enough, Mr. Clough has
subsequently added further rude, gratuitous and thoroughly
derogatory remarks about the people of this City in general and it
is m this light I would encourage you to provide whatever
assistance you may feel is appropriate by way of communicating
your ^own views in order to enable the council to commence
repairing the immense damage and considerable pain caused by these
ignorant and gratuitous remarks.
Yours faithfully




Ken Corns
Head of Committee and
Member Services C-X
                  _A-*




al/cttee/p.andr./letter/BrianClou2
                             The City of Liverpool
                             C h ie fE x e c u tiv e

                             Peter Bounds

                            PO Box 88. Municipal Buildings. Dale Street. Liverpool 169 SDH.
                            Tel: 051*225
                            Tel:051*225                      Fa*:225 2 4 2 7

   17 November

  Dear Mr Clough

  On behalf of all Memberb .of Liverpool City Council and the
  Citizens of Liverpool we wish you to be fully aware of the
  universal disgust with which your recent comments that Liverpool
  supporters were responsible for the Hillsborough Disaster have
  been received in this City.

  The Council is disturbed that you are apparently dismissive and
  contemptuous of the findings of the Interim Report of Lord Justice
  Taylor, which have only very recently been endorsed by the
  Secretary of State for National Heritage, the Rt Hon Stephen
  Dorrell MP who stated in a letter to the Chief Executive of the
  Council dated 13 September 1994 -

    “The Taylor Inquiry involved some 440 officers from the
     West Midlands Police Force. They took some 3,776 statements as
     well^as using video films from three separate sources which
     provided, in all, some 71 hours of further material.   This vast
     store of evidence was carefully sifted, and I think it is fair
     to say that Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report gives a very
     clear picture of.events on the day".

  In the light of this comprehensive, and conclusive body of evidence
  you offer not a single fact to support your own contrary
  viewpoint. Nor, apart from a reference to talking to the
  "policeman who was responsible for opening the gates", do you give
  any indication of the sources of your information and yet your
  account of events, given your location in the dressing room., and
  briefly on the touchline, during the course of the Disaster, is by
  definition "second-hand".

  Nowhere in the book when discussing your perception of
  ''latecomers" causing the Disaster do you address basic facts which
  inconveniently invalidate your entire argument. Examples of these
  facts include:-

   (1) the decision to provide Liverpool fans with the smaller
       allocation of tickets despite their considerably larger
       supporter baBe;

   (2) specifically the allocation of the inferior terraced
       accommodation in the Leppings Lane End, where major crushing
       problems had developed at Semi-Finals in 1981, 1987 and 1988,
       despite immense protests from Liverpool Football Club and its
       supporters



... al/cttee/mfcda/letter/Mr Clough
W h e n calling or telephoning, please ask lor
 (3) the overall allocation of 23 turnstiles in one narrow and
       l ^ S ^ f a n s ^ e r ^ a* n^ . 2^'256 Liverpool fans (an average at
                       It    turnstile) compared to 60 turnstiles across a
       f    w     T    -     ™   admit 29, BOO Nottingham Forest fans (an
       average of 4 9 7 fans per turnstile),*

 (4) the significantly greater distance required for Liverpool
     SShl™*!™0            i° sheffield' the well documented traffic
     v        encountered by bo many, the actions of South
      r ^ S r T ^ U y ^ ^ n f 9^                 t0 traffi° ”hich                     further


 ,5> a iI f^ n etS.!Snhc^re^k’0£f tiTOin the f*Ce °f the
It is difficult to comprehend your motivation in misreDresentincr
^,!°UrCed' un unded' discredited and nonsensical ideas as fact
? ^ T er/ ° Ur m° ^ recent comments on television in wttich you
indulged yourself in a vitriolic attack on the peopl^o?
stereotvoes d n S ^ 11? * ^ J 1 range °f der°STat°ry and insulting
r ? I » u d ^ L , r a « dUC i ^ e r
S I 3 £ n ? 8 S S J ? by a p red isposition * » - " - W . 3 S K .

As your status as a "football personality" waB gathered from vour
considerable "on the field" knowledge, the City Council is
«o?r?he                                                   StatUS t0 comment about an
total ionnranna matter about which you have demonstrated almost
            orance. Bearing in mind the influence which your status
S o n vou              y° Ur ! C t i °v a s 9 f o s s l y i r r e s p o n s i b l e a n d c a l l
S o l o S L H i        5 5 ? ^ de f ^ s t a n t i a t i o n o f y o u r com m en ts o x t o
SK n      ?        ^ a d d i t i o n a l g r i e f , p a in and to r m e n t y o u h a v e
Hillsborough^        t0            bereaved families and survivors of

Yours sincerely


Council lo^ Jetck Spriggs
Cha^p of Hillsborouah Disaster Working Party


Co\iAcillor Peter Miiiea..............
Opposition Spokesperson - Hillsborouqh
Disaster Working Party


Coundillor Jackie McCarthy/
Opposition Spokesperson -^Hillsborough
Disaster Working Party


al/cttee/mfcda/letter/Mr Clough
                                                                 Association of                                                35 Great Smith Street
                                                                                                                                        Westminster
                                                                 Metropolitan                                                     London SW1P 3BJ
                                                                 Authorities                                                DX 119450 Westminster-2
                                                                 Secretary: Rodney Brooke                                Switchboard: 0171-222 8100
                                                                 Deputy Secretary: Joan Jones                             Direct line: 0171-227 2856
                                                                                                                                 Fax:0171-222 0878


Chief Executive                                                  ■our-ref— PS/PD                           / 7^                   15 November 1994
[All Members]                                c.p.u. j
The Clerk
[All Joint Authorities]


                                              U.P.           R.E.U.
                                                                                                              POLICY CIRCULAR 123/94
|' * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
3



COMMUNICATIONS BETWEEN LOCAL AUTHORITIES AND THE ASSOCIATIONS

The associations want to improve communications with local authorities, so as to improve the
quality of service provided by the associations for the benefit of member councils.

Contact officer:   Peter Smith (071 227 2856)
*********************************************************************************

Dear Colleague

We are looking at the possibilities for developing electronic means of communication, whether
E-Mail, electronic document distribution, bulletin boards, databases or other information
provision.

I attach a note prepared by Robert Heyward of the ADC, which sets out the present position,
indicates areas which are being explored and identifies existing and anticipated problems.

We would like to arrange discussions with officers who handle information received form the
Associations. We would like to arrange a meeting with a range of representatives selected to
assure a wide range of roles. The meeting would aim to determine the perspective as seen from
within local authorities, and to look at how the Associations’ communication methods should
develop.

Please direct this note to any person you think appropriate, for example to major users of
material produced by the Associations, or persons who distribute documents from the association
within your authority, or who have designed systems for the internal distribution of paper or
electronic documents. If any recipient is eager to join in these discussions, please contact Peter
Smith at the AMA (35 Gt Smith Street, Westminster, London SW1P 3BJ), giving brief details
of present role and responsibility with respect to communications from the associations, plus any
immediate views on present arrangements or ideas about how arrangements might be improved.

Yours sincerely




                                                                                                                                 15 November 1994
                                                                                                                        W:\WPU\MISC\POL123-9.ALL
M ^ttA^                    £i-y>^j?ej

M ic &       ( p y l,           j j a^ -

                    -fb      ^J 2 o f

 Ot/vi c i   fV ic n ^ L    (ytA.,
                 ASSOCIATION OF COUNTY COUNCILS
                ASSOCIATION OF DISTRICT COUNCILS
            ASSOCIATION OF METROPOLITAN AUTHORITIES


      COMMUNICATIONS WITH MEMBER AUTHORITIES

1.1   As part     of  the planning for a single local authority
       association,  the existing associations are considering
       how   present methods    of   communicating with    member
       authorities can be harmonised and improved.   It is widely
       recognised that the provision of a timely, efficient and
       effective information service to all councils is a key
       task for each association;    improvements in the service
       is one of the aims set out in the draft      Single Local
      Authority Association prospectus in mid-summer 1994 (page
       10, paras 14.1, 14.2, and 14.5.2).

1.2   A great      variety of information is communicated such as
       committee agendas and reports;     circulars (with in-depth,
       coverage of particular topic); digests (aimed to give a
       broad awareness across a wider subject area and point to
       other    sources.) ;  magazines   and newsletters;      nev/s
       releases   to press and media;    publications (for sale);
       communication with advisers;        correspondence,  either
       person to person or more general 'mail s ho t s '.

      EXISTING METHODS

2.1   Almost all the communications described above take place
      through paper documents carried by postal services. Some
      times,   the material  is conveyed    by FAX from    the
      association to the council.     Whether conveyed by the
      association by Royal Mail, other document carriers ox
      FAX,   there is an important further stage of delivery
      within the local council offices.

2.2   From the point of view of the association's secretariats
      and from other    comments, there are notable problems
      associated with this method.  These include:-

              the inability    to assess whether  information is
              reaching its    target audience;     much of    the
              material   addressed to the chief executive or to
              generic post    titles does not reach the intended
              recipient;

               the   difficulty   in   obtaining reaction    from
               recipients (when requested); issuing paper is not
             ■ a very interactive process;  reaction sometime has
               to be prompted by follow-up telephone calls;

              blurred    protocols    for    addressing  mailed
              information,   for example to the chief executive
              when another person is      the intended   active
              recipient;   this causes delays and presents a
              further obstacle to the information reaching the
              target person.

                                1
      I




                 paper mountains are created:   there is evidence
                 that councillors and senior officers are becoming
                 bogged down by in-coming paperwork.  The practice
                 of broadcasting often repeated material to try to
                 ensure  that some information reaches the target
                 audience adds to this problem.

                 communicating by paper documents can be expensive
                 for the associations in both printing and mailing
                 costs:   a substantial time can elapse between the
                 completion of a document by the author         and
                 despatch  to the carrier if a large document   (or
                 one with a large report attached) is sent to many
                 recipients.

          DEVELOPMENT OF ELECTRONIC METHODS

3.1       The electronic   transmission of the image of a paper
          document  (FAX)  has become commonplace,  especially for
          news releases communicated to the media, and short items
          broadcast to mailing lists.

3.2       The items transmitted by FAX or as paper documents    more
           and more often originate from word processing software or
           other electronic forms.

3.3       The associations    have each established a local     area
           network internally and are now inter-linked by a wide
           area network which carries electronic mail and otirer
           electronic documents between the associations offices.

3.4       The associations    variously have experienced of a  very
           limited number of 'external' users accessing information
           on in-house networks, including staff working from home,
           advisers and councillors.*

3.5       The associations (or other central bodies such LGMB) also
          have a number of data bases which are accessed by staff,
          often to answer queries received by telephone or by
          letter.

3.6       There are now a number of other organisations which
          provide electronic communications to local authorities,
          such as :-

          *      Local Government Chronicle   Network
          *      Local Government Network
          *      ICL Community Network

3.7       The associations are conducting limited experiments with
           Local Government Network and with the ICL network.      We
           understand that   the Department of the ' Environment has
           plans   for limited experimentation     with the     Local
           Government   Chronicle Network,   as   part of a wider
           investigation into the possibility of electronic exchange
           information with local authorities.


                                   2
3.8   The associations are aware of other organisations    which
      ,act as infrastructure providers or information carriers
       oriented towards the local government market, for example
       London On-line.    These  facilities   can sometimes be
       gateways  to further information services, for access  to
       other networks which in future might include information
       sources provided by the associations.

3.9   There are other    more general electronic message and
      electronic   document ' carrying   services,   which   act
      primarily as information carriers, with little or no role
      as information providers (such a British Telecom, Mercury
      etc).    In addition, some local authorities communicate
      electronically   with   other    external    organisations
       (unrelated to the associations or central bodies), eg
      major suppliers,   banks,  health authorities and local
      organisations.

       GUIDING THE ASSOCIATIONS APPROACH

4.1   The associations would like to gain some of the benefits
       of the electronic communications      methods,  such    as
       improved interactivity,   improved audience targetting,
       fast delivery, improved access to information by member
       authorities.   We are also aware of the importance of the
       distribution arrangements within a local authority and a
       number of snags which could arise when the visibility of
       paper document   is lost.   For' example,  documents may
       become lost in electronic mail and in the same way as a
       document is lost in local authority internal distribution
       arrangements;  specially designed layouts or graphics can
       be lost thereby reducing impact, unless the software and
       devices available   to recipient can regenerate      these
       successfully.             .

4.2    We would like to arrange for discussions with officers
       who handle information received from the associations.
       We would like to arrange a meeting with a range, of
       representatives selected to assure a wide range of roles.
       The meeting • would aim to determine the perspective as
       seen from within local authorities, and to look at how
       the associations' communication methods should develop.

4.3    Please direct   this note      to   any person you    think
       appropriate,  for example      to major users of material
       produced by the associations, or persons who distribute
       documents  from the association within your authority, or
       who have designed systems for the internal distribution
       of paper or electronic documents. If any recipient       is
       eager to joint in these discussions, please contact Peter
       Smith at the AMA, (35 Great Smith Street,      Westminster,
       London SW1P   3B J ), giving brief details of present  role
       and responsibility with respect to communications      from
        the associations,    plus any immediate views on present
       arrangements or     ideas about how arrangements might be
        improved.

ROBERT HEYWARD 9-1 1 -94                    /1994 maantz las

                                3
   R3719                                                                        Sch 9160
                               CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM

From   c ity Solicitor and Head of              To The Chief Executive
       Administration

Date          3 U U 1991
Ref. GP/262/WJF
Tel. Ext4264 - Mr. Derricott                    Ref.




       Safety of Sports Grounds
       Coroner's Inquest
       Hillsborough Football Stadium/Safety Certificate

       I refer to the attached letter from Dr. S. L. Popper to yourself dated 3rd
       May, 1991.

       For your information, I attach a copy of my reply to Dr. Popper dated 21st
       May, together with his acknowledgment dated 17th June, 1991.

       I anticipate that the Council's Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group will
       discuss the comments raised by Dr. Popper at a meeting to be arranged after
       the World Student Games. Following that meeting, the matter will be referred
       to the Licensing Panel and a written report will be prepared.


       Enc.




       MS5/AA
                                          OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR           MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                               WATERY STREET
                                                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                               SHEFFIELD
                                                       (West District)
                                                                               S3 7ET
             STEFAN L. POPPER, LL.B.. B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                           CORONER


                                      Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721        ..Sr.d..May.......... 19 9.1...




        SLP/JT.




        Mrs. P. Gordon,
        Chief Executive,                                                   j E T ] - 7 MAY 1991 j C!;,
        Sheffield City Council,
        Town Hall,
        Sheffield.                                                          u.p. J        !


f   )    Dear Mrs. Gordon,

         Re: HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL STADIUM/SAFETY CERTIFICATE.

         You will of course be aware that I recently completed the Hillsborough
         Inquests. The safety certificate which was issued in 1979 dealt with various
         matters and in particular capacities in different locations within the
         ground, but did not deal in any way with the area immediately outside the
         turnstiles but within the curtilage of the ground.

         You will be aware that a considerable number of problems were experienced in
         this area which eventually led to the opening of large exit gates.

         I also noticed that in many respects, the area outside the turnstiles had
         remarkable similarities with the terracing in the sense that it was a
         relatively confined space with narrow exits at the front.  It also of course
         differed in that the population in this area by definition should be
         transient whereas the population in the stands and terraces is more
         permanent during the duration of the football match.
( ]                                   ‘
         In view of the difficulties which were experienced m this area, it occurred
                                                                                     ,
         to me that one ought perhaps to consider whether the safety certificate
         should make provision for the control of numbers and any other matters which
         may be deemed to be appropriate in the area outside the turnstiles.

         I appreciate that this is a difficult problem, as by definition the counting
         mechanisms which are in place are in fact the turnstiles, but given the
         history which had been experienced at the Leppings Lane end, I think it might
         be appropriate if the question was considered with a view to seeing whether
         there are any practical safety matters which could be implimented to seek to
         avoid a repetition of difficulties immediately outside the turnstile area
          (and indeed for that matter, outside the perimeter gates).

         I would be grateful if you could please refer this matter to the appropriate
         officers in the council for their consideration and for any necessary action
         which may be deemed to be necessary.

          I am sending a copy of this letter to Sheffield Wednesday Football Club in



R8606
BAGABB
                                          2




              order that they might be aware of the point which I am raising with you.

              Yo




     ("   )




     o



 I
II
   GP/262/WJD

   21st May, 1991


Dr. S. L. Popper,
South Yorkshire Coroner (West District),
c/o Medico Legal Centre,
Watery Street,
SHEFFIELD.
S3 7ET

Dear Dr. Popper,

Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (As Amended)
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
Hillsborough Football Stadium - Safety Certificate

I refer to your letter to the Chief Executive (Sheffield City Council)
dated 3rd May, 1991, which has been passed to my Chief Licensing Officer,
Sports Grounds (Mr. Derricott) for attention.

The points you raise in the letter have been noted and the letter itself
is to be placed before the next General Meeting of the Council's Safety of
Sports Grounds Advisory Group, for discussion.

For your information, alterations are currently being undertaken at the
Leppings Lane End (West Stand) of the Hillsborough Sports Ground. The
Council have approved a scheme which details a new line for turnstiles and
a proposal to seat the lower terrace area.  I enclose a plan of the scheme
for your information.

You will note that the new line of turnstiles allows a much greater
freedom of movement in this area. This coupled with the lower number of
spectators accessing the West Stand, I feel provides for improved
spectator 3 a f e t y in this area.

I will write to you again when your letter has been formally discussed and
reported to the Licensing Panel of the Council.

Yours sincerely,




City Solicitor ana
Head of Administration


MS2/AA




                                  734264 - Mr. Derricott
                                              OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR            MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                                    WATERY STREET
                                                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                           (West District)          SHEFFIELD
                                                                                    S3 7ET
                 STEFAN L. POPPER, LL.B., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                               CORONER

                                          Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721
                                                                                    .1.7.th...af..Jtune.......... 199.1.,




            SLP/JT.
            GP/262/WJD.


            Mark Webster, City Solicitor
            Head of Department,
            Town Hall,
            Sheffield. Si 2HH


            Dear Mr. Webster,

(       l   Re: Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (As Amended), Sheffield Wednesday
            Football Club, Hillsborough Football Stadium - Safety Certificate._____


            Thank you for your letter of the 21st of May.  I note what you say and am
            grateful for the information which you have supplied to me.




                                                                 ADM INISTRATE.
                                                                  CITY  7"     -r
                                                                soucmon I




R6606

BAJAAK
                                      OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR                   MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                                   WATERY STREET
                                              SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                   (West District)
                                                                                   SHEFFIELD
                                                                                   S3 7ET
         STEFAN L POPPER. LL.B., B.MED.SCI., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                      CORONER


                                  Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721                       ..28..March... 199.1..

          Our Ref:             SLP/LPL

          Mrs P Gordon, MA
          Chief Executive
          Sheffield City Council
          Town Hal 1
          SHEFFIELD
          SI


          Dear Mrs Gordon
          The Inquests now having been concluded, I want to take this
          opportunity of thanking you and, through you, all your staff
          who have been involved in setting up the facilities which we
          have enjoyed and in maintaining arrangements which ensured
          that we were able to proceed with a substantial degree of
          comfort.
         Apart from those members of staff whom one might obviously think
         about, I want to specifically include the reception staff and
         the security staff, who as far as I am concerned, both in and
         around the Chamber as well as in the car park, have proved to
         be courteous, interested and helpful, and I would be grateful if
         you could pass on, as you may think appropriate, my thanks.
         I am also exceedingly conscious of the very great inconvenience
         which my occupation of the Chamber must have caused to the
         councillors and I would be most grateful if you could pass on
         to them my sincere thanks for their generosity and patience.
         I enclose for your information a copy of a letter in similar vein
         which I have addressed to the Leader Mr Clive Betts.
C>       Yours Sincerely

                                                                                            JJUb

     y   o   l   tfur/'trK
         H M Coroner
                             /,                                                                   3 APS W .V p y g l

                                           yv,v :                                                                   z
                                                                       /CsC~
                                       \




                                                                               l— <V\ S


                                                                               ’   1   '             *
    n3719
                             C IT Y OF SHEFFIELD
                                                                                                     3 9160
                                                                                                     c h
                                                         r/j e m o r a n d u p j i

            Mr. J. R. W. Sewell, Principal                   Mr. H. M. Webster,
            Solicitor, Group B                               City Solicitor
            10th December, 1990
            JEWS
            4016
Tel. Ext.                              t'J U l
                                                      Ref.                                            C.'V .

                                                    kPrQ,                            Sj
                                                                                          r>
                                                                                C !             - n vw / y     '
                                  14 DEC 1990
                                                                                               t a
                                         '.E.C.U.
       Hi.11sborouqh Disag        d

       I thank you for your memorandum of the 4th December giving me an update on
       recent developments in relation to proposals for distributing the residual
       monies held in the charitable trust. As requested I have made some
       preliminary informal enquiries at officer level in relation to the
       Hillsborough Community Trust although frcm the limited feedback about the
       organisation I do not feel in a position to offer much reassurance to assist
       the trustees of the Hillsborough Disaster Fund.

       Although as suggested I began my enquiries through the Employment Department
       the main lines of enquiry have been through colleagues in Family and Cannunity
       Services Department and Housing Department. The contacts in Family and
       Ccarrnunrty Services have been Lena Jones, Principal Community Worker
       (Tel. 4882) and more particularly Stuart Hukin at the Langsett Advice Centre
       (Tel. 330366). The additional enquiries of the Housing Department have been
       made via Andrew Toogood's contacts.

      It is evident that the organisation came into existence in relation to the
      Neighbourhood Revitalisation Scheme in the area which was supported by the
      Department of the Environment and has new run its course. Accordingly the
      focus was very much directed towards property and environinental issues and the
      improvement of housing. Evidently an interest was taken in various particular
      local schemes e.g. Regents Court Flats, and much of the work appears to be
      directed towards acquiring properties and improving them. I have deliberately
      not had any direct contact with the organisation itself for present purposes
      but am aware of appropriate contact points and note that it is based in
      premises let at a peppercorn_from the SYPTE based at 1 - 13 Holme lane. The
      organisation evidently also involves itself in advice work and indeed had two
      volunteers working at the Langsett Advice Centre. On a wider ccaxmunity brief
      I understand that it also claimed credit in the campaign opposing the siting
      of the tennis courts for the World Student Games in Hillsborough Park. At
      member level I understand that Councillors Mrs. Jackson and Meade have taken a                           //
      direct interest in same of the activities of the Trust and you may wish to
      find an opportune moment at a meeting of the Policy Committee or City Council
      to ascertain whether Mrs. Jackson has any clear views about the irerits and
      activities of the organisation.
                                                                                                               I
      I was a little surprised to hear that the Hillsborough Ccxrenunity Development
      Trust had already submitted a formal application with supporting prospectus to
      the Hillsborough Disaster Fund trustees and to that extent the trustees m y
      already be possessed of more information that ourselves. Andrew's enquiries
      indicated that they appear to be a pressure group for housing improvements and
      as yet it is not clear whether they are wholly constituted in their present
      form as neither officers in Family and Ccsrimnity Services Department or
      Housing Department have been able to furnish me with a copy of the body's
      formal constitution. Neither of the service departments approached provide
      any grant aid to the Hillsborough Trust and whilst there was no objection as
      such expressed in relation to the activities both Andrew      I gained a strong
                                   -   2   -




impression that no great supportive enthusiasm was being voiced. On the
Family and Community Services side there appeared to be some concern that the
emphasis on income generating activities may potentially create a conflict
with the interests of the wider community. In conclusion it seems to its that
one difficulty is that we are dealing with a new untested organisation and
therefore do not knew very much about it. Secondly I do wonder to what extent
the nature of the activities as indicated is comfortably reconciled with the
types of purpose for which the trustees of the Hillsborough Disaster Fund are
looking to support. Without seeking to be critical I simply contrast the
nature of the activities with those of the hospitals and other Sheffield based
projects suggested for consideration and wonder to what extent they would
appeal to the sensitivities of the bereaved families and those providing
donations.

I am sorry that without contacting the representatives of the Hillsborough
Community Development Trust themselves it is difficult to give sufficient
detail to their activities or do their claims justice and I would reiterate my
suggestion that you perhaps take the opportunity to take further soundings at
member level by mentioning the organisation to Councillor Mrs. Jackson. We do
need to tread carefully as there would appear to be quite a strong hope if not
expectation on the part of the local trust that they will be receiving some
support from the Hillsborough Disaster Fund.
                           CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM

From      Head of Department               |   To    J R W Sewell
                                           1         Principal Solicitor
                                           |
                                           1
Date      4 December 1990                  1         cc   Chief Executive
Ref       MW/GJ                            1
Tel Ext   4018 - Mr Webster                j   Ref
                                           1




PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL


HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER FUND

I return herewith your file, for which loan many thanks, together.with a note
of the meeting which took place in the Chief Executive’s office on Monday
3 December, a copy of the typed list which, as you will notice, is headed
"Strictly Confidential", setting out possible areas of residual gifts over,
together with comments on such list.

My purpose in writing is threefold; firstly, as indicated, to return the file,
secondly to update you on the position and thirdly to ask if you could make
some discrete enquiries, possibly of colleagues outposted to Employment with
regard to what we know of the Hillsborough Community Trust and in particular
whether there are any areas with regard to its proposed activities which could
or should be avoided and in particular whether and to what extent the Council
would be able to reassure the Hillsborough Trustees that we can keep a
watching brief on the Hillsborough Community Trust’s future activities.
NOTE OF A MEETING TO DISCUSS DISTRIBUTION OF RESIDUAL FUNDS -
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER APPEAL


Those presents-   Norman Adsetts, Sheffield Trustee
                  Michael Reddington, Treasurer of the Fund
                  Councillor C J C Betts, Leader of the Council
                  Pamela Gordon, Chief Executive
                  Mark Webster, City Solicitor
                  John Pilling, Assistant Director F & CS

Michael Reddington opened the conversation by saying that the point had been
reached where the  Trustees wished to wind up the Discretionary Fund, in
connection withwhich they had set a deadline of the end of June 1990 for
claims and so far some 900 people had claimed. He anticipated there would be
about £1 million left for distribution which the Trustees felt should be paid
out directly for beneficiaries, there is then the question of interest (see
below).

Therefore any other payments, ie residual payments should be paid out of the
Charitable Fund which has currently got a balance of £800,000 approximately,
with an anticipated payment coming from the Scottish FA. Due to recent
relaxation of the rules it is possible now for the Trustees to transfer the
residue of the interest out of the Discretionary Fund to the Charitable Fund
and therefore get the tax back   on that matter, so it is anticipated that there
may be something in the regionof £1 million for distribution.

He went on to indicate that when they had consulted earlier for ideas on the
distribution of the residue, the three authorities at that stage had indicated
that it was far too early to think about, but now that time had obviously
arrived, he talked in terms of the distribution of the £1 million which would
be in the Charitable Fund, and   that although some would probably be reserved
for future hardship for the primary beneficiaries the balance would then go to
Sheffield, Merseyside and Nottinghamshire for specific projects as a memorial
to the disaster and/or an acknowledgement of contributions.    There would of
course be given for quasi charitable purposes.

He added that such monies should not be used to relieve the Clubs or statutory
bodies of their legal responsibilities but he felt they could be used to
reflect public sympathy for the activities of such bodies, in particular to
assist them in areas where they wouldn’t otherwise be able to make progress
and here reference should be made to the typed list which was circulated.   In
particular, non-statutory areas which could contribute to the safety of the
grounds might be an appropriate niche for contributions such as the St John’s
Ambulance.  The Bereavement Forum was discussed and universally accepted as an
appropriate body to receive funds, particularly the counselling aspect of it,
as this could then assist individual police officers.  In addition, another
aspect that was suggested was the Hillsborough Community Trust subject to
feedback from Council Officers and Members as to the soundness of that body
and, in particular, whether the Authority could or would be prepared to give
any help and assistance with regard thereto in the future.

As to the future process, there would be a Trust Meeting later this week which
would agree the amount of money available and approve a similar list to that
circulated with the scales and money attached thereto, they would then go back
to the bodies
NX




     on the list and precisely determine the terms and the objects for which money
     should be made available and at that stage they would come back and discuss
     local proposals with the City Council prior to actually notifying such bodies
     of the sums they are to receive.




                                                                                     o
                               C o /v f,
                                                                                                           V /^




                HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER APPEAL DRAFT MEMORANDUM

            ON SUPPORT TO ORGANISATIONS FROM CHARITABLE FUND



                               SHEFFIELD-BASED PROJECTS




                       1)   Hospitals
                                                                      /V       t       .   e
       ~T                        Royal Hallamshire—   1— ° T]l        7'^aA (
                                 Northern General — [ ^ I x W c ^ w ^ 4.-^
                                 Keighley
                                                                  .%4-? m^ loTSrt ■—~—
                                                                  (lj L6l>vi'v^t |
                                                                            • jZ
                       !)   Hillsborough Community}^ ^                     ^       7               ? (_> * ^ L (L,
■J                                                                                             ____ JWy Q^\Xr-j'
                                                                                                               &yp

 'A o l A              3) . Sheffield Emerqency Services " ^
                        c^JuJ>Ow St John's Ambulance         ^^Ye-C


                       4)   Churches


                       5)   Sheffield University/Polytechnic ^                                 ~-p                  ^   J
                                 Memorial Scholarships       /


                       6)   Youth Training Projects
                                                                     V
                                                              )' v V    cJ* A d ^ J                 l, j z \   el
                                                              rc o ty m



                                   '-cV''       (Vf       feU .   a u /v                            rJ U U X
                                 fk

            k                     \ lXm M             ;Aif^                                             /j/2» C*o
                ,vV\

                                  {         J         I                                        i     //
   WNA/CMR/MLC/3.12 .90
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER APPEAL - COMMENTS ON THE LIST

With regard to:-

1     Hospitals

      It was felt here that the sort of issues that might be appropriate for a
      grant would be waiting and sleeping facilities near to the Intensive
      Care facilities for relatives of those injured, plus similar
      improvements to Casualty and perhaps small items of equipment which
      wouldn’t otherwise be purchased such as the "Disaster" trolley.

2     With regard to the community, the Hillsborough Community Trust was seen
      as being possibly an appropriate body as were the Owlerton Church and
      the Local Boys’ Club whose buildings were used during the emergency.

3     Emergency Services

      This is intended to cover Social Services, the Bereavement Forum, the
      Police and the St John’s Ambulance, but in the event it was felt that of
      such bodies those that might be more appropriate were the St John’s
      Ambulance and the Bereavement Forum (see main text).

4     The churches were mentioned. At thispoint the Chief   Executive
      indicated that the Officers felt that the combination of parts of 2, 3
      and 4 were felt to be appropriate.

With regard to 5 and 6, these were seen to be some kind of "In Memorial"
contributions and the Youth Training Projects could possibly be those
identified with the Football Clubs.  It was pointed out that similar lists
were available for Liverpool but were probably more community-related and did
not include the hospitals, but Nottingham had difficulty in putting forward
any specific proposals.  It was re-emphasised that there were three
geographical strands to the distribution of residual funds, plus the need to
achieve a particular purpose.
                       CoMfiQeAiTf/Gft^




            HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER APPEAL DRAFT MEMORANDUM
          ON SUPPORT TO ORGANISATIONS FROM CHARITABLE VTTTJn



                      SHEFFIELD-BASED PROJECTS




              1)   Hospitals

                        Royal Hallamshire
                        Northern General
                        Keighley
                                                      u c n 'r , r J ^ o t e - L o o K * 3 ~ % I
                                                      {+C- / pias>1 ^~~^JUa^ cQ
              2)   Hillsborough Community


              3)   Sheffield Emergency Services
                     ^ St John's Ambulance

              4)   Churches


              5)   Sheffield University/Polytechnic
                        Memorial Scholarships


              6)   Youth Training Projects




                   ~ — f                                              C-.




     Ch




WNA/CMR/MLC/3.12.90
                                    & » * >

                                ^     X   3   T   S     s    2 i w >             r    r    1.
C.EX/RF

9th     November, 1990


Hr. N. Adsetts, QBE,
Chairman,
Sheffield Insulations Group PLC
Hillsborough Works,
SHEFFIELD.
S6 2 LW


Dear Norman,

Further to my letter of the 2nd November and to the
further telephone conversations between our
secretaries I confirm that Monday, the 3rd December
at 2*00 p.m. will be convenient for the meeting to
discuss the Hillsborough Disaster Appeal.


Yours sincerely,




      PLEASE NOTE THAT A PRE MEETING WILL BE IN HELD
      IN MY OFFICE AT 3.00 p.m. ON THE 30th NOVEMBER.




      c.c.   City Solicitor
             John Pilling, F & CS Dept.
                           CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM

            City Solicitor & Head of Admin|     To           lACV-UL1 vC
                                                      Chief Executive          .
 From
                                                              ( V . Mte, % o |H    a V    5 p i-
 Date       7th November 1990                                  CuJUl «
 Ref        MW/PSW
 Tel Ext.   4018




 RE;    HIM-SBOROUGH DISASTER APPEAL - APPLICATION OF FUNDS FOR RESIDUAL
 PURPOSES

 With reference to your copy letter of 2nd November 1990 to Norman Adsetts
 concerning this matter setting out the arrangements for the proposed meeting
 on 3JQJ0 L -M e » e « b » r , I thought it appropriate that I raise again the previous
 communications we have had on this issue, and in particular, the question of
 the involvement of John Pilling of the Social Services Department given the
 involvement of the Steering Group which he chaired as I believe that you
 previously indicated acceptance of the Steering Group approach referred to in
 the memorandum I copied to you in May of this year.,

  Accordingly, I would suggest that it would be appropriate for John Pilling to
1 be involved either in the meeting itself or probably in a pre-meeting
  involving you and I so that we could ascertain the most recent views of the
  Steering Group on this issue.

  If you agree, I will contact John perhaps in the first instance to ask him to
  do an update note for you and I prior to any such pre-meeting taking place .
C.EX/RF

2nd November, 1990




Mr. N. Adsetts, OBE,
Chairman,
Sheffield Insulations Group PLC
Hillsborough Works,
Sheffield.
S6 2LW


Dear Norman,

I refer to your letter of the 30th October and to
the subsequent telephone conversations between our
secretaries and confirm that the Leader and I
would be free to discuss the proposals for the
residual uses of the funds of the Hillsbooough
Disaster Appeal at 2.00 p.m on the 30th November,
in my office at the Town. Hall.

I understand this is convenient to you and Mike
Reddington and I have asked Mark Webster, the City
Solicitor and Head of Administration to join the
meeting.


Yours sincerely,




C m £*   Councillor C J C Betts
         City Solicitor/Head of Administration
WNA/MLC
                                                                                           Sheffield
                                                                                          Insulations
30 October 1990                                                                          Broun
                                                                                         pic
Ms P Gordon
Chief Executive
Sheffield City Council
Town Hall                                                                                   T      *
SHEFFIELD   SI 2HH

                                                                                       k i v A"t
                                                                                                       R.E.U. P.E.C.U.


You will recall that in June, after a meeting of the trustees of
the Hillsborough Disaster Appeal, there was a luncheon at which
we gave a report to Clive and yourself, on the progress which had
been made.

We envisaged then that the bulk of the fund would have been paid
out to claimants directly affected by the Disaster by September,
and that we would then turn our consideration to "residual"
payments in recognition of services performed at the time, in
memory of the event and its impact on the community, and perhaps
in continuation of some support services.

We have reached this stage of our work somewhat later than we had
expected but we now have a draft schedule of "residual" payments
on which we would like to consult the sponsoring bodies of the
Trust.

I have already spoken to Clive, who                              suggested that I should make
arrangements with you for a meeting                              in which Michael Reddington,
the Trust Fund Manager, and I would                             meet Clive and yourself for a
brief discussion if possible before                             the next meeting of the Trust
on Thursday, 6 December.

I have asked your secretary to see whether we can arrange such a
m e e t i n g towards the end of November, or in early December.
N e e d l e s s to say,        if you wi s h to add any other council
re p r e s e n t a t i v e s to the co nsul t i n g group this is wholly
acceptable.

With best wishes

Yours sincerely




NORMAN ADSETTS OBE
Chairman
                        Hillsborough Works, Sheffield S6 2LW, England
                        Telephone 0742 852852
                       Fax Groups 1/2/3 0742 341602
                      Registered Office: Hillsborough Works, Sheffield S62LW, Registeredin EnglandNa 998314
         NORMAN ADSETTS


  Tel;    852852



  1.      Hillsborough Disaster Appeal

      Would like a further meeting with

    Chief Executive
  Leader
  Mike Reddington - Trust Fund Manager
  N.A.

  to talk about a list of proposals for making
  some payments to community and charitable
  bodies in Sheffield.     This is at the
  request of the Sheffield Trustee who wish
  the Council to be consulted on the residual
  uses of the Fund and comments sought before
  the Trust makes a final decision.


  NA is intending to write to Chief Executive
  but wanted to warn you aboutthe approach first.



 The meeting has to take place before the
 6th December the date of the next Trustees
 meeting




 NB      Would you wish the City Solicitor to join you




 RF-30/10/90



 %                 0_A—   \                     £ VSM


6 0                                                      J        K
                   \          f-s   ,,   i/I                      .

                              w                •V"   "       ■B - ° ~
                                E L E C T R IC IT Y C O N S U M P T IO N IN K W H
                   150,000




                   100,000
kWh per year




                   50,000




                           O                                                                      11       m         i i i       r i i i i i
                                                   14 2118 8 293215 2 7 3 5 3 0 2 6 2 5     7 33 12 10 19 4 2316 13 2417         11 2B 3 1 2 2 2 0 3 6 5
                                                                                                                           F & C S Residential




                                H E A TIN G FUEL C O N S U M P T IO N IN TH E R M S
                   5 0 ,0 0 0




                   40.000—
1harms per year




                                                              i niI !




                                 1 21 15 29 2 30 9 14 27 2 0 4 12 IS 31 16 2 5 3 2 3 3 17 13 5 3 5 2 6 3 7 3 4 2 S 2 3 10 11 36 7 3 3 2 4 19 S 2 2 6 3
                                                                                                                             F & C S Residential




            1  Ash House                        11   Foxwood                              21   Lytton                              31 S e v e n f i e l d
            2  Bole Hill View                   12   Green Oak View                       22   Mortoraley H o u s e                32 S h i r l a n d
            3  B r i erlev Field                13   Hawkhills                            23   Netherlea                           33 S p r i n g w o o d
            4  Srinclirfe Tower                 14   Hazlehurst                           24   Newton Grange                       34 T a n n e r y Lo
            5  E u r n t Tree Croft             15   Hillcrest                            25   Norbury                             35 T h e L e e s
            6  Castelavn                        16   Housteads                            26   P a d d o c k Hill                  36 T h o r n l e a
            '7
               Cotleign                         17   Hurlfield View                       27   Park Grange                         37 W e s t b r o o k
            >v Deerlands                        18   Kirkhill                             28   Primrose View                       38 W i l l o w c r o f
            9 Edgelow                           19   Knowle Hill                          29   Ravenscroft
            0 Ellesmere                         20   L o n g l e y Hill                   30   Roe Wood House
From         C HI E F E X E C U T I V E                              To     CITY S O L I C I T O R / H E A D OF
                                                                            ADMINISTRATION
Date         29th October,            1990
Ref.         C . EX /R F
Ttl. E xt.   4 000                                                   Ref.




             HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
             CO U N C I L ' S E M E R G E N C Y A R R A N G E M E N T S



             As yo u k n o w the Le a d e r has m e n t i o n e d several times
             that there are o u t s t a n d i n g isses w h i c h ne ed to be
             re vi e w e d and r e p or te d back to Co mmi tte e.      I am
             ncv; c l e a r that these relate to the o p e r a t i o n of our
             own e m e r g e n c y services at the time of the disaster.

             I u n d e r s t a n d that var io us i n a d e q u a c i e s in our
             op e r a t i o n a l a r r a n g e m e n t s we re d e m o n s t r a t e d (e.g.
             lack of mo b i l e telephones) and some co n f u s i o n as to
             who was s u p p o s e d to be do in g what.                      Some points
             were n o t e d in a m e m o r a n d u m at the time from Ray
             Gridley.             I presume these m a t t e r s wer e followed
             up and im pr o v e m e nt s to our pr a c t i c e s made.

             Wo ul d y o u please ar ra n g e for this ma t t e r to be
             re vi e w e d and for a short re po r t to be put to
             C o m mi tt ee ou t l in i n g the issues and the act io n taken.
             Could this be done In time for the next mee ti ng of the
             a p p r o p r i a t e Co m m i t t e e (? Policy).
                                   CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM

   From:    MARTIN MANBY                            To:   CITY TREASURER
            DIRECTOR OF SOCIAL SERVICES

   Date:    31ST OCTOBER 1990                             c.c. Chief Executive
   Ref:     MM/SMJ
   Tel Ext: 4844                                   Ref:




           ^HILLSBOROUGH INQUEST

           \ou will retnemoer that F. & C.S. established a link team to support
           relatives of the victims of the Hillsborough disaster' which was wound up
           after the first stage of inquests earlier this year. Funding for this
           v;as approved with the support of the Leader.

           F. & C.S. is now considering providing support to relatives attending
           the inquests when these re-open on the 19th November. The inquests can
           continue for three months.

           Additional funding is required for this purpose involving F. & C.S.
           staff and possibly with assistance from voluntary organisations.

           It would not be possible to contain this expenditure within cash limits
           and constraints of the moratorium.

           I anticipate expenditure of £10,000 this year.     Detailed costings have
           nut yet been worked out.

           As we have discussed, it w'ould be most helpful if you could agree to
           expenditure for this year being funded separately from F, & C.S. cash
           limits.

           Finn thanks for your help.




           Martin Manby
           Director of Social Services




COFAFC
                                                                                       C     I        T        Y
   w ith compliments                                                                   COUNCI L


                                                                                       D ep artm en t o f Land & Planning
    Chief Executive                                                                    Director
                                                                                       R D Jones   mrtpi



                                                                                       Property Services Division
                                                                                       Property Services M anager
                                                                                       Colin D Farmer      BA(Hons) B Arch(Hons) RIBA ACIArb


                                                                                       Town Hall
                                                                                       Sheffield
The officer dealing with this matter is. ...Mr,   C.,.. Smedl.ey   (0742) 73   .4557   S1 2HH
          The o ffic e r
   d ealing w it h this
 co rresp o n de n ce is:
                               Mr. Smedley
          Telephone:
                               73-4557
                    Fax:    (0742) 735002


     Your reference:
                                                                                          c I T    Y

      O ur reference:
                                                                                          COUNCI L
                               CS/E.80 C
                  Date:
                               25th October 1990

                                                                                        D epartm ent of Land & Planning
                                                                                        Director
                               TO THE MEMBERS OF
                                                                                        R. D. Jones m ktpi
                               THE CITY COUNCIL
                                                                                        Directorate

                                                                                        Town Hall
                                                                                        Sheffield
                                                                                        S1 2HH


                               Hillsborough Inquest : For Information


                              Dear Councillor,

                              I am writing to inform you that consequent upon the decision to hold
                              the Hillsborough Inquest in the Town Hall the user of the allocated
                              rooms has been agreed with the Coroner as follows.

                              1.      The Council Chamber is to be used as the Court Room with the
                                      Gallery being used by the press. The Council Chamber will be
                                      available for scheduled Council Meetings on 31.10.90, 28.11 90
                                      9.1.91.                                                      ’                      •'

                              2.      The Ante-Room is to be used as the Jury Room.

                                     In this connection, in view of the necessity to keep the Jury
                                     isolated, it is proposed that the male Councillor^ toilets
                                     adjoining this room be made unisex for the duration of the
                                     Inquest and be available only to the Jury. The toilets at the
                                     entrance to the Library will continue to be available to
                                     Councillors and hopefully they will prove to be adequate.
                                     Alternative means of storage provision for Councillors unable to
                                     use their lockers by this proposal is being investigated and I
                                     hope to be able to come back to those affected Councillors
                                     shortly with further .information.

                             3.      Committee Room ^ is to be used by the Coroner as his office,
                                     retiring room and document storage centre.

                                     The Mandela Room will have facilities provided to enable the
                                     Court proceedings to be observed and is to be used by those
                                     member’s of the general public who are unable to find seats in the
                                     m ai n Court Room. The press will operate from a cordoned off area
                                     of this room.

                             5.      The Reception Room is to be used by the families attending the
                                     Inquest, partly as a rest area and partly as a place where they
                                     may hold discussions with their advisers. To this end the room
                                     will be informally and loosely divided by means of screens into a
                                     number of enclosures to facilitate the above.

  p iea;£ a dr.-tss                                                                     fS                   /L10A3E
c c ^ r r . o " . s to
                                   D e p a r t m e n t o f Land a n d P l a n n i n g
                                                     DIRECTORATE
6.   A number of other small offices will also be made available for
     stenographers, coroner's support staff and the police.

It has been agreed with the Coroner that the Council Chamber will be
available for the monthly Council meetings during the currency of the
Inquest.

It is anticipated that the Inquest will commence on Friday 16th
November and will continue, with an adjournment over Christmas, into
the New Year. It will of course be necessary for the facilities being
provided to be erected or otherwise put in place and tested prior to
the Court sitting and to this end Council and other business in the
rooms mentioned above will cease with effect from Monday 12th
November.

I shall write to you again should there be any substantial departures
from the above proposals prior to and during the Inquest itself.

Please do not hesitate to contact Mr. Smedley on extension 4557 if
there is any aspect of the above which you feel requires further
clarification.

Yours faithfully,




Director
    R3719
                                                                                                                                                     Sch 9160
                                                CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM
**          y
From                C o u n c illo r C liv e     B e tts
                                                                                      To              C h ie f E x e c u tiv e                   /f) /
                                                                                                                                                 ’          \_
Date                1 O c to b e r 1 9 9 0
Ref.                C JC B /K E S /1
Tel. Ext.           470 1
                                                                                      Ref.




                    RE:        HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER                 REPnPT




                    J h « V: » P ,r ^ r ^ l y     SP° k e .      “    y ° U ° n a co"Pl e            °f    o c c a s io n s     about        my          b e lie f

                    e m e rg e n c y p r o c e d u r e r : p e r « : d r f S L r L ^ g Cr          i H l L ^ b o r o ; gh hd i : ^ t e 1 r " h iC h

                H a v in g c h e c k e d b a c k I       c an f i n d no r e c o r d o f such a                     re n n rt                f       ,




                em
                e me
                   e rg
                     rg e
                        enn cc yy ,   o t any k in d ,        w e “re /t o P oecUc u r U and
                                                                                           ° U t p r obcUet d u ri ef s a w
                                                                                                                          f uerr tPh e t--n d i s ^ « t r        o jr

                S         C o u n c il J S ?                    r S t l y ? Ub e


                I     lo o k    fo rw a rd to    your r e p ly         i n d i c a t i n g when t h e         re p o rt w i l l      be p ro d u c e d .




                     J C B e tts




                                                                                                                                                         'd'H      I
                                                                                                                          ~n ;o T d , n 3 h

                                                                                                                              0661100 Z -

                                                                                                                                        3            S'
                                    CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM

From          City Solicitor & Head of A d m i n                  To         Di rec tor of Lan d & Planning

                                                                            FAQ M r C Farme r
Date         10th October                                          ' p ^Clfief Ex     Exe
                                                                                        ecutive
                                                                                          cutive
Ref          MW/PSW                                               ^fU
                                                                    l _' _ mTi'jrpft-nr
                                                                             r e c t o r of H e a l t h & Consumer
Tel Ext.      4018                                                l.ef. Services
                                                1 1 OCT 199p
                                                                         ^Jdhn Poulter,      C o m m Services




RE:     A R R A N G E M E N T S F O R THE H I L L S B O R O U G H INQUESTS              *

I w rite to c o n f i r m the telephone c o nve rsat ion of Tuesday, 9th O c t o b e r 1990 in
c on nec tio n w i t h this matter, namely, that the general v i e w of the M e m b e r s is
that on balance it w o u l d proba bly be m o r e appropriate for the Inquests into
the deaths arising from the H i l l s b o r o u g h disaster to be h e l d in .the Town Hall
given that the only alternative w h i c h is currently acceptable to the Coroner
w a s the Don V a l l e y Stadium.

Accordingly, a meeti ng took place w i t h the Corone r on Monday, 8th October, as
a result of which, it was agreed, in pri nciple that the Council C h a m b e r be
ma de available as the Court subject to it being released in o rder for the
m o n thl y Council m e etin g to take place a nd that in addition, the C o r o n e r have
the A n t e - r o o m for his staff and as a retiring room for himself, C o m m itt ee R oom
4 be ma de available for the Jury, that a room in Land & Plann ing (which I
beli eve is available as a m e e tin g room) be made available for the
stenographers and that either one or both parts of the R e c e pt ion Suite be made
av ailable subject to the ability to divide one of the Rece pti on Suites in two
and thereby mak e a room in one half for the relatives and the other ha lf for
Solicitors and their clients.

This leaves available for Council business. Committee Rooms 1-3 and the
Co nfer e n c e R o o m and possibly one part of the Rec epti on Suite and as in the
past, it w i l l be n ece ssar y for there to be co-ordi nati on of the letti ng of
ot her m e e t i n g rooms in other departments as other uses of such rooms w o u l d
n e e d to be su b-ordinated to the committee process (ie in o ther words,
committ ees w o u l d h ave p riority over other m eetings for those rooms w h i c h w o u l d
require liaison betw een your sel f and Joh n P o u l t e r ) .

On e of the issues discussed w i t h the C o rone r w as the fact that should there be
a fall-off in attendance at the Hearings, ie should there be con sistently less
th a n 100 people in the actual Council C h am ber on three or mo re consecutive
days, then, active considerat ion w o u l d take place as to w h e t h e r or not the
In quests could then be move d back to the M e di co- Leg al Centre.      I should add,
in addit ion to the rooms specifically m e n t i o n e d above, it is also intended
that the Public Gallery in the Council Cham ber be made available exclusively
for press use.

A s indicated in the telephone conversation, I w o u l d be grateful if you would
liaise w i t h Sue Harper, the Principal A dmi n i s t r a t i v e Officer for West Midlands
Police, and also the Coroner and if, before you agree any m a t t e r w h i c h
re qui r e d e xpen dit ure w h i c h wo u l d u l t i m a t e l y be charged back to the Council,
y o u w o u l d liaise w i t h myse lf and David Purchon.

I trust the issue is clear but if y ou require any further information then
p le ase do not he sita te to contact me.




 NB    Consideration nkeds to be given to catering arrangements for all involved
       and also security of the tjuftdirig.. Please liaise with Derek Price and
        ei Simmonite respectively.
                                  CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM

From      Mr. D.W. Purchon, Director of             1 To   Ms. Pamela Gordon,
          Health arid Consumer Services             1      Chief Executive.

Date      4th October, 1990                         1     c.c Mark Webster
Ref       RM/MRM                                    1         Councillor Mrs. P. Midgley
Tel Ext   4632 - Mr. Michie                         1 Ref



          HILLSBOROUGH INQUESTS


          Further to recent correspondence on this matter I understand that you are
          to meet the Coroner, Dr. Popper, on Monday.

          The latest events are as follows, although I realise you may already be
          aware of some of them.

          1.      The Labour Group are reconsidering their decision not to
                  allow the Council Chamber and various committee rooms to
                  be used for the Inquests but a firm decision has not been
                  made as yet.

          2   .   The best alternative does appear to be various rooms at
                  the Don Valley Stadium. The manager is very keen to get the
                  booking (possibly up to three months) and all necessary
                  facilities are on site except for portable items such as
                  video and recording equipment etc.

          3.      Councillor Peter Price has expressed concern that facilities
                  for Sheffield Eagles, who will play some matches during the
                  duration of the Inquests, could be affected but I am sure the
                  stadium manager is aware of this and  will arrangematters
                  accordingly.

                  Dr. Popper has now visited the site and is satisfied with what
                  he has seen. At the time of writing he was wanting to "sleep on
                  the decision" but subject to this he   was prepared to hold his court
                  at the Stadium.

                  Dr. Popper would probably still prefer to use the Town Hall if
                  available even though parking and catering would create difficulties,
                  not to mention the disruption to members meetings and Town Hall
                  business.

          6.      If the Council intend to offer the Town Hall, an early decision is
                  essential since a massive adminstrative and organisational task has
                  to be completed before 19th November when the Inquests open.

          7.      For many reasons, therefore, it is the view of Health and Consumer
                  Services managers that the Don Valley Stadium would be the best
                  location. It has new, safe facilities; parking, toilet accommodation,
                  catering facilities, furniture all on site; access for relatives,
                  witnesses, media can be controlled by the police; the stadium is close
                  to the motorway and arrangements will be made via the A.A. for
                  appropriate signposting of the various main routes,




                                                                 RES   -5OCT1990
                                                                       R.E.U. P.E.C.U.
                                       -   2   -




8.   At the end of the day however, it is, as you know, Dr.     Popper's
     decision as to where he holds the Inquests.

     Fro m an organi sation al point of view the D o n V alle y Stadium would be
     the best option even though there are concerns that a Sports Stadium
     is not an ideal place to hold an inquest into deaths whi ch occured at
     a sporting event.



I hope the foregoing is of use at your m e eting wit h the Coroner who
remains adamant that the M e d ico- Legal Centre will be unable to cope wit h
the numbers likely to attend.     If he should receive evidence to the
contrary through enquiries to bereaved relatives, then I am sure he will
not hesitate to review his view of accommo datio n needs accordingly.




D .w. Furchon,
Director of Health and Consumer Services
                 MINUTES OF MEETING OF LABOUR GROUP EXECUTIVE
                       held on Tuesday. 2nd October 1990

 APOLOGIES


 Ap o l o gies we re received and a c c e p t e d from Councillors C. Betts,                 J.   Boyce
 and H. Jackson.                                                                                    3

 The minutes of the meetings h e l d on 4th, 18th, 21st,                     24th and 26th
 Sep tembe r 1990, were agreed as a correct record.

 MATTERS ARISING
 Meeting. 26th September 1990

 1990/91 BUDGET


           Tr e a 8 Urer/ “ ended « « m e e t i n g to report on the re comm e n d a t i o n s
 of the Man age m e n t Team concern ing the "STOP" mechanism.       He c i r c u l a t e d a
 report   (Management      Team r e port    on     Suggested  Procedure for R e d u c i n g
 Expenditure) w h i c h   summarised   the      principles   and' mecha n i s m s   to     bf
 adopted m the operation of the " S T O P " mechanism.

F o l l o w i n g lengthy discussion,      it w a s   agreed:


 i)       that  the  amended  report s h ould go to Policy C ommitt ee on Frida y
          and be considered by Gro up on Monday, 8 th October;

ii)       that  the  message  of  the  app roach to  expendi ture s hould  be
          consi era  y reinforced, i.e. is the expenditure essentia l? if so
          can it be justified against the criteria set out in the report?; ’

in)      to rec ommend amendments to the cr iteria                (these w i l l be i ncluded in
         the report to go to P oli cy Committee).

Action:      Councillor H. Rni<>ht


                      H Kni! h t u a f iS6d that f o l l o w i n g d iscussion at the L a b o u r Group
O c t o b e r O c t o b e r he had tabled an ame ndment for the Council m e e t i n g on 3rd
O c t ob er         which        deferred     consideration           of  all  items  r e comme nding
e x pen ditur e until they could be d e c i d e d against the criteri a referr ed to
        ! e p ° rt ° ^ the STOP mechanis m.     However, as there w e r e a n u m b e r of
items w h i c h ^ w o u l d require immediate action, the       amendment    also  agreed
that  such items could be p r o g r e s s e d w i t h the a u t hor isatio n of the C hief
Executive, the City Treasurer and the City Solicitor if they w e r e in the
interests of the City Council.

Action:     Councillor H. Rni^ht
                                                           - 2 -




4.   CORRESPONDENCE

     4.1      Shef field D i s t r i c t Labour Party, Health A u t h o r i t y Resolution,
              referred   to      Chairs     of  Health  & Consu mer Service and F am ily &
              Com munity Services for action. ..

     4.2      Secretary, AMA, re M e m b e r s ’ Allowances.                    Copy to be p l a c e d on
              Notice B o a r d in M e m b e r s ’ Library.

     4.3      R o m a n i a n ;C h i l d r e n ’s Support A ppeal - referred to Chai r of MEGS.

     4.4      Labour P arty - Tory Watch.                     Copies p assed to r elevant Chairs.

     4.5      NEC A d v i c e Notes:                                                     s

              No. 19/90 "Useful Information on Tory Candida tes                               and S p o k e s p e o p l e " .
              - noted. :                     - ;

              No. 20/90 "Registration of Overseas V o t e r s ” - p a s s e d to C o u n c i l l o r
              J. Fiore a nd City Solicitor.

              No. 23/90 "Poll Tax R e v i e w - copy c ircula ted                        to    all      M e mbers      of
              Executive.

              No. 24/90 "Housing Investment Programmes                          1991.92"       - copy p a s s e d to
              Chair of H o u s i n g for action.

5.   S H E F F I E L D TEC   (Councillor W.           Jordan)

     The Execu tive r e c eived and no ted        papers                fro m       Councillors      Jordan     and
     Jones        on the p r o gre ss of Sh effield TEC.                C o u n c i l l o r Jones r e p ort ed that
     co n s u ltatio ns w e r e n o w being   undertaken                with        Trade     Unions     etc.   and
     ad v i s e d   that   a    further report w o u l d be             comin g to the E x e c u t i v e in due
     course.                                                ■•                                                                  ■

     Action;       C o u n c i l l o r s W. J o r d a n a n d S..Jones.           c ^

6.   S E L E C T I O N O F A N A M E F O R THE N E W A R T S        (TUDOR)   S QUAR E

     As Members of the Exe cutiv e had had several w e e k s t o .c o n s i d e r the issues
     arising       from      p r o p osals   from C o u n c i l l o r Buckley, P l a n n i n g L a b o u r G roup               -
     and C o u n c i l l o r P. H orton on the -nami ng-of the n e w arts                (Tudor)         Square,
     the   E x e c u tive      a gree d    una nim o u s l y  and     q u ick ly to r e c o mm end that the
     square be c a lled "R uskin Square".

     Action;        C o u n c i l l o r M. B u c k l e y     ....
                                                    - 3 -




ROYAL ARMOURIES SHEFFIELD                   (Councillor C. Betts)

C oun cillor Betts h ad submitted a letter from the M a s t e r of the Armouries
(H.M. Tower of London) advising that they w e r e very k e e n to p r o c e e d w i t h
detailed c o n sider ation of a proposal to move       the  Royal       Armou ries  to
Sheffield,     and suggesting that i t w o u l d be happy to a r r a n g e a series of
pre senta tions either in the Tower of L ondon or Sheffield.

Fol lowin g discus sion it was agreed that the Royal A r m o ur ies be requested
to make a prese n t a t i o n to the L abour Group- in Sheffield.

Action;      C o u n c i l l o r C.J.C. Betts           i n:    >   .        . 5-et- s

H I L L S B O R O U G H INQUESTS     (Councillor P. Midgley)

C oun ci l l o r    M i dgl ey reported     on- the- difficulties- that        had     been
e nco untere d w h i l s t trying to secure-facilities f o r the - h o l d i n g -of the
inquests         arising from the H i l lsbor ough disaster. G i v e n the sensitivity
of-the matters she felt that the E x e c u t i v e should h ave an o p p o r t u n i t y to
con sider the issues and ma ke recommendations.                 -             - -—

D e s p i t e the inconvenience that migh t he caused to M e m b ers of the. Counci l
and Council operations, there was a clear feeling in t he Exe cutive that,
if      at    all  possible, the Town Hall-s h o u l d be u s e d for the inquests and
this should be p u r s u e d by Counci llor M i dgley and Fiore as       a m a tter of
urgency.

If      it p r oved impossible for the Town Hall to be u s e d then the Executive
w o u l d w i s h to give further co nside ration to this it em at its m e e ting on
9th October.

Action;      C o u n c i l l o r P. M i d g l e y           :           ■■    c
   cU-fcU                                                         C-O^tJ feo6)Uj^J

   jdbuuj^ SJCJL                                 <kMjX.cJsU>L ^©yULT .
                                                                                                 U N
      w ith compliments
   G > u ^U A t                 A U V         KuljjSy U to                             Health and Consumer Services
                                                                                       Director
                       a - i~             £tdtexj*T                     fe    6-tXJ~   D W Purchon       miehAMinstWM
                                                                                       T o w n Hall Chambers
                                                                                       1 Barkers Pool, Sheffield S1 1EN
                                                                                       Telephone: (0 7 4 2 )7 3 4 6 1 1
\J)JilX^                                         fo^b    kecf im£l M         t^.       Telecom Gold 76: LM X 877 (£/w. Health)
                                                                                                    76: LM X 878 (C onsum er Serv.)
                                                                                       Fax: (0742) 7 3 6 4 6 4 (Town Hall Cham bers)
O^CCJb^^rcL^t^e^                                 U>-^_ IcL ll   t^J/L   fir w                (0 7 4 2 )4 0 2 5 3 1 (Trading Standards)
t?k                  O-pfijb^ (U>eulJloJb--@j^ .                                             (0742) 7 3 4692 (Env. Services)
         p rin te d o n recycled p aper                                                Telex: 9 3 1 2 1 3 2 2 7 0 (IF G)

& H ^-CS 0^ 1 or>^ ^ C K m *~ .                                         O g> h o




                                                                                                                                              •"’
                                                                                                                                                "I"




                                                                                                                                         a"
                                                                                                         ClUiVE
                                                                                     C.P.U.                        c p i
                                                                                                        IF’ )
                                                                                                                      14
POLICY      PAPER     -    HILLSBOROUGH INQUESTS                                                 3 OCT 1990
                                                                                                                       ‘H
1.0      Background
                                                                                        U.p. r

         The inquests into the nine ty - f i v e victims of the H i l l s b o r o u g h D i s a s t e r
         were held at the M e d i c o - L e g a l Centre on April 18th, 1990 and c o n t i n u e d
         for three weeks.           As the D i r ecto r of Public Prosecutions had not decided
         w h eth er or not any c rimi n a l proceedings were to be taken a g ai nst any of
         the parties, these limited inquests only examined m e d i c a l e v i d e n c e
         c o n c e r n i n g the victims.


         A d e c is ion has n o w been taken by the Director of Public P r o s e c u t i o n that
         there is insufficient evidence for criminal proceedings to be taken and
         therefore the inquests can proceed.

2.0      Present Posit i o n


         A m e e t i n g took place on M o n d a y 24th September at the M e d i c o - L e g a l Centre
         and was atten ded by H.M. Coroner, West Midlands Police and
         repres entat ives of H eal th and Consumer S e r v i c e s .

         The foll owing i n for mation was given by H.M. C o r o n e r :-

  2.1    The inquests will run from the 19th November to 19th D e c e m b e r w i t h a
         recess for Christmas, then re-start on the 7th J a n uary and p o s s i b l y run
         for up to a further two m o n t h s .

  2.2    The M e d i c o - L e g a l Ce ntre Coroner's Court was cons idered too small as
         potent ially the f amily of all the victims have the right to be in court
         to police their c o u nsel when cross-examining witnesses.                       In a d d i t i o n the
         legal representatives, witnesses, representatives of the press and jury
         nee d to be accommodated.             A l t h o u g h portakabins were s u c c e s s f u l l y used
         last A p r i l it was felt that the inquest will be a m u c h larger a f f a i r
         p a r tic ularly wh en some k e y witnesses are giving evidence.

  2.3    The Coroner has w r i t t e n to the Chief Executive reque s t i n g the use of the
         T o w n Hall but this has been refused due to the large n u mber of rooms
         needed and the d i s r u p t i o n it would cause to an a l ready busy schedule.

  2.4    A n offer has been made by the Property Services M a n a g e r to lease two
         floors of Furn ival House but this building would be difficult and
         e xpe nsive to convert as it would need completely r e —c a r p e t t i n g ,
         r e-d ec o r a t i n g and some p a r ti tionin g removing (it was c o m m e n t e d by H e a l t h
         and Consu mer Services that access, including disabled persons access and
         par king was very poor and at the entrance an im mediate area did not give
         a good image of Sheffield).

  2.5    The Coroner asked for further thought                 to be given to finding other
         suitable locations.

3.0      Other L ocations for the Inquests


        N u m e r o u s other locations for the inquests have now been examine d and
        found to be u navai lable or unsuitable for a number of r e a s o n s :-

        City Hall                                             Disused schools
        O c tag on Centre                                     Marks and Spencers b u i l d i n g on
        U n i v e r s i t y Premises
                                                                                        the Moor
        H e a l t h Au thority Premises                       Queensway b u i l d i n g on C h a r t e r R o w
        M a son ic Halls etc.                                 Anvil Cinema
        Var ious T r a i ning Centre s both                   Steel City P i azza
        the City Council and privately owned.
.U     Don Valley Stadium

       This s uggest ion was followed up from the meet ing on the 24th Sept ember
       and a site m e eting was held on the 26th September with West M i d l a n d s
       Police, H ea lth and Consumer Services and John Field, the M a n a g e r of the
       stadium.

       B e nef it of this l ocation
4.1    M o d e r n buildi ng with a good image of Sheffield. This is impo rtant when
       tel evised interviews take place either inside or outside the building.

 4.2   L a r g e amounts of car parking space.        This is a major benefit as b oth the
       T o w n H a l l and F u r niv al House have very limited parking, p a r t i c u l a r l y
       d u r i n g the Chri stmas period..

 4.3   E a s y T r a ff ic-fre e access to the Ml and Parkway. Automobile A s s o c i a t i o n
       signs could be used to assist travellers coming into the Ci ty C e n tre
(0     from other locations.

 4.4   Three entrances to the suite so that the press, witnesses, jury and
       m e m b e r s of the public can be kept separate. This would also reduce the
       ho u n d i n g of witnesses by televisio n crews.

 4.5   Sole use of this area of the stadium which would aid security.

 4.6   Good disa bled persons access.

 4.7   Good   sanitary a c c o m m o d a t i o n including disabled persons           toilets.

 4.8   Rooms a l r eady carpe tted and decorated to a very high standard.

 4.9   Some chairs and tables a l re ady available at the stadium for use d u ring
       the inquests.

4.10   Space in the car park for outside broadcast units and a d d i t i o n a l porta-
       kabins if necessary.
                                                                                  I
M)
4.11   M e a l p r eparat ion and d ini ng space for       jurors.

4.12   E s t a b l i s h e d fire e v a c u a t i o n and first aid facilities.

4.13   E a s y provisi on for extra telephone lines.

4.14   Ma n a g e m e n t of the s t a d i u m are keen for the facilities to be
       u t i l i s e d for this purpose.         A figure of a £1,000 per w e e k rental has
       b e e n s uggested w h i c h is a similar price to the facilities at F u r nival
       House.

       The possible d i s a d v a n t a g e of this location is that it could be
       co n s i d e r e d i nsensitive to hold an inquest in a s porting location.
       However , there is no direct visual access to the sports facilities from
       the car park or suite and in addition, as the D o n V a l l e y S t a d i u m is one
       of the safest and most up-to-dat e facilities in Europe it could be seen
       as an indica tion of Sheff ield's commitment to the future.
     Recommendation


1    L h3t f ^ j e c t to H ;M - Coroner, West Midlands Police and S h e f f i e l d Ci^v
        uncil 5 app roval of tha venue that the Property Services M a n a g e r bI
     req ueste d to n e g o tiat e a lease for the d uration of the Jn^uest

2   That West M i d land s Police,         who are co-ordinating the press r e l M C O c f
    t e inquest, be requ ested to issue a carefully worded statemerr clearly
    justif ying the d e c i s i o n to local the inquest at D o n V a l l e ^ s ' a d i u m "




    O r i g i n a t i n g Offic er   -   j. B atley




    M M 6 AAT
    28/9/90
                             OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR       MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                              WATERY STREET
                                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE          SHEFFIELD
                                          (West District)
                                                              S3 7ET

STEFAN L, POPPER, LL.B., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                              CORONER

                                                              2 8thSeptember;ig 90
                         Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721



SLP/PAD


Mrs. P. Gordon,
Chief Executive,
City of Sheffield Metropolitan District,
                                                                        p:   ?!   I              iiV i:
Town Hall,
Sheffield,                                                                               SHFSSLO
SI 2HH. ^


Dear Mrs. Gordon,
                                                                                      R.E.U. |P.E.C.U.
As you will be aware I have decided to resume the inquests into
the 95 deaths which occurred at Hillsborough on the 19th November
1990.  I enclose for your information a copy of a letter which
we have now received from the South Yorkshire County Fire Service
and you will see that although they are prepared to increase the
capacity of the court to 90 but they have clearly stated that
that is the absolute maximum.

You will be aware that apart from myself, the jury and the
various court ushers and supporting staff there are numerous
parties who will have rights of representation and I anticipate
that there will be probably a substantial body of legal
representation during the inquests.  In addition to that we
must have space for the families of the deceased as well as other
interested parties, the press and the general public.

Whilst it might be possible to accomodate some of these groups
in portocabins and other temporary accomodation distant from the
court I think it must be obvious that the accomodation which is
available at the Medico—Legal Centre is just inadequate for an
inquest of this nature.

It seems to me that the ideal arrangement would be for me to use
the Council Chamber together with the necessary ancillary rooms
which I would need for myself, jury, solicitors etc. Apart from
providing an appropriate forum for the inquests  it would also
I suspect be a relatively cheap option as at least some of the
furnishings and equipment are already in place.

I have however been verbally told that the Council are not prepared
to make this accomodation available for what might be a lengthy
period.

I would be grateful if you could please confirm that this is
correctly understood by me.

I also understand that there is no other suitable Council
accomodation available which has the capacity and facilities
that I need. No doubt you will be able to confirm this as well.
         —\           ^   f   . X
         i^. C^sss^       L
^ejbc4   U A      J^f^ff^jr
                         ©£> ift o
                             OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR
                                                              MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                              WATERY STREET
                                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE          SHEFFIELD
                                          (West District)
                                                              S3 7ET

STEFAN L. POPPER, LL.B., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                              CORONER                              :
                                                              2 81 h ...Sep t emb e r .19 ...9 0.
                         Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721




M R S . P . GORDO N(2 )


I would be grateful if you could please respond to this letter
immediately so that I can be quite clear about the position
with regard to Gouncil accomodation for if my understanding is
correct alternative accomodation will have to be found immediately.

It is my view that the cost to the Sheffield City Council of
suitable accomodation is likely to be substantial both on the
revenue and capital side.




                   DNER




c.c. Mr. R. Michie.
        H YORKSHIRE FIRE AND CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY


     outh Yorkshi re Cou nty Fi re Service
H. E. Wright. M l Fire E, EB.I.M.                                                                            ^D M sioriH eadquatttrs
       Chief Fire Officer                                                                                    Sf?Ln??n Straet’
                                                                                                             Sheffield,
                                                                                                              South Yorkshire Si 3FG
                                                                                                              Telephone: Sheffield
Divisional Commander             K .L .M e tta n if. J . P .         G ra d X F ir e E .                     STD (0742) 727202

Our Rer.      W4125/JI/PD                             Your Ref:                                               Date: 2S. 9 - 9 0
                            ... .    S ta tio n . Officer Ibbotson                                            Ext No
This matter is being dealt with by .. r . ,. 7............................................................    tx t. no..........................



      Principal Administration officer
      West Midlands police
      PO Box 52
      Colmore Circus
      Bijmingham
      B4 6NQ

       Dear Madam
       Hillsborough Disaster Enquiry
       Medico Locral Centre, Watery Street , SHEFFIELD
       Purther to a recent meeting between Station Officer Ibbotson tod
       yourself at the *bove premises. I can confirm that this Authority
       has no objections to the following temporary alterations to the
       coroners court
        1        A witness box containing ten seats to be removed, and a
                 further three rows of ten seats per row provided to the front
                 of the currant public seating area.
        2        The three new rows should be provided with a 1 metre wide
,                aisle in the middle and the seats fastened together in groups
>                of five.
        These alterations will effectively increase the capacity of the
        coroners court from 70 to 90 r the existing exits axe adequate to
        cops with this increase. The new capacity figure must be
        considered an absolute maximum due to the size of the room.
        If you require any further information please do not hesitate to
        contact the officer dealing with this matter.

        Yours faithfully



         Divisional Commander
         cc        The Coroner ^
                   Dr S L Popper
                   Medico Legal Centre
                   Watery Street
                   SHEFFIELD

                                  AH communications to be addressed to the Divisional Commander.
                 TalBDhone: S H e i^ ia x ) (0742) 73S7E1       28th_-Se£tj

 iSiCiP/PAD



 Mrs * P * Gordon,
 Chief Executive,
,City of Sheffield.
 Town Hall/ '                            ■
                                         .
                                         ,           ’
 Sheffield, <      r” ■
'SI 2HH, \ ::     J: 1                               :      !
                                                            .


 Dear M r s . Gordon,

 As you will be aware I Kave decided to resume the inquests into '
 the 95 deaths which, occurred at Hillsborough on the 19th November
  1990.. T ftnnlosf1
             fr       ‘
                      Pl“lT~ Um1T
                             >-— —‘infATTns.^-.'nn
                                     —             — i^Gpy
                                                   «     __ u£
                                                            _-C a
                                                                _ j,efcer wnich
                                                                           ^ . ., '■
 we, have now received from the South Yorkshire County Fire Service
 aud. you. will see,, that although the??- are prepared to increase
 capacity of the court to 90 but they;have clearly stated thatvf:'
./that' is the# absolute maximum.           ,                              \ •: V / - ' "

 Y o u w i l l be.aware that apart from myself, the jury and the
■■;v9 r|.Qij4Bjpqk^t,..Tittersv.and.supporting--staff'there 'a r e "nuniferHus'' F ' ^
       rties ,kho'will,'.have rights of representation and I anticipate
       it there will be probably - d substantial body of legal
 representat ion during the inquests»             In addition to that we
 must have sp^ce ;f o r (the families of         the deceased       well' as other
 interested parties, the press and the general public.                         /

Whilst it plight b^-possible to accomodate some of these err
'1in
   n , portocabinE
       T**if**i**4 -rn 4-n tJ                                      -      T_ '
                              ^and|\ other temppr®ry accomodation distant from the:
I
,c v
   o,u.r t .I think /'.'i’fc muSifc be obvious that the accomodation- whitth j s
 available at the Medico-Legal Csutr.e is just .intatfttquafe- for an
 ihquest of this, natiike.' ’

 It seems to me that the ideal arrangement would be for me to use
 the Council Chamber together with the necessary ancillary rooms
 whxcil 1 would need for myself, jury, solicitors eto.: Apart .from
 providing an appropriate forum- for. the inquests it would also '
-1 suspect, be a relatively cheap .option as.                       ■-,
                                                                      '*r'
                  equipment are already in place^

t have howev^f-" been verbally told that, the Council are not prepared'
to make this accomodation available for what might be' a lenof frv
period - .                                                   ■' ''v 1

X       be grateful if you cjiould please coAfixitt tliat this is
correctly understood b.y me. .
                             '    > ’    1        '/

1' also understand that -there is no other suitable Council  ,-■:
accomodation available which has the capacity and facilities            ■
that I heed „ No d<?ubt you will-be able to confirm this .as well/ v : :'
                                              3 * 37 ■      fcjlon.                                                                                                          - i'iJ


                                                                                                              MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                              SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                                                              WATERY STREET
                                                                                   (West District)            SHEFFIELD                     ,
                                                                                                              S3 7ET                   .
                                        STSFAN L. POPPER. tLB.. BAED.Sci.. S.M.. S.S., M.R.a6.P. ■
                                                     !l                             CORONER
                                                                                                                       .■Vi

                                                                Telephone: SHEFFlSLD(0742) 738721             28th..S«                           ..sip-



                                      MRS. P . . GORDON ( 2 )

            X . V,                                                                                                                                                           .. *

ir.'-1’/: ■' ' ! ' 11
in' / -             •                 with regard to Coxinc.il accortiod^i--? nn fAv 14V                                                          ~                          ; .vAilS
p >::                       .'V
                                      COr'*C:' alter3^ t*ve accomodation «i U                                 tavo S                                                            ■ a
                                                                                                                                                                                 ,;'®S
IV'"’                                 It is m y view that the cost to the Sheffield rs-Mr                                                       __           ^
  rvh'*1,                                                                                                                                                        ...I,''.,

                                                                                                     *   be                            s r s              m              m      v,Fem.

I# --'-                     'V ■.
;'? •                           i.                                                                                                                                             i
                                                                                                                                                                                      ‘'•■rtsi
■;t
  >«l
    l’.
      '"
       •i
        -■           l      .
                                                                                                                                                                                      M'
                                     Yrmr-ci/Q-f                                                                                                                                      v.A
                                                                                                                                                                                       ■iMff
                                                                                                                                                                                          'J
                                                                                                                                                                                           i ''
                                                                                                                                                                                            -jl
                                                                                                                                                                                              l
fe'i;'' '.■■'I' 1,.l\^ ■’

f1
                                                                                                                                                                                           X


                                     H. M . Mi/a> k o n e r
                                                                                                                                                                                            fI
                                                                                                                                                             i                                   :




                                     C.C. Mr. R * „Michie.                                                                                                                     ■1   1




  \/»[\J ^                                                                                                                                           V-Vf
                                                                                                                                                        '."'L;
                                                                                                                                                             ’■y-
                                                                                                                                                                ■;•
                                                                                                                                                                                 ..flj
                                                                                                                                  wr• ('
                                                                                                                                                                                 ''^ 1 ,



                                                                                                                                                                                         \rf!
                                                                                                                                                                               '
                                                                                                                                                                               •
                                                                                                                                                                               '.■
                                                                                                                                                                                 ; v*i
                                                                                                                                                                               ■‘y^ m

                                                                                                                                                                                                 11
         RM«

                                                                                                                                                                             ■ 1
            28-09-1990 >■13 ■3 9 “                                                                                            ■   /;"■'I,
                                                                  TTr.V'V'"'MTl'
                                                                               I'                                                                             P . 03 .ifji
                    ijV?£ B B S A N D CIVIL H t F E N C E AUTHORITY

                    Yorkshire County Hre Service
                                                                                                Wes. Division Keadcyjaftsfe
                                                                                                V^^-^OTOf:

                                                                                                    snuf? i f e r^?eS1 3F«

                                                                                                    STD (0T42) 725^02      "~
                              X.lwiftsfc-lsesi/ =3-^*                  - FiKfc
DivisionalOorsm&r.de1
                    .'
                                                                                                    D-3®;28*9‘90'
Ourft^      *4125/J r - W                                                                                     .3BS. :        \
                                                                                                    Esf-No.           -•-* ->-*'.•
This matte?'* ?W?nS              b«' ■ «



      Syi^tral.                                         urf-xea*-

m     Wm^
      S O Ba* .52
                     SoMee

      Colaore C.ire&s '                                      . *"

      15%

      thsax Madisjtt

            _       _                                                «- s B i s s i z m - '

       f iS E t h e r t »     a M    O     t                                                              t f e   lu t h o r is j'


       cioteotieXS                                 •-

       I          & wifc^ss ‘&0X
                                                            M b * * ? «***-                                           ;
 €»

                  iff ■:'••♦-•

         « M ..*ii M « b i ~                  ; f p t ^ f f l S r iS S st’S r t I q S « ? ? o :
         ccreasrs soart. scorn 70                    **, « *        * £igu^ tms-t be.-   • v,.
         CQ*W             Mfiib               'ssaaei—iTi'Uffi due,
         c c istd e r e c•"s*
                           ___ ”..    -'<t<■& siaaosaam
                                aSssoliifee
         1 ’                          iw r f t i r t t e     io f e n c a t iO T .   p le « e       d o ^ ; a s s i$ iW      -« 6
           SlnlSt           t S i* < r c L         Scaling H i # * <**» “ * “ *•                ,     -           -   •



           Yo«rs faitbcfhillY




            Di'rlsiwnwl Ccsjssaiider =
                                               r
            cct     ^Iie corg«er-r
                    Sat s. t B e e p e r^ '-
                    ^ l , e a J^ga-L LeC-t3^
                    ^ a t © r y Street
                    SHSS'5'XSI iD
                                                                                                              Sch 9160
                                        CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM

                                                                   To
                 City Solici tor & Head of A d m i n                       "Chief Exec utive
f         f

I /a te          19th Sept ember 1990
f    Ref.        MW/PSW
     Tel. Ext.                                                     Ref.
/                4018




                 RE:    HILT-SROBOTTGH DISASTER - ACCOMMODATION FOR RESUMPTION OF INQUESTS

                 It has already b e e n made clear to D r P opper on several occasions that the
                 goodwil l exhib i t e d by the A u t h o r i t y in terms of m a k i n g av ailable virt ually
                 all its m e e t i n g rooms during the h o l d i n g of the Taylor Inquiry was felt to
                 be an appropria te and n e c e ss ary response only to the issue of the Inquiry
                 itself and that it was u n l ike ly in the extreme the A u t h o r i t y w o u l d consider
                 m a k i n g such a c c o m m o d a t i o n available for the Inquests.

                 This is part ic u l a r l y so since the best course of a c tion w o u l d appear to be
                 to use the space immediately adjacent to the M e d i c o - L e g a l Centre for the
                 in st allati on of P o r t a k a b i n units for any "overspill" including a
    :.n          spe cifically dedicat ed press unit w i t h close circuit t elev i s i o n link into
                 the actual H e a r i n g w h i c h facilities can be made on available on a five days
                 a w e e k basis w i t h other Inquests b e i n g located elsewhere.    It w o u l d
                 pr o ba bly also be the mo st cost effective w a y of dea ling w i t h the issues.

                 I w o u l d add that I have received an informal a ppro a c h from Superinte ndent
                 D o n D e n t o n of the South Yo rkshir e Police following an a p p roach to h i m by
                 the A d m i n i s t r a t i v e O f fi cer from W e s t M i d la nds Police w h o seem to be the c o ­
                 o rdi nating force for the Inquests and as a result of this it seems probable
                 that such individ ual w i l l be c onta cting the A u t h o r i t y direct to discuss
                 wh a t they per ceive to be the requirements.                      However, I p erson a l l y w o u l d
                 ne e d a great deal of p e r s u a s i o n that the proposals curren tly put forward by
                 R o g e r M i c h i e in his letter w o u l d not be the best w a y forward in all the
                 ci rcumst ances a l t h ough at the end of the day it is a d e c i s i o n for the
                 C o r o n e r and it w i l l be n e c e ss ary to convince h i m of this fact.              It ma y well
                 the refore be app ropriate to have a m e e t i n g w i t h him, ourselves and D avid
                 Pu r c h o n w h e n he returns from leave next w e e k to try and t hrash this one out
                 once and for all.




                                                                                        —^ 2       4 S E P W 9 0 j py|

                                                                                         smw
                                      CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM

  m        Mr. R. Michie                                To    Ms. P. Gordon
           Ass istan t Director                               Chief Ex ecutiv e
           He a l t h and Consumer Services
Dat e     11th September 1990
Ref       RM/PB
Tel Ext    4632 - Mr. Michie                            Ref




          H ILL SB O R O U G H D I S A S T E R
          A CCO MM O D A T I O N F O R INQUESTS




          Y ou will be aware fo llowing the decision of the Director of Public
          Pro secutions that the full inquests on the 95 people who died so
          tragically at Hillsborough, will shortly have to take place in Sheffield.

          Dr. Popper, H. M. Coroner, is of the opinion that, alth ough he would
          prefer to hold these at the M e d i c o - L e g a l Centre, the a c c ommod ation there
          is inadequate in vi ew of the greater significance of and therefore greater
          interest in these inquests.   He anticipates m u c h higher attendances from
          media, legal representatives, relatives, etc. and many more wi tnesses will
          have to be called than was the case in April.

          On that occasion portacabins wi th commun icatio ns links in the Med ic o - L e g a l
          Centre grounds were more than adequate and coped adm irably w i t h all
          demands.

          In order to k e e p costs to the Coun cil as low as possible Dr. Popper feels
          that the most suitable venue w ould be the Town Hall R e c e p tion Rooms plus
          several com mittee /ante rooms for jury room, coroners staff, refreshments,
          press, legal representatives, etc.       When this was requested in April the
          Council was not prepared to suffer the consequent inconvenience and
          disruption.     These inquests however wi ll be virtually a re-run of the
          Taylor Inquiry and are therefore of greater importance and significance
          than those held in April.

          E n q u iri es to S heffield Un ive r s i t y re gardin g a c c ommod ation have been
          unsuccessful.         The City Memor i a l Hall is thought by Dr. Popper to be
          unsuita ble and would in any case not be available for the possible three
          months duration of the inquests (probably b e twee n Decemb er and February).
          To hire the confer ence facilities at a large hotel for 3 months would cost
          a fortune and w o uld probably encounter difficulties created by hotels
          b ein g licensed p r e m i s e s .

          In the circumst ances I have suggested to Dr. Popper that he should
          a pproach you on this matter, explai ning his requirements, for how long,
          g iving reasons for w a nting to use the Town Hall as opposed to the
          M e d ico -Legal Centre, etc.

          The Coroner, of course, has the power to incur whatever expense is
          nec essar y and charge the Council but he is genuinely trying to m i n i m i s e
          costs hence his request.
In c o nsider ing Dr. Popper's request you may find it useful to be aware of
the foregoing i nformation and to k n o w that, w i t h the ad vantage of a
successfully organised event in Apr il behind us, managers in H ea lth and
Consumer Services are confident that similar, if enhanced, arrangements
at the M e dico- Legal Centre would also be adequate on this occasion.




R. MICHIE
Ass istant Director
          R3719                                                                                           Sch 9160
                                     CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM

    From           COUNCILLOR HELEN JACKSON              To     sge Distribution List                  u
                   COUNCILLOR JOHN THORNE
                   COUNCILLOR GEORGE MATHEWS                    V .               l r n Vfc
                                                                                              C -P .o ,
    Date           14th August 1990                                      . ...... j — — —
    Ref.           HJ/CS                                                  1 6 A U G 1990
    Tel. Ext.                                            Ref.   ...— -J                          PUB ,
                                                                        ^ . e. u .T p,e .c, u . J j / o
                   Floodliqhtina in Hillsborouqh Park              U.P.
                                                                        - - .1.
                   We attended last night a packed meeting in Hillsborough Library, called by
                   the Hillsborough Community Trust, about the floodlighting of the football
                   pitch area now leased to Sheffield Football Club.    Also there were Mr.
                   Heeley and another representative from the Football Club and Mr. Paul
                   Billington from the Recreation Department.

                   Great concern was expressed about the whole proposal

                        about the insufficient consultation prior to the granting of               planning
                        permission

                        about the unsatisfactory nature of the planning site visit;

(     )            -    about the effects of the holding of football matches there on traffic
                        and car parking in the area;

                        and about the implications for the use and character of             the    Park       as
                        expressed in the bye-laws.

                   The outcome of the meeting was therefore

                   1.   That even at this late stage discussions should again be held with
                         Owlerton Stadium about the club's preferred use of that facility.

                   2.   That discussions be held with the Law centre around the strength of
                         the Bye-Law prohibition of "organised games" in the ark, in view of
                         the fact that payment would be charged for these matches.

                   3.   That an approach to the Ombudsman         be   looked       into,         to      claim
                        maladministration by the Council.

                   We agree to participate in any meeting set up with Owlerton Stadium, and
( )                Sheffield Football Club which Recreation Department agreed to organise.

                   Please could all relevant departments keep us              and      the         Community
                   Representatives informed of dates and developments.

                   Distribution:

                    Mr. R. Jones, Director of Land and Planning
                    Mr. J. Morrell, Director of Recreation and Amenities
                    Mr. J. Williams, Recreation Department
                    Mr. P. Billington, Recreation Department
                    Mr. M. Webster, Head of Administration and Legal Department
                  ; M rs . P. Gordon, Chief Executive
                    Councillor P. Waugh
                    Councillor G. Burrows
                    Councillor M. Buckley, Chair, Land and Planning
                    Councillor P. Price, Chair, Leisure Services
                    Dr. Carol Myers, 64 Hawksley Avenue, Sheffield
                    Mr. Heeley, Sheffield Football Club,
                    Mr. P. wood, Hillsborough Community Trust, 2 Holme Lane, Sheffield 6
3 C .IN I   d   l *j   H 'U i   — s j—u i i   i - . +— r ^ o - - D * ? D       jlu i   n——                  LJ , H iJ iO H U ? "   u» i *=rei   r o jo o ji n




                                                                                        South Yorkshire PMIce
                PR ESS                                                                  PO U C K H l A D B U A R T S M
                                                                                        t N IO H IW L
                                                                                        «HIM|1LD w a u v
                RELEASE                                                                 TILIPHONI (0742) 71192!
                                                                                        T lb lX M )*N



                       EMBARGOED tWIIL 3.00 PM. TBDRSDAY 30 AUGUST




                       DIRECTOR OP PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS' DECISION REGARDING
                       THE CRIMINAL ENQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER



                       I am extremely glad that the Director has made his .decision not least befcause
                       the uncertainty until now has caused some officers and their families a
                       great deal of distress.    The Director's decision is not a matter lor self

     o                 congratulation on the part of the South Yorkshire Police although it b 'ings
                       with it a measure of relief.

                       I am all too acutely aware of the 95 souls who lost their lives and of the
                       distress and grief of     their families and friends. Grief travels in many
                       guises and South Yorkshire Police has known - since Hillsborough * iti own
                       particular form of suffering.

                       It is now for other proceedings to determine what were the mistakes and
                       failings which gave rise to the disaster.       The Inquest proceedings have
                       yet to be finalised/ a     Civil Hearing is pending and questions of inti rnal
                       discipline have yet to     be concluded.   So whilst the question of crii inal
                       liability has been dealt with by the Director of Public Prosecutions there
                       are important issues still to be settled.

                       I am handicapped from commenting in more detail because of the pending <ivil
                       trial in which the South Yorkshire Police seek to recover a contribi tion
                       from Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and Eastwood t Partners in respact
                       of the compensation which has been voluntarily agreed to be paid by i outh
                       Yorkshire Police to the bereaved and injured.




                                                                      Deputy Chief Constable
                                                                           for Chief Constable
C.EX/&F /^ />

7ch June, 1990




Mr. N. Adsetts, OBE,
Chairman,
Sheffield Insulations Group PLC
Hillsborough Works,
Infirmary Road,
SHEFFIELD.
S6 2LW


Dear Norman,

I have been asked to write to you by the Policy
Committee of the City Council who at their
meeting on the 22nd May, 1990, ratified by the
full meeting of the City Council yesterday,
placed on record their appreciation of the
extremely efficient and fair manner in which
the Trustees of the Hillsborough Disaster Appeal
have administered the Fund and in particular
they requested me to convey their thanks to you
for your work as a member of the Trust.

May I also thanks you on a personal basis for
the work you have done in connection with the
Fund.


Yours sincerely,
        R3719                                                                                    Sch 9160
                                    CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM

                The Head of the Administration                     Chief Executive
                                                           To
                and Legal Department
                                                                                                              .P.O.
    Date        23 May 1990
                Mtf/DG                                                                    2 5 MAY1990
    Ref.                                                                                                    I PUB
                4018
    Tel. Ext.                                               Ref.


                STRICTLY PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL

                HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER APPEAL - APPLICATION OF FUNDS FOR RESIDUAL PURPOSES

                W i t h reference to the copy letter from N o rman Ads etts regarding the Appeal,
                I enclose for your i n fo rmati on and a t t e ntion a copy of a note prepare d by
                Rod Sewell the Principal Solicitor w h o has, from my D e p a r t m e n t ’s point of
                view, looked after the C o u n c i l ’s relationship w i t h such body w h i c h usefully
                sets out some of the background.

                As clearly it w o n ’t be poss ible for y o u and I to discuss this m a tter before
                I go on leave and in light of the suggested date for the next m e e t i n g of
                the Trust m a y I suggest that Rita contacts Rod and has h i m speak to you
                direct on the contents of his c o m mun icatio n and any other issues y o u feel
    J           you ought to k n o w before the meeting.

O
                cc Rod Sewell




                                                                                           f


o
o
                                                 a/b
          R3719                                                                                Sch 9160
                                       CITY OF SHEFFIELD — M EMORANDUM

                    Mr. J. R. .W. Sewell, Principal        To     Mr. H. M. Webster, Head of
                    Solicitor, Group B                            Department.

    Date           21st May, 1990
    Ref            GP262/JKWS
    Tel. Ext.       4016                                   Ref.




                  The Hi 11«>x3roucih Disaster Appeal - Ai%>Tiration of Funds for Residual Purposes

                  I return herewith your copy of a letter dated the 2nd May frcm Norman Msetts
                  writing as a Trustee of the Trust to the Chief Executive. This is of course a
                  sensitive issue to handle and requires appropriate consultation in managing
                  the response. In reviewing the issue I have perused again the terms of the
                  Trust and also had seme preliminary informal discussion with John Pilling,
                  Assistant Director of Social Services being aware that he is an officer who
                  has been particularly closely associated with the Council contribution towards
                  victim support. My suggested approach is to look respectively at the issues
                  of the terms of the Trust, the process for offering sane suggestions which
                  carry a measure of appropriate consultation, and finally the inclusion of a
                  reference to the contribution made by the City Council towards victim support.
O                 The Terms of the Trust
o                 Naturally the primary objects of the Trust are directed towards the benefit of
                  the victims of the disaster and their relatives or dependants. The terms of
                  the Trust Deed then move on to deal with residuary powers in the following
                  paragraphs:-

                  "6.1     In addition to their powers under the foregoing provisions hereof the
                           Trustees may at any time before the end of the Trust Period pay or apply
                           the Trust Fund or any part or parts thereof to or for the benefit of
                           such organisations institutions or purposes whether or not charitable as
                           the Trustees in their discretion select and think appropriate as serving
                           ccxtmunity needs and purposes in the spirit of this Trust.

                  6.2      If at any time before the end of the Trust Period the Trustees shall in
                           their absolute discretion determine that no further provision need be
                           made for the beneficiaries out of the Trust Fund or any part thereof the
                           Trustees shall thereafter hold the Trust Fund or such part thereof and
                           in any event at the end of the Trust Period the Trustees shall hold
                           whatever then remains of the Trust Fund and the income thereof upon such
                           charitable trusts as shall serve charitable cannunity needs in the
                           Cities of Liverpool, Nottingham, and Sheffield or the County of
                           Merseyside or any one or more of them in ways which ccranemorate both the
                           disaster and the generosity of those who responded to the appeal
                           hereinbefore mentioned or subsequently gave money investments or
                           property to this Trust and as the Trustees shall in their discretion
                           determine."

                  Process

                  The process for identifying appropriate residual purposes may perhaps usefully
                  be conducted through the vehicle of the Steering Group which John Pilling
                  mentions has met periodically since the disaster. In addition to
                  representation from the Family and Ccxtraunity Services Department the other
                  representatives on the Steering Group include people from the churches,
voluntary organisations, the Health Authority, Sheffield Wednesday and the
Police. Although the Steering Group is evidently reaching the stage of
finalising its cwn activities I understand that there is to be a meeting at
4.15 p.m. on the 4th June in the Town Hall. John Pilling and I both think
that it may be worthwhile to have an item on the agenda for that meeting to
assist in processing the feedback to the Trustees. Appropriate arfrK-Honal
invitations could be made to the meeting and indeed Norman Adsetts himself
could be invited if available to participate, in the discussion. Additionally
I note that the letter from Norman Adsetts was copied to the Leader and it
would perhaps also be appropriate to consider an element of member
representation at the meeting if this is to be agreed as a useful way forward.

I have suggested to John Pilling that he might usefully place a provisional
item on the agenda relating to the Hillsborough Disaster Appeal so that the
matter may be channelled through this forum if agreed.

City Council Contribution

I appreciate that there will be a range of contributions which I have failed
to identify although it would appear that the main City Council contribution
has been through the victim support offered via the Task Team set up within
the Family and Ccmnunity Services Department. I am aware that their work
involved the offering of support imnediately after the disaster, subsequently
at times such as the inquests when families again visited Sheffield and mare
recently in the support publicity and service at the fixture this season when
Sheffield Wednesday played host to Liverpool Football Club.

I understand that the Task Team has new substantially completed its work and
been disbanded although with the assistance of the City Treasury the
expenditure applied towards the work flawing from the Hillsborough disaster
has been separately accounted for and could be produced were it considered
appropriate for the Trustees to consider a measure of reimbursement.

I hope that these ccnments may be of use to you in advising the Chief
Executive in furthering discussions with the Leader and Norman Adsetts.
                                                                                                                              .J
    R371B
                                    CITY OF SHEFFIELD                      MEMORANDUM                               Sch*162
From        CHIEF PUBLICITY OFFICER                              |j0         MEMBERS OF SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL

                                                                      cc
Date        24 M a y 1990
Ref.        DB/MH
Tel. Ext.   4068
                                                                  Ref.



            HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER APPEAL - INTERIM REPORT

            H e re i s a c o p y o f t h e   in te rim   re p o rt,    d istrib u te d   at   th e   req u est of
            th e T ru s te e s .




 o
   THE HILLSBOROUGH
    DISASTER APPEAL




Interim Report of The Trustees
         April 1990
Trustees
Mr. D. H. Morris (Chairman)   Solicitor - Past President, Liverpool Law Society
Mr. W. N. Adsetts, OBE, MA    Industrialist - Past President, Sheffield
                              Chamber of Commerce
Mr. M. D. Blankstone F.Inst.D Stockbroker - Chairman, Liverpool Stock Exchange
Mr. M. H. F. Hammond          Former Chief Executive, Nottingham City Council


Legal Adviser
Mr. Brian Leveson, QC


Tax Adviser
Mr. Philip Hardman, FCA, FTII

Medical Assessment Panel
Dr. John Evans, MD, FRCP, MRC Psych.
Dr. George Hay, MD, FRC Psych.
Mr. John Dark, MB, BSc, FRCS


Agents
Mr. Donald Cheetham, OBE, CQSW
Ms. Hazel George
Mr. Fred Lloyd, DPA
Mr. Derek Lunt, AIB
Mrs. Ursula Moor, BA, MIPM
Mr. Eric Wallington, DPA


Staff
Mr. C. M. Reddington, B.Com., IPFA, MBCS Trust Fund Manager CJE.X
Mr. D. C. Ferguson, DMA
Mr. S. W. Jones, DPA
Mrs. L. Price
Mrs. A. Shapter
Mrs. E. Weir


Bankers                             Auditors                         Trust Fund Office
Barclays Bank,                      Ernst and Young                  P.O. Box 220,
Water Street,                       Silkhouse Court,                 India Buildings,
Liverpool                           Tithebam Street,                 Liverpool,
                                    Liverpool.                       L69 2PN
National Westminster Bank,
Thurland Street,
Nottingham

Co-operative Bank,
West Street,
Sheffield
                             Interim Report of The Trustees
.The Disaster                                                              subject to tax. However, as will be seen later, we have
On the 15th April 1989 the F. A. Cup Semi-Final was                        found it possible to avoid even this disadvantage.
due to be played at the Hillsborough stadium, the home
of Sheffield Wednesday. By coincidence, it was to be a                     The Fund was therefore established as a discretionary
re p e a t o f the p re v io u s y e a r ’s S em i-F in a l b e tw e e n   trust, although a separate charitable trust was set up to
Liverpool and Nottingham Forest. A fine day of high                        allow co n trib u tio n s to be m ade from organ isations
expectation turned in the space of a few minutes into the                  (generally charitable trusts them selves) which could
worst sporting tragedy ever witnessed in this country. 95                  only make payments to charities.
people were killed in the crush at the Leppings Lane end
of the ground and hundreds m ore were injured - the                        The second decision of principle we took was that the
official report on the disaster quotes 766- but there were                 distribution of the Fund would reflect the fact that there
many hundreds more who suffered trauma and shock, if                       had been unequal suffering and hardship.
not physical injury.
                                                                           Further principles established were that we should aim
The Immediate Response                                                     to pay out the monies available by way of capital sums
T n e L o rd M a y o r o f S h e f f ie ld , th e C h a irm a n o f        rather than by making continuing income payments over
L iv e rp o o l C ity C o u n c il and th e L o rd M a y o r o f           a n um ber o f years; th at we sh ould pay ou t to the
N o ttin g h a m w ere p re s e n t at th e m atch and in the              beneficiaries as quickly as possible; and finally that we
immediate aftermath o f the disaster, on the Saturday                      should not at any time divulge the names of persons to
evening, they launched an Appeal Fund for the victims                      whom we had made distributions, nor how much any
and their relatives. The Chairman of Liverpool Football                    individual or category of persons had received.
Club announced the Club’s intention to set up an Appeal
Fund and at a meeting on the 17th April it was agreed to                   C ertain ad m inistrative principles were also settled.
combine the Appeals into a single Fund, with Trustees                      Since it would be impossible for the Trustees personally
being nominated by the four sponsors. The formal Trust                     to see all the beneficiaries we agreed that we should not
documents were quickly drawn up and the deeds were                         see any of them, all personal contact being done through
signed by the four Trustees on the 21st April - by which                   th e T ru s t F u n d M a n a g e r an d s p e c ia lly a p p o in te d
time there was already over £800,000 standing to the                       Agents, and we decided that costs of administration be
credit of the Fund’s accounts in Sheffield, Liverpool and                  kept to the minimum.
Nottingham.
                                                                           On the practical side, we let the bereaved families know
The Trustees were fortunate to have early advice from                      that the Fund w ould take resp onsibility for funeral
the C h airm an o f the T rustees o f the B radfo rd Fire                  expenses where this was their wish and we made interim
Disaster Appeal. This enabled us at that first meeting                     payments to the next of kin as quickly as they could be
not only to m ake an im m ediate start on helping the                      identified. Interim payments were also made to those
victim s of the disaster but also to take a num ber of                     w ho h a d b e e n s e rio u s ly in ju re d an d we m ad e
important decisions of policy and to make them widely                      arrangements for immediate help to be given to anyone
known.                                                                     suffering financial hardship as a direct result of the
                                                                           disaster. Some £350,000 was paid out within 5 weeks.
The most crucial decision was the form of the Fund. In
general, the public perception of disaster funds is that                   There had already, from the very day of the disaster,
they are charitable funds. However, the constraints of                     been a tremendous input by the local authority Social
charity law are such that many of the purposes for which                   Services Departments particularly in M erseyside and
we believed contributions would be given could not be                      Sheffield. There was an immediate liaison between the
met. Payments to express sympathy in grief and loss,                       Appeal Fund and the Co-ordinating Committee set up
rather than to meet actual financial need, would not be                    by the Directors o f Social Services. The use o f this
possible. Past experience had shown that charitable                        netw ork was o f vital im portance since the victim s,
funds sometimes had difficulty in using the funds which                    although virtually all Liverpool fans, were drawn from
had been donated.                                                          across the country. Two-thirds of those killed were from
                                                                           M erseyside and im m ediately surrounding areas, the
Setting up the Fund as a discretionary trust would allow                   rem aining third spread throughout the country, from
the Trustees to respond to what they believed to be the                    Wiltshire and Essex to Preston and Derbyshire. It was
inten tio n s o f the dono rs, w ithou t the co n stra in t o f            assumed that the distribution of those injured could be
c h a r ity law . T h e o n e m a jo r d is a d v a n ta g e o f a         sim ilarly w idespread. A rrangem ents were therefore
discretionary trust was that unlike a charitable trust, any                made for Directors o f Social Services throughout the
income arising from the investment of the Fund was                         country to m ake paym ents on our b e h alf to relieve
financial difficulties. This meant that both practical and                 The Distribution of the Fund
financial support could be provided together and with                      Having dealt with the immediate problems we were able
the minimum of fuss.                                                       to turn our minds to the question of the main distribution
                                                                           of the Fund. We wanted to make a major disbursement
We found that this arrangement with the Social Services                    before the end of the year and this entailed a number of
Departments worked excellently and it continued until                      in te r - re la te d a c tio n s. A n u m b e r o f A g e n ts w ere
we made major distributions from the Fund later in the                     appointed by the Trustees to visit the bereaved families
year.                                                                      an d th e in ju re d to see if any f u r th e r im m e d ia te
                                                                           a s s is ta n c e w as n e e d e d and to g a th e r in fo rm a tio n
                                                                           necessary to enable the Trustees to make a distribution.
The Raiding of the Fund
Although the Trustees were not involved in fund-raising,                   We c o n s id e r e d it e s s e n tia l to h a v e an im p a rtia l
we could not let this opportunity pass without recording,                  professional assessment of the injuries, both of body and
on behalf o f all the beneficiaries, our gratitude and,                    mind, sustained by the survivors. We therefore asked
indeed, amazement at the incredible generosity which                       three eminent Consultants to undertake this assessment
the disaster has prompted.                                                 for us and the Trust Fund staff set about the task of
                                                                           obtaining the necessary medical reports.
T h e C ity C o u n c ils o f L iv e r p o o l, S h e ffie ld and
Nottingham, and Liverpool and Sheffield Wednesday                          One of the difficulties that we faced was that although
Football Clubs, were responsible for providing much                        we could readily identify those who had been killed,
practical assistance to fund-raising. How ever, fund ­                     there was no comprehensive record of those who had
ra isin g on o c c a s io n s such as th is is n o t c e n tra lly         been injured. We recognised, therefore, that although
organised but arises from hundreds of spontaneously                        we could get in touch with the bereaved families and the
o rg a n is e d e v e n ts an d a c tiv itie s , as w e ll as fro m        seriously injured straight away, we would need to await
countless donations from individuals, educational and                      claims from those less seriously injured.
sporting organisations, and businesses large and small.
The range o f events has been trem endous, from the                        Early in June, therefore, we advertised in the local press
m atch betw een Celtic and Liverpool, the concert by                       in M erseyside, Sheffield and Nottingham, and in the
famous Liverpool stars of show business, the record                        n a tio n al press, in v itin g th ose who w ere in ju red at
produced by Gerry Marsden and his colleagues, all the                      Hillsborough to register a claim on the Fund. We asked
w ay a c ro ss th e sp e c tru m to s p o n so re d w alk s and            for claims to be made by the end of July. It was apparent
activities in dozens of schools throughout the country                     that m any o f those who had been in the crush were
and collections in old p e o p le ’s homes. The football                   reluctant to claim, being conscious that they had escaped
community throughout the world has responded; clubs                        with their lives whilst so many had tragically perished.
and fans from Canada to South America, from as far                         However, as the size of the Fund was rising steadily it
away as Australia and Hong Kong, and across Europe,                        was becoming clear that it would be sufficient to make
as well as the British Isles, have been generous in their                  an eq u itab le d istrib u tio n , no t only to the bereaved
 support.                                                                  families and those seriously injured but also to those
                                                                           who sustained less serious injuries.
 The banks and building societies provided a nation-wide
 network through w hich m any of these contributions                        A Family Support Group had been set up by the families
 were received and all branches of the media played a                       of those killed at Hillsborough. Late in July the Trust
 significant part in supporting and publicising the appeal.                 Fund Manager attended a meeting of the Group at which
                                                                            concerns abo ut the d istrib u tio n o f the Fund and a
 Over £1 million was contributed by the readers of the                      possible “means tested” approach were expressed. The
 “D aily M irro r” and £'/2m illion was given by H.M .                      Trust Fund Manager was able to allay these fears. The
 G o v e r n m e n t an d £'/4 .m illio n by th e E .E .C . T he            first concern had to some extent been provoked by press
 contributions have come from all quarters, in large and                    reports which had been taken to imply that the Trustees
 sm all su m s, all o f th e m b e a r in g th e m e s s a g e o f          might consider using money from the Fund for purposes
 sympathy for the victims.                                                  other than the direct distribution to beneficiaries. The
                                                                            Trust deed, as is normal in such cases, provided for the
 A lth o u g h we w o u ld h a v e lik e d to p u b lis h                   use o f residual funds for public charitable purposes in
 a ck n o w led g m en ts o f in d iv id u al c o n trib u tio n s, this    the areas of Merseyside, Sheffield and Nottingham, in
 would have been an impossible task. So many have                           the spirit o f the Appeal. It was m ade clear that the
 contributed anonymously or through group donations                         Trustees would only consider payments under residual
 that we thought it would be invidious to acknowledge                       powers after they were satisfied that a full distribution
 only some of those whose generosity has led to the Fund                    had been m ade to the b erea v ed fam ilies and those
 now reaching £12.1 million - far and away the largest                      injured at Hillsborough. The Family Support Group
 domestic disaster Fund ever raised in this country.                         were also reassured that the Trustees w ould not be
adopting a “m eans te stin g ” approach, although the               Customs and Excise and DSS. They were always ready
distribution would take into account the situation of               to a s s is t us w h en w e c a lle d u p o n th e m , an d it is
dependants.                                                         no tew o rth y th a t In lan d R e v e n u e and C usto m s and
                                                                    Excise have now published a booklet giving guidelines
A lth o u g h we r e c o g n is e d th a t u ltim a te ly the       to the tax treatment of disaster funds, which will help
responsibility for all decisions on the distribution of the         those called upon to administer future disaster funds.
Fund would rest with us as Trustees, we thought it right
to consult widely so that we could be aware, as far as              It is not now expected that there will be any tax liability
possible, o f the view s o f the com m unities affected.            on the Fund in respect of the contributions to the Fund
M eetings were held with representatives of the local               and th e o n ly su ch lia b ility w ill be in re s p e c t o f
communities in Nottingham, Sheffield and Merseyside                 investment income. However, in consultations with the
                                                                    Inland Revenue it has been agreed that if the investment
and with Liverpool F.C.
                                                                    income is paid over to the Hillsborough Charitable Trust
By the end o f A ugust, 400 injury claim s had been                 the tax paid on that income can be recovered by the
formally lodged with the Fund, but we were aware of a               Charitable Trust. So far as payments out of the Fund
further 160 potential claims and both of these numbers              were concerned, the beneficiaries do not have to pay tax
were rising daily. We thought that it would not be fair to          on the am oun ts receiv ed alth o u g h th e re w ould, o f
the bereaved fam ilies and those seriously injured to               course, be a liability for tax on inv estm en t incom e
delay making a distribution until we were in a position             arising subsequently.
to adjudicate on all the claims, and so we aimed to make
the major distribution in these cases by October.                   We were made fully aware by the DSS of the way in
                                                                    w h ic h any p a y m e n ts fro m th e F u n d c o u ld a ffe c t
When we met early in October the Fund was standing at               entitlement to income-related benefits which were being
£10.5 million. We felt able at that stage to make the               received by any of the beneficiaries and this helped us to
d is trib u tio n to the b e re a v e d fa m ilie s and to th ose   a v o id c e rta in p itfa lls . T hey w ere a lso h e lp fu l in
seriously injured, in the knowledge that there would be             pointing out the exem ptions applicable to trusts for
sufficient in the Fund to make appropriate payments to              in ju re d b e n e fic ia rie s w hich c o u ld m in im ise th ese
those with lesser injuries who at that stage numbered               effects.
some 700.
                                                                    We had early on decided that payments for dependant
B y th e en d o f O c to b e r we had e ith e r p a id o u t or     children would be made in Trust. It also became clear
committed to Trusts just over £6 million and we aimed               that some payments for those seriously injured should
to m ake a distribution to the m ajority o f those less             be m ad e in T ru st. F o llo w in g a r e q u e s t fro m the
                                                                    Solicitors of one of the dependant children for assistance
seriously injured before the end of the year.
                                                                    in setting up a Trust, we commissioned standard Trust
T he M edical P anel m ade good p ro g ress w ith their             Deeds to cover the various sets of circumstances that
assessm ents. By D ecem b er we were able to m ake                  could arise and made these available to beneficiaries, as
payments, interim in some cases, to 500 of those injured            appropriate. These Deeds were also drafted to enable
(including all those who had claimed by 31st August).               any settlements from civil proceedings to be put into the
                                                                    same Trusts, thereby simplifying the future management
By mid-March we had made payments to 647 of those                   of the funds.
injured and in the light of the outcome of these cases
and of further contributions which had come into the                These Trusts were drawn up in consultation with the
Fund beyond those anticipated in October, we were able              H ills b o ro u g h S te e r in g G ro u p o f th e S o lic ito r s
to make a final payment to bereaved families and those              representing the families and the victims of the disaster
                                                                    in civil proceedings and we have found it most helpful
seriously injured.
                                                                    to be able to deal with one organisation representing the
We have now paid out or committed to trusts some £10                legal interests of so many of the victims.
m illio n o f th e £ 1 1 .6 m illio n c o n trib u te d to th e
Discretionary Fund - some 86% and administrative costs               Recognising that some of the beneficiaries m ight be
a re p r e s e n tly le ss th a n 1% o f th e s e a m o u n ts .     unused to handling significant sums of money we made
Contributions to the Charitable Fund stand at £460,000.              available an investment information booklet to those
                                                                     who wanted it. For the larger sums being put into Trusts
Other Issues                                                         we arranged for independent financial advice to be
There had been some early m isunderstanding in the                   given to the new trustees and obtained on their behalf
m ed ia a bo ut the tax and VAT situation so far as it               preferential terms for certain investments.
affected the Fund and it is as well to record the facts and
clear up these misunderstandings. We had the utmost                  The Next Stages
co-operation from o fficials o f the Inland R evenue,                There remain over 180 injury cases which have not yet
been finally assessed, and claims have continued to                    We want to be satisfied about the completeness of the
come in. It seems appropriate to put a final deadline on               d istrib u tio n to in d iv id u a l b e n e fic ia rie s b e fo re we
the receipt of claims and this will be set at a reasonable             c o n sid e r the use o f the C h arita b le T rust funds for
interval after the anniversary of the disaster. We believe             residual purposes in the spirit of the Appeal.
that the balance of contributions in the Discretionary
Fund will be sufficient to cover the remaining injury                  Statement of Accounts
cases. This would allow for the transfer of investment                 We will be publishing audited accounts of both Trust
income to the Charitable Trust and hence to recover the                Funds after the completion of distributions or after the
tax payable. However, we have decided it would be                      y e a r en d , as a p p r o p r ia te . H o w e v e r, as th e f ir s t
prudent at this stage to transfer only £400,000 o f the                anniversary of the disaster approaches it is appropriate
g ro ss in c o m e to the C h a rita b le T rust, le a v in g the      to give an account of our stewardship to date. Interim
balance to meet unforeseen contingencies.                              u n a u d ite d a cco u n ts o f the re c e ip ts , p a y m e n ts and
                                                                       commitments of both Funds are shown opposite.
Although at one time it was thought that it would be
possible to meet funeral expenses from the Charitable                  Our Thanks
T ru s t th is p ro v e d n o t to be th e c a se . T h e on ly        S ince we c an n o t thank c o n trib u to rs to the A pp eal
e x p e n d itu r e an d c o m m itm e n t at p r e s e n t o f th e   individually, it seems inappropriate to thank those who
Charitable Trust is for the Hillsborough Help-Line. We                 have co ntributed to the adm inistration o f the Fund
have agreed to support this for a period of 18 months                  in d iv id u a lly . N o n e th e le s s , we m u s t e x p re s s o u r
from October 1989 at a cost of £100,000.                               appreciation to all those who have made it possible to
                                                                       reach the stage we are at today. Apart from our Fund
We will be contributing to the cost of the memorial                    staff, agents and advisers, we include the hundreds of
which is to be dedicated at Anfield on the anniversary,                d o c to rs w ho p ro v id e d m e d ic a l re p o r ts and th o se
but apart from this, and support for for the memorial                  organisations who provided, at no cost to the Fund, a
booklets already printed, no decisions have been taken                 seconded member of the staff, office accommodation,
about memorial or residual uses of the Appeal Fund                     com puter and w ord-processing equipm ent, printing,
which will substantially come from the Charitable Trust.               banking and auditing services.




4 ^ ^ . —              l


   D. H. Morris                        W. N. Adsetts                      M. D. Blankstone                           M. H. F. Hammond


                                                                                                                             10th April 1990

                                                                                                                                                  o




                                                                                  r
                                   Discretionary Trust
                                           at 19th March 1990

                                                                   £

    Contributions                                               11,594,097

    Investment Income                               888,294
         Less provision for tax                     310,903       577,391

                                                                12,171,488


    Payments to Beneficiaries                                    7,521,277

    Amounts allocated to Trusts for Beneficiaries                2,476,500

O   Other Fund Payments                                                9,204


                                                                10,006,981


    Administration

           Staffing and office expenses             49,631
           Medical etc. fees                        35,986
           Other                                     9,859         95,476

                                                                10,102,457
    Balance as at 19/3/90                                        2,069,031

                                                                12,171,488


O
                                      CharitableTrust
                                           at 19th March 1990

    Contributions                                                 461,185
    Investment Income                                              10,366

                                                                  471,551

    Payments - Help-Line                                            16,540
    Amount allocated to Help-Line to March 1991                     83,460

                                                                  100,000
    Balance as at 19/3/90                                         371,551

                                                                  471,551
    Subject To Audit
     Ly       - c     bhfLsOi




v J va>   ^               Qjjjtrb   0   -^^rv'^cnj;%
                    <L.




                                                       o




                                                       o
                                                                                                     Sheffield
                                                                                                    Insulations
                                                                                                   Group
                                                                                                   pic


Ref: W N A / l w
                                                                                                        CH!Ef/EMSCUTJVE
30th May,      1990
                                                                                         C.P.U.                                 i
                                                                                                            SMI ■feo                n po
                                                                                        ...—                                               i
M s . Pame la G o r d o n
                                                                                                       3 1 HAY 1990
                                                                                                                                    PUB ,
v IlX C L      LI L X V C

S h e f f i e l d City Council                                                                         R.E U          PE C U
                                                                                            U.P.
T o w n Hall
S h e f field
SI 2HH



D e a r Pamela,

I am w r i t i n g to c o nfirm the arra ngements for lunch fol lowing the m e e t i n g
o f the H i l l s b o r o u g h Disaster Trustees o n M o n d a y 11th June.

W e will b e h o l d i n g the Trust M e e t i n g d u r i n g the m o r n i n g at H i llsboro ugh
W o r k s and I expec t to start lunch about 1.00 pm, m a y I suggest y o u
arrive about 12.45 pm.
                                                                               S
I h a v e also invited Counc illor Betts a n d Councillor Phyllis Smith to
the lunch and y o u m a y w i s h to m a k e a rrangements to travel together.

I look forward to seeing y o u on the 11th.                                                                      \                         CJE-K
Kind regards,
                                                                                                            y         Ccx-'V'

Y o u r s sincerely,
                                                                                                                      ^             o ^ <e_cr




N O R M A N MJSETT S OBE




F o r your i nformat ion I have attached a list of the other p eople who will
be p r e s e n t at the lunch.




                               Hillsborough Works, SheffieldS62LW, England
                               Telephone 0742 852852
                              Telex 54288, Fax Groups 1/2/30742337191
                             Registered Office: Hillsborough Works, Sheffield S6 2LW, Registeredin EnglandNo 998314
Details of p eo ple a t t e n d i n g H i l l s b o r o u g h
Di s a s t e r Trust L u n c h on 11th June. 1990




Dr.   Evans                        - Chai rman of M e d i c a l Panel
Mr.   Mike Reddington              - Trust F u n d M a n a g e r
Mr.   D o n Fergu s o n            - Trust Fund
Mr.   Michael Hammond              - Trustee
Mr.   M i c h a e l Bla nkstone    -Trustee
Mr.   D e r i c k M orris          - Trustee
WNA/MLC


                                                                                                                Group
1 6 j}ity 1 9 9 0



Ms P a m e l a Gordon
Chief Executive                                                                                                        H r-B t-C H T W E
Sheffield City Council                                                                               G.P.U ■
Town Hall
SHEFFIELD
SI 2 H H                                                                                                 RES ' 1
                                                                                                       5TRA1

Dear          Pamela

I h a v e a l r e a d y w r i t t e n to C l i v e B e t t s a n d y o u r s e l f o n 2 M a y 1 9 9 0
about     the n e e d     for us      to t a l k w i t h i n   the next          few weeks    about
possible         options          for   a  "memorial"            contribution           from    the
Hillsborough Disaster Appeal.

We     have        already    had      an     application    from  the  Hillsborough
Community           Trust,  which        seems     to b e an appropriate  vehicle for
e x p r e s s i n g some a p p r e c i a t i o n for the support and sympathy of the
p e o p l e of Hill s b o r o u g h .

It m a y be t h a t y o u w i s h to s u p p o r t this or a l t e r n a t i v e l y       there
may       be   other      recommendations         for    some     use      of  our     "residual
f u n d s " , a n d I w o u l d like to m e e t y o u w i t h i n t h e n e x t t w o o r t h r e e
weeks,         perhaps      involving     Michael       Reddington,           the   Trust Fund
M a n a g e r , in o u r t a l k s . I w i l l g e t m y s e c r e t a r y to s p e a k to y o u r s
a b o u t a p o s s i b l e date.

In a d d i t i o n  I have                  s p o k e n to C l i v e B e t t s  about    a lunch at our
offices      on the      day                of     the   next    Trustees      Meeting     in S h e f f i e l d ,
II J u n e 1 9 9 0 , a n d I               h o p e y o u w i l l b e a b l e t o j o i n us.

With          best         wishes

V on   ~r g       si n r p r p l v




NORMAN ADSETTS                       OBE
Chairman




cc            C    J   C    Betts




                                             Hillsborough Works, SheffieldS6 2LW, England
                                             Telephone 0742852852
                                            Telex54288, Fax Groups 1/2/30742337191
                                           Registered Office: Hillsborough Works, Sheffield S62LW, Registeredin EnglandNo. 998314
                                                                                                         Sheffield
                                                                                                        Insulations
                                                                                                        Broun
WNA/MLC                                                                                               p lC


2 May     1990



Cllr Pamela Gordon
Chief Executive
Sheffield City Council
Town Hall
SHEFFIELD
SI 2 H H



Dear    Pamela

The      interim       report     of     the   Trustees     of   the     Hillsborough                                       Appeal
Fund was recently published,                       just before the a n n i v e r s a r y                                    of the
d i s a s t e r , a n d I u n d e r s t a n d th a t you h a v e b e e n sent a copy.

As Trustees,            we n e e d to be s a t i s f i e d t h a t we h a v e c o m p l e t e d the
d i s t r i b u t i o n to i n d i v i d u a l b e n e f i c i a r i e s b e f o r e we c o n s i d e r the
u s e o f C h a r i t a b l e T r u s t f u n d s f o r r e s i d u a l p u r p o s e s in t h e s p i r i t
of the A p p e a l .

H o w e v e r , w e a r e a p p r o a c h i n g t h i s s t a g e , a n d i t is p l a n n e d t h a t at
the June m e e t i n g of the Trust, we should begin to cons i d e r                                 such
matters.

In t h e n e x t m o n t h I w o u l d l i k e t o h a v e a n o p p o r t u n i t y t o t a l k to
you     about    those charitable              objects which     may     seem appropriate,
g i v e n y o u r o w n c o n t r i b u t i o n in the a f t e r m a t h of the d r e a d f u l
events      of l a s t year,         and any other        general        issues       w h i c h may
arise.

My   intention would           be    to have         these      individual     talks                                      early   in
May,    a nd to c o m p l e t e d i s c u s s i o n s b e f o r e the T r u s t m e e t                                   again   on
11 J u n e , p o s s i b l y in S h e f f i e l d .




Yours     sincerely

                                                                                                       3 -MAY 1990

NORMAN ADSETTS           OBE
Chairman



                                                      Letter also sent CJC Betts


                                    Hillsborough Works, SheffieldS62LW, England
                                    Telephone 0742852852
                                   Telex 54288, Fax Groups 1/2/30742337191
                                  Registered Office: Hillsborough Works, Sheffield S62LW, Registeredin EnglandNo 998314
CHIEF EXECUTIVE
                                   NALGO SHOP STEWARD
                                   FAMILY & COMMUNITY SERVICES
18th May., 1990                       DEPARTMENT
C.EX/RF b . \ 2-
4002     1                                       C.




HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

I refer to your memorandum of the 27th April and appreciate
the concerns of your Committee.    I regret it was not
possible for NeiT*Kay to follow the matter up before he
retired and I am asking Martin Manby to review the position
and to consider the best way forward.
    R 371 9                                                                                            Sell 9 1 6 0
                             CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM
    t


From                                          To
                                                     Pamela Gordon
              NALGO Shop Steward                     Chief Executive
              F & C S
Date          27 April 1990
Ref.          PR/RM
Tel. Ext.     4 91 A                          Ref.



              RE : HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
              F & C S NALGO Shop Stewards Committee have asked me to write
              to you following Neil Kay's memo of the 19 April which he
              copied to you.

              We agreed with the Director, shortly after the disaster,
               that there was a need to make an appraisal of this
               department's response during the first 48 hours.   We did
               discuss the process for consulting staff and suggested
               seven meetings to take place, centred on each of the
               department's social work divisions.   Neil Kay did express
               reservations about this process but explained the appraisal
              and subsequent report would be done over a number of months and
              we believed that one meeting a month was not too great a
               demand.

              None of these meetings have taken place and consequently
              no appraisal has been made.  No discussions have taken place
              about the successes and/or failures of the department's
              response and therefore, crucially, F & C S has learned
              nothing from its experience of dealing with the most
              traumatic event faced by Sheffield for many years.

              Contrast that with the position of the Area Health Authority
              with Liverpool and other Merseyside Social Services Departments
              who have long since completed and published their appraisals
              of the events following the Hillsborough disaster.

              It is all very well for Neil Kay to confirm that the response
              of individuals was magnificent - we are all too well aware of
              that - but what he has clearly failed to address is the
              organisational response of the Department.  Many of the
              individuals involved have expressed major concerns about this
              matter and feel that despite the magnificent response of
              individuals that the organisational response was one of total
              disarray.

              We still believe therefore that an appraisal needs to be under­
              taken and we feel it is inappropriate for the acting Director
              to assume responsibility for this piece of work, as he was
              directly involved over the weekend of the disaster.

              We also feel that, given the absence of commitment from our own
              D^p)artmenl/\that the Local Authority should take corporate
                              — °— "— “ suring this appraisal is carried out.

                                                            CHSEi/EXECUTIVE
                                                     C.P.U.
                                                                 SHIELD                  c . p .o .!
                                                      M.T.
              NALGO Shop Steward                      RES 3 0 APR 1990
              F & C S                                                                     PIJB •
                                                     STivAf
                                                            r . e . u . I p . e .c . u .
                                                       U.P.             1
CI T Y OF SHE FFI ELD
F A M IL Y A N D C O M M U N I T Y SERVICES DEPARTMENT
REDVERS HO USE
U N I O N STREET
SHEFFIELD S1 2 J Q
Telephone 734811




                                 e-lt'ccc3-
                                      C IT Y OF SHEFFIELD — M E M O R A N D U M
.       »
    F'o.n   D i r e c t o r of S ocial Services                To     Phil Read,    Nalgo

                                                                      cc Pamela Gordon
    Date      19 April 1 9 9 0                                           Chief Executive
    Ref.      NVK/JS
    Tel. Ext. 4 8 4 4                                          Ref.




             RE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

             I thank y o u for your memo of 16 April.

             I very m u c h r egret that I w a s n o t able to arrange and carry o ut a series
             of m e e t i n g s w i t h staff wh o we re involved in w o r k o v e r the w e e k e n d of the
             Hillsb o r o u g h Disaster.      You w i l l remember that I e x p r e s s e d some doubts as
             to the practi c a l i t y of the numbers of m e e tings sugges ted w h e n I discussed
             this w i t h your colleague Cath Baldock, but I am sorry if the fact that
             these o r s i m i l a r m e e tings have not taken place has been interpret ed by some
             staff as m e a n i n g I fail to rec ognise or value the impressive contribution
             made by those w h o responded at the time.

             I agree that this response w a s "magnificent" the w o r d used in your own memo.
             I said so p u b licly on a n u m b e r o f occasions after the D i s a s t e r in press
             c onferences and committee meetings.          I also put this on record in w r i t t e n
             communications through both N e w s l e t t e r and press statements.




              D i r e c t o r o f Social Services
1                                                      y-vL      k   fl-^f

{jjfru. <A^P<yrvu^Qj>l                                                       k   {
                                                                                         C O U N C I L
    with compliments
                                                                                         Health and Consumer Services
                                                                                         Director
                                                                                         D W Purchon MIEH AMInstWM

                                                                                         T ow n Hall Chambers
                                                                                         1 Barkers Pool, Sheffield SI 1EN
                                                                                         Telephone: (0742) 734611
                                                                                         Telecom Gold 76: LM X877 (Env. Health)
                                                                                                      76: LM X878 (C onsum er Serv.)
                                                   ;:r1 1 6 M A R 199'                   Fax: (0 742) 7 3 6 4 6 4 (Town Hall Chambers)
                                                                                              (0 7 4 2 )4 0 2 5 3 1 (Trading Standards)
                                                                                               (0742) 7 3 4692 (Env. Services)
                                                   E 5 J u i u i ? ^ W ( :   i       /   Telax: 9 3 1 2 1 3 2 2 7 0 (IF G)
    'tf* '   p r in t e d o n recycled p a p e r
                                           HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES

                                                   HILLSBOROUGH INQUESTS

                                              ft                              r
         N o t e s o n the m e e t i n g at the M e d i c o - L e g a l C e n t r e on 7th March,     1990.

         Present;           Dr.     S.L. P o p p e r
                            Mr.     R. M i c h i e
                            Mr.     D. Blore,
                            Mr.     J. M e r v y n J o n e s ( Assista nt C h i e f C o n s table -
                                                                   W e s t Mi dlands Police)

                            and t h r e e s u p p o r t o f f i c e r s of the Hillsb o r o u g h Enquiry Team.



1. 0     Inquiry

         C o s t s and expenses of I n q u i r y T e a m to b e ’ met by' South Yorkshire Police.
         C o s t s of inquests and f o l l o w i n g items to be' met by' the Coroners Services
         (S h e f f i e l d M e t r o p o l i t a n D i s t r i c t C o u n c i l and Barnsley)

d.. 0    C o r o n e r s Inquests

   2.1   T h e s e w i l l c o m mence on W e d n e s d a y 18th April, 1990 with a view to
         c o m p l e t i o n by' 4th May.   It w a s r e c o g n i s e d that there m a y b.e' an overrun
         on this of up to o n e w e e k a n d we s h o u l d plan accordingly.

   2.2   J o h n B a t l e y will be’ the D e p a r t m e n t ' s liaison officer, Sue H a r p e r
         ( T e l e p h o n e No. 021 236 5000 Ext. 2010) will b e ’ the Inquiry T e a m liaison
         officer.

   2.3   T h e Group c o n s i d e r e d that m e d i a and p u blic interest will be'highest on
         the first day r e q u i r i n g f a c i l i t i e s o u t s i d e the scope of the Medico-
         L e g a l Centre.       Sue H a r p e r h a d p r o v i s i o n a l l y reserved the N e lson Mandella
         R o o m at the Town H a l l but the n e c e s s a r y ante rooms for jurors, press,
         w a i t i n g areas and r e f r e s h m e n t s etc. at present are bo’          o ked for committees.
         R. M i c h i e has a r r a n g e d for the i n s p e c t i o n of the City Me m o r i a l Hall by'
         t h e E n q u i r y Team.     This was f o u n d to be' entirely satisfactory and has
         b e ’e n b o b k e d for ,18th April t o g e t h e r w i t h several ante rooms.

   2.4   I n addition, the s e l e c t i o n and s w e a r i n g in of jurors requires
         c o n s i d e r a b l e a c c o m m o d a t i o n on the f i r s t day.

   2.5   T h e I n q u i r y T e a m a n d Dr. P o p p e r feel that all other p roceedings can take
         p l a c e at the M e d i c o - L e g a l C e n t r e for the r emaining period subj'ect to
         c e r t a i n arr angements.

         -   a f t e r c o n s u l t a t i o n w i t h the fire o f f i c e r the following
             a r r a n g e m e n t s w e r e a greed o n the groun ds of safety and
             to limit d i s tress for r e l a t i v e s :-

              a)   to a void o v e r c r o w d i n g the building, two po rtacabihs will
                   be' h i r e d to be' s i t uated in the M e d i c o - Legal car park.
                   D. B l o r e has e s t a b l i s h e d that no council department has
                   s i m i l a r f a c i l i t i e s a v a i l a b l e at that time. Sue H a r p e r has
                   c h e c k e d s e v e r a l firms a n d n e g o t i a t e d a good discount with
                   what she c o n s i d e r e d to be the m o s t reliable firm.                 For the
                   p e r i o d r e q u i r e d the c o s t wil l be' approximately £1,000.
                   The c o mp any w i l l p r o v i d e f r e e -of-c harge the necessary outlets
                   for C.C.T.V. a n d t e l e p h o n e lines and will liaise to connect to
                   se r vices with J o h n Batley.
i



                                                              -   2   -




              b.)‘ U s i n g the M e d i c o - L e g a l C e n t r e and portacabihs will be
                   f a r cheaper than h i r i n g other a c c o mmodation but fire
                   r e s t r i c t i o n s n e c e s s i t a t e limiting numbers in the Coroners
                   Court .         The p r o c e e d i n g s w i l l be’ piped by'C.C.T.V. from
                   t w o cameras in the C o u r t to the press accomm o d a t i o n and
                   s u pport areas in the port acabins.                     The abs'ence of press in
                   t h e C ourt w i l l also be' less stressful for relatives.

              c) Again, Sue H a r p e r has n e g o t i a t e d competitive rates and the
                 T.7. firm w i l l provide a l l equipment, links, etc. and all
                 th e work.  T h e total c o s t will be' about £1,000.

    2.6    The W.R .7.S. will p r o v i d e two v olunteers               each day from 9.00 a.m. to 6.00
           p.m. to serve r e f r e s h m e n t s to relatives,            the cost being m e t by' the
           Council.   Other v i s i t o r s will be' able to              purchase refreshments.

    2.7    A p olice officer w i l l be’ a l l o c a t e d to e a c h family to accompany t h e m
           whilst a t the Inquest.

    2. 8   It  is i n t e n d e d to p r o g r a m m e t he a ttend a n c e of families to complete eight
           inquests each day so far as is possible, firstly to complete the task                         as
           soon as p o s sible a n d s e c o n d l y to m i n i m i s e costs.

    2.9    With this     in mind the p r o v i s i o n of h otel accommodation was discussed at
           length.

           Although, witnesses fees, t r a v e l l i n g allowances, etc. w i l l be' paid in
           a c c o r d a n c e with t he scales l a i d down, parents or relatives would only be’
           paid if c a lled as w itnesses.            The Coroner, so far as possible, will avoid
           this to m i n i m i s e the stress of the occasion.

           A cas h p a y ment in lieu of a c c o m m o d a t i o n is not a ppropria te but the Group
           felt t h e r e were g o o d reasons f o r a r r a n g i n g hotel ac commodation for two
           p eople p e r deceased;

               an e a r l y start e a c h day is i mportant to complete the inquests in as
               s h o r t a time as possible.            T h i s will realise considerable savings in
               w i t n e s s e s and jurors a t t e n d a n c e allowances and travel l i n g expenses
               etc.

               the W o r l d S n o o k e r C h a m p i o n s h i p s at the Crucible will m e a n that
               o v e r n i g h t a c c o m m o d a t i o n is v e r y scarce during the p eriod which would
               c a u s e a d d i t i o n a l distress f o r families seeking accommodation.

               it is im portant to avoid a n y adverse publicity r e g a r d i n g Sheffield's
               h o s p i t a l i t y in c o n n e c t i o n w i t h the inquests.

           T h e H a r l e y Ho tel is p r e p a r e d to hold rooms available at a preferential
           r a t e a n d w e will o n l y be’ b i l l e d for a c c ommodation used, i.e.
           approximately          £50 p e r person.

    2 . 1 0 T h e o r d e r of i n q u e s t s will be' programmed taking into a c count the home
            a d d r e s s e s of r e l a t i v e s attending.    (Quite a number are not from
            Liverpool).          This w i l l m i n i m i s e the need for overnight accommodation.

    2.11   A d d i t i o n a l furniture,   chairs etc., can be loaned from w i t h i n the Council.
                                                      -   3 -

3.0     F i n a ncial P o s i t i o n

  3.1   Any arrangements o r p u r c ha ses in connec t i o n w i t h the inquests made by'
        m u t u a l agreement w i l l b,e;‘f o r m a l l y confirmed b y ’'official order signed b y ’
        the C o r o n e r or J. B a t l e y and i n v oiced and c o d e d appropriat ely to
        H i l l s b o r o u g h D i s a s t e r expenditure.

  3.2   Sue Harper estimated total costs of arrangements,                          excluding hotel
        accommodation, w o u l d not be’ m u c h ab.oVe £4,000.

4.0     F u r nival H o u s e - W e s t M i d l a n d s P o l i c e

  4.1   W i t h regard to s o c i a l services, a local liai son officer is baised in
        Redvers H o u s e ( Telephone No. 731546).

  4.2   S o c i a l workers w i l l b e ‘ on h a n d at the C entre           throughout the period of the
        inquests.

5.0     Records

  5.1   Dr. Popper will a r r a n g e p r o f e s s i o n a l s h o r t h a n d and typing resources to
        record and type f u l l tr anscriptions of all proceedings as a bafck-up to
        the usual tape recordings.

6. 0    P l a n n i n g Pe r m i s s i o n

  6.1   Not required for t h e portacabins for periods of less than 28 days but
        fi r e regulations m u s t be' obs’erved, fire extinguishers provided etc.

        T h e portacabihs w i l l b.e' 24ft x 9ft.                    This size obviates the need for
        craming.




        MM3ACP
        14.3.90.
   R 3 71 9                                                                                                  Sch 9160
                                        CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM

From          The Head o f th e A d m in is tr a t io n and       To     The Leader
              Legal Department                                           CJC B e t t s

Date      5 February 1990
Ref-      MW/DG
Tel. Ext. 4018                                                    Ref.   cc C h ief E x ec u tiv e



              TAYLOR REPORT ON HILLSBOROUGH

              Further t o r e c e n t d i s c u s s i o n s between m y s e lf and th e C hief E x e c u tiv e
              I now in ten d t o produce a r e p o r t f o r the P o l i c y Committee in February
              t o update Members on th e m atters o u t l i n e d in the l a s t r e p o r t t h e y r e c e i v e
              on t h i s i s s u e l a s t y e a r and in p a r t i c u l a r t o draw a t t e n t i o n t o any
              v a r i a t i o n s in th e in t e r im recommendations s e t out in the f i n a l r e p o r t
              o f Lord J u s t i c e Taylor and th e measures t h a t have been taken t o implement
              the recommendations.

              In essence, as I think you are aware, we had anticipated most of his
              requirements and the procedures that are currently operating in
              authority are in line with the final report.




                                                                                                                P.O.
                                                                                              6 F E B 1990
                                CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM              CONFIDENTIAL

From        CHIEF PERSONNEL OFFICER               To     DIRECTOR OF WORKS

                                                         cc   Chief Executive
Date        5th February 1990                                 Keith Thrustle
Ref.        RK/JT
Tel. Ext.   4081                                  Ref.   DFG/RMS


            INTERNAL INQUIRY INTO STAFF RESPONSIBILITY ASPECTS
            OF THE HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY

            I refer to your memorandum of 31st January.   I have spoken with the
            Chief Executive and I understand alternative arrangements are now being
            made.   I should appreciate formal confirmation.




                                                              L     |   SHnrRELD    I 0.P.O-,

                                                              I S H * ^ E-B1990        pU3
                                                              s S   h   p n tP .E .clir"        ,
                                                                            1      - L ----
    R 371 9                                                                  .   ,    sch a 1i e6o0
                                                                                      Sch 9
                               CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM                IVAA

              Mr D F Green                             ief Executive                 OLvw             w_.io
              Director of Wc
                                                   1/ cc Mr   M   Webster
DatB          3]^ January 199                            Mr   T   Hoskins
Ref-          DFG/RMS         t                          Mr   R   Knowles
Tel. Ext.     5240                                       Mr   K   Thrustle



              CONFIDENTIAL
              INTERNAL INQUIRY INTO STAFF RESPONSIBILITY ASPECTS
              OF THE HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY

              I trust that you are aware that shortly before you took up
              your appointment it was agreed with the Leader that I should
              chair an internal inquiry into staff responsibility aspects of
              the Hillsborough tragedy following publication of the original
              Taylor Report.  The objective would be to determine whether
              there are any grounds or reasons       for taking disciplinary
              action against any of the staff concerned with the application
              of the 'Safety in Sports Grounds' legislation.

              It is now necessary to get this underway, having deferred
              action for a while pending the final report of Lord Justice
              Taylor and the separate Police investigations which have been
              taking place concerning possible criminal negligence.

              Over the last couple of months or so I have had discussions
              with Mark Webster but, understandably and quite properly, lie
              feels the need to take 'an arm's length' approach since his
              own Department has the Licensing role. I drew up some draft
              terms of reference and these have been commented upon by Mark
              and following some further conversations I have had with Keith
              Thrustle of Personnel, I have amended these and a copy of m y
              latest draft is attached.    I would welcome final comments on
              these from all addressees by a week today - Wednesday 7
              February - and also on the draft programme overleaf.

              My purpose in writing to you now is to suggest that you should
              shortly formally tell people - eg the Management Team and the
              Trade Unions - what is proposed and why and how it will happen
              and my role in it. That needs to come from you,      I think,
              rather than me or Mark or the Chief Personnel Officer.

              Keith     Thrustle feels that the Trade Unions should be
              'consulted' about the terms of reference and asked for their
              views but that it should be consultation and not negotiation.
              Once all that has been done then people at the sharp end need
              to be informed about the procedures and timing and so on and
              that may well best be done either by me as Chairman or by
              Personnel, and I am in touch with Keith about that.  There are
              also some people who have left the Authority who ideally I
              will need to approach but if they are not disposed to
              contribute/participate then I am advised there is nothincr we
              can d o .

              A time now needs to be set for the commencement of the inquiry
              so that I can clear my diary and others that may be called can
              prepare also.
                              -2 -

Allowing time for the consultations on the terms of reference
(say a fortnight) and an opportunity for you to set the thing
in motion,   I would suggest I aim for the week commencing
Monday 19 March and to achieve that the following targets
will need to be met:

ACTION                                       TARGET DATE

Draft Terms of Reference Agreed for
Consultation with Trade Unions:                7 February

Meeting with Chief Executive to
discuss/agree advisory note to
Chief Officers and Trade Unions:       by      9 February

Report to Management Team (or
Chief Officers concerned notified):           13 February

Trade Unions advised and given
Draft Terms of Reference and
details of proposed procedures etc:           16 February

Staff likely to be called advised
of proposed Inquiry, consultations,
timetable and likely commencement
date:                                         19 February

Consultation with Trade Unions:               23 February
                                       to      2 March

Final Terms of Reference and
procedures completed and sent out
to all concerned:                              5 March

Inquiry commences:                            19 March

Inquiry completed by (ideally):               23 March

Outcome and recommendations to
Chief Executive:                               6   April

The present intention is that Tim Hoskins from Administration
and Legal and Keith Thrustle will act as my advisors.    Once
you have had the chance to digest this could I suggest we try
and meet quickly ie by 9 February, and agree what goes out,
when and to who.      I am drafting up with Keith a possible
letter and will let you have this by Monday 5 February.

It might be helpful if Keith and Tim participate at that time
and I will,    of course,   continue to liaise with Mark as
necessary but I think it is important that his neutrality is
maintained.




Dij

Enclosed:

1)    My original Draft Terms of Reference dated 21.12.1989.
2)    Mark Webster's reply dated 11.1.1990.
3)     My revised Draft Terms of Reference.
             REVISED DRAFT TERMS OF REFERENCE CONCERNING
         INTERNAL INQUIRY INTO STAFF RESPONSIBILITY ASPECTS
                     OF THE HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY


1.      To inquire into what were the duties and responsibilities
         of the City Council in meeting and fulfilling the relevant
         legislation concerning Safety in Sports Grounds and in
         particular that of Sheffield Wednesday at Hillsborough
         from 1979 up to and including the time of the Hillsborough
         tragedy in 1989.

2.      To inquire into how those duties and responsibilities were
         translated into organisational and operational intent
         within the City Council both at Officer and Committee
         level,   identifying   the    duties,    responsibilities,
         relationships and accountability of all such staff and the
         associated reporting procedures.

3.      To inquire into the associated performance and action of
         the staff involved and particularly determine whether
         each such member of staff properly and conscientiously
         fulfilled    their   duties    and    responsibilities and
         demonstrated the degree     of     application,   care and
         initiative that could rightly be expected of them and if
         not in what ways did they fail and for what reasons.

4.      To inquire into the wider context in which the above work
         was carried out, what were the overall resources available
         and the importance attached and allocated to Safety in
         Sports Grounds matters.     Further, to determine how all
         that compared with other      Authorities   and   National
         perceptions as to the degree of resources which should be
         committed to such work.

5.      To inquire into the ways in which the City Council and
         its staff interfaced with other Statutory bodies and
         parties  involved in the Advisory Group at Sheffield
         Wednesday and the roles and responsibilities of each.

6   .   To determine specifically whether disciplinary action is
         warranted against any member of staff and if so on what
         grounds and to report accordingly to the Chief Executive.

7.      To draw to the Chief Executive's       attention any other
         matters which seem pertinent.




31.1.1990
                                                                                        i
                                                                                            .




   Sheffield City Libraries, Surrey Street, Sheffield S 1 1 X Z                  Telephone: (0742) 734750

                                                                   Local Government Information Service




                                                                                                          R7103
   _ .       CHIEF E X tsU nvt
IG.r.    I      ^.XtqD
                SNP?             jc.P.O



      I                            PUB
 .^J4R7E'.U.i°.E.C.U
         I       - -I                     lo I"5-                 With Compliments
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH              The Rt Hon Lord Justice Tfcylor
STADIUM DISASTER                           50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                           London SW1H 9AT
                                           01-273 2577/3602/2370




                                            Date 29 January 1990




  HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY:   FINAL REPORT PUBLISHED

  The Final Report of the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry
  under Lord Justice Taylor is published today.   In Part V the
  Judge makes 76 Recommendations which he hopes will be
  "instrumental in promoting better and safer conditions at sports
  grounds in the future."  (43 of the Recommendations are repeated
  from the Interim Report and there are 33 new ones).

  Football;   Present and Future

  Lord Justice Taylor paints a bleak picture of the current state
  of football under the heading "Three Sombre Lessons After
  Hillsborough".  He notes how previous reports on crowd safety
  have been unheeded, that complacency is still to be found at many
  grounds even after Hillsborough, and that football is suffering
  blight because of old grounds, poor facilities, hooliganism,
  segregation, alcohol and poor leadership.   He sets out ways in
  which he thinks all those in the game could set a better example,
  especially to younger fans, and embark on the task of creating a
  better atmosphere at football grounds and upgrading stadia so as
  to provide fans with modern facilities.   He points out the many
  sources of revenue available to the football clubs to enable them
  to finance the improvements he is proposing.   In the course of
  his Inquiry, Lord Justice Taylor visited modern stadia in
  Scotland, Holland, France and Italy as well as grounds in England
  and Wales.

  All-Seated Accommodation

  Lord Justice Taylor recommends that sports grounds designated
  under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 should become all-
  seater under a phased programme.    For the English first and
  second divisions, the Scottish Premier League and national stadia
  he recommends a reduction of 2 0 % in present standing capacity
  over each of the next five yqars, so as to eliminate standing by
  August 1994.  For all other designated grounds, he recommends an
  annual reduction of 10%, so as to eliminate standing by August
  1999.  The first reductions should be made at the start of the
next football season in August.  Until then, Lord Justice Taylor
recommends a slight relaxation in the cut in capacity which he
proposed in his Interim Report (13% instead of the 15% he
recommended then). The effect of these recommendations is shown
in the example below:-

    First Division Club

     Standing Capacity before Hillsborough:   25,000
     (calculated according to Green Guide)
     15% cut after Interim Report             21,250
     13% cut after Final Report               21,750
     First 20% reduction    (August1990)      17,400
     Second 20% reduction   (August1991)      13,050
     Third 20% reduction    (August1992)       8,700
     Fourth 20% reduction   (August1993)       4,350
     Fifth 20% reduction    (August1994)           0

Lord Justice Taylor also recommends that the FIFA ruling that
there should be no standing from 1993 onwards at high risk
matches (as defined in UEFA Regulations) should apply here.

Advisory Design Council and National Review Body

To help clubs plan and build the necessary changes at their
grounds, Lord Justice Taylor proposes that the FA and the FL
should set up an Advisory Design Council to conduct and marshal
research and disseminate information and expertise regularly to
League clubs. Lord Justice Taylor sees a need for a National
Inspectorate and Review Body to review the way local authorities
carry out their functions of certifying sports grounds.  Section
13 of the Football Spectators Act gives these powers in relation
to football grounds.

Fences and Gates and Pitch Invasions

Lord Justice Taylor recommends that "prison-type fences" be
removed.    He says that high, spiked fences are intimidating, ugly
and demoralising.    He would like to see all perimeter fencing
removed in time but believes that would be premature at this
stage.    He therefore recommends that no fences should be higher
than 2 .2 m and that they should have sufficient gates on to the
pitch to permit immediate evacuation in any emergency.    Gates
should be painted and kept unlocked during the match.    He sees
merit in safety corridors (such as those at Anfield, Goodison
Park and White Hart Lane), and balances his views on lowering
fences with a recommendation that it should be an offence to go
on the pitch without reasonable excuse.

Clubs and Police

Lord Justice Taylor recommends that clubs and police should agree
written "statements of intent" setting out their respective
responsibilites. Clubs should check turnstiles, signs and
tickets and recruit adequate stewards.  They should provide the
police with proper control rooms. The police are urged to review
their operational orders for police matches, their training for
senior officers in charge of matches, and their arrest procedures
at grounds. Their planning should provide that ticketless fans
should not be allowed to enter a ground except in an emergency.
They should consider options such as postponing kick-off, early
kick-offs or Sunday fixtures.  Police authorities should review
the charges they make for the costs of policing inside grounds.

Other Recommendations

There are detailed recommendations about communications, Safety
Certificates, the role of the local authorities, co-ordination of
emergency services, first aid, medical facilites and ambulances.
Lord Justice Taylor does not think that the current rules
governing the sale of alcohol in grounds should be changed.

Offences and Penalties

Lord Justice Taylor considers the problems raised by ticket touts
and suggests making it an offence to sell tickets on the day of
the match without the club's authority.  He also proposes that it
should be an offence to throw a missile or to chant obscene or
racialist abuse.  He suggests extending the powers of the courts
to make attendance centre orders and to use "tagging" to keep
convicted hooligans away from football grounds during matches.

National Membership Scheme

Lord Justice Taylor considers in detail the Management
Consultants' Invitation to Tender (ITT) and Statement of
Requirements (SOR) for the national membership scheme.   This
follows undertakings by Ministers last summer that Parliament
would have an opportunity to consider any comments he might make
on i t .

He says (paragraph 424) that he has grave doubts about the
feasibility of the scheme and serious misgivings about its likely
impact on safety.  He also has grave doubts about the chances of
its achieving its purpose and is very anxious about its potential
impact on police commitments and control of spectators.  For
these reasons, Lord Justice Taylor says he cannot support the
implementation of Part I of the Act.

He draws attention to the progress being made through the use of
CCTV in detection and in the collection of evidence, and the
better use of intelligence with the setting up of the National
Football Intelligence Unit.  "Put together with progress towards
all-seating, improved accommodation, better facilities, improved
arrangements for crowd control and better training of police and
stewards to achieve it, I believe these measures would give the
best chance of eliminating or minimising football hooliganism."




NOTE TO EDITORS


Following the disaster at Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April, when
95 people were killed, Lord Justice Taylor was appointed by the
Home Secretary

    "To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday football
    ground on 15 April 1989 and to make recommendations about
    the needs of crowd control and safety at sports events."

Lord Justice Taylor was assisted by two Assessors: Mr. Brian
Johnson CBE, QPM, Chief Constable of Lancashire, and Professor
Leonard Maunder OBE, Professor of Mechanical Engineering at the
University of Newcastle upon Tyne. The Secretary of the Inquiry
was Mr Robert Whalley from the Home Office.

The Inquiry heard oral evidence in Sheffield Town Hall in May and
June. Lord Justice Taylor produced his Interim Report on
1 August. He completed his Final Report on 18 January.
                                     CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM
I
From        City Treasur§r                                                              E x e c u t ive
                                                                    To       C h ie f

                                                                                        HCh -'t>
Date        2 2n d J a n u a r y 199 0
Ref.        MH                                                                                      0 ii t£.   ^ ^^ ^ 1
Tel. Ext.   5992 - M H a r r i s o n                                                    C.P.U.:
                                                                     Ref.     MW/DG                       s^fcpLo     b.p.o.
                                                                                        "■"W;T7.
                                                                                          R2S 2 5 JAN 1990               PUB
                                                                                         STRAT
            HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY                                                                   ‘T E j T j p im 1            if
                                                                                           U.P.

            F o l l o w i n g y o u r m e m o d a t ed 2 7t h N o v e m b e r 1989 I am w r i t i n g to say that I
            r e c e n t l y sent the H om e O f f ic e an a c c o u n t for £ 8 3 , 0 7 2 + V A T b e i n g the
            cos t to the C i t y C o u n c i l of h o l d i n g the H i l l s b o r o u g h D i s a s t e r Inquiry.
            I hav e e n c l o s e d a s t a t e m e n t s h o w i n g the m a k e - u p o f this sum.

            As m e n t i o n e d in c o r r e s p o n d e n c e w i t h y o u r p re de ce ss or , I h a v e als o a tt a c h e d
            a s t a t e m e n t s h o w i n g n o t o n l y the c os t s o f the I n q u i r y b u t als o the
            O p e r a t i o n a l C o s t s o f the D i s a s t e r (£67,970) and an e s t im at e o f the
            O n g o i n g C o s t s (£199,490) w h i c h are m a i n l y the F & CS c o u n s e l l i n g tea m
            a nd the a n t i c i p a t e d cos ts of the C o r o n e r ' s Inquests.




             HEB
                                        Hillsborough Disaster

                                  Cost of the Judicial Inquiry



Departmen t                                          Details

Admin.    & Legal             C l o s e d c i rcuit video and audit equipment                13,915
                              P h o t o c o p y i n g facilities                             12,349
                              C a t e r i n g services                                       2,210
                              C a t e r i n g loss from consequent
                                c a n c e l l a t i o n of civic functions                   6,003
                              T e l e p h o n e charges                                      2,954
                              Em p l o y e e charges                                         1,741
                              M i n o r e q u i p m e n t and miscel l a n e o u s charges      70    39,242

Land & Planning               Y o r k s h i r e E l e c t r i c i t y Board charges          4,938
                              C l a m p i n g seats in Council C h am ber and
                                R e c e p t i o n Suite                                      4,654
                              S t a c k i n g Cha'irs                                        3,500
                              Tr estle T a b l e s and W i t ness Box                        3,103
                              E m p l o y e e charges                                        3,502
                              M i n o r equipment, a lter ations and
                                miscellaneous                                                 3,508   23,205

Cleansing                     A t t e n d a n t s and Cleaners                               9,790
                              M i s c e l l a n e o u s charges                                259    10,049

Publicity                     E m p l o y e e charges                                         1,223
                              Signs and Posters                                                 872
                              Hire of rooms for re located
                                meetings, etc.                                                1,688    3,783

H e a l t h and Consu m e r   E m p l o y e e charges                                         3,410    3,410
Servi ces

C hief P e r s onnel          E m p l o y e e charges                                         2,500     2,500
Officer

O t h e r D epartmen ts       M i s c e l l a n e o u s charges                                 883       883




                                                                                                      £83,072




THE/
City Treasury,
Sheffield.
4th January, 1990



BKYAA S
                                                       SUMMARY OF COSTS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY


                             I      C ONDUCTING THE INQUIRY               I O P ERATIO NAL COSTS OF THE DISASTER         1            ON GOING COSTS               |
                                                                          1                                              1
I        DEPARTMENT          I    Costs    to Date       |                |       Costs      to Date     |               I     Costs to Date     |
                                                    1 Estimat ed          1                                 Estimated    1                         Estim a t e d I
                             I Direct      Indirect | Total Costs         I Direct          | Indirect   | Total Costs   I Direct      Indirect | Total Costs |
1            (1 )            1   (2 )      1  (3)   |     (4)             1   (5)           1    (6 )    |     (7)       1   (8 )         (9)   |    (1 0 )      I
                                           1             1                1                                              1
                             1     £       1     £       1      £         1         £       1     £      1         £     1      £          £    1         £        1
                                                         |                1                                              1
                                                                          1                                              1
I Dept, of Land & Planning   I 22,311 1              894 |    23,205      I     10,009 1          -      1   10,009                              j            '■   1
I (including Works)                         1            1                1
                                           1I            1I               I
                                                                          1                                              1
I Chief Personnel Officer    I    2,500                        2,500                        1     -      1     -                                |                  j
                                           11            11               1                                              1
                                                                          1                                              1
I Admin.   & Legal Dept.     I 33,439 1         5,803 |       39,242      I     14,478 1          -      1   14,478                             |        2,000     |
                                           11         I
                                                      I
                                                                          I
                                                                          1                                              11
| Health & Consumer          I    3,410                        3,410      1     35,827 1          -      1   41,273                             j      118,600     |
I Services                                 i             i                                                               1
                                           i             i                1                                              1
                                           i             i                1                                              1
I Family & Community         |                                  -         I       2,000 1         -      1    2,000      I 59,200               |       59,200     |
| Services                                 i          i                   1                                              1
                                           i          i                   1                                              1
                                           i          i                   1                                              1
I Libraries & Information    I         120 1      229 I             349                     1    -       1     -         I    2,333             |        2,333     |
I Services                              1             1                   1                                              1
                                        |             |                                                                   1
                                        1             1                   1                                               1
I Publicity Department       I    2,998 1         785 |        3,783                        1    -       1     -         1 17,357               |       17,357     |
                                        |             |                   I                                              I
                                                                          1                                              1
I Cleansing Department       I    9,790 1         259 I       10,049      1                                              1
                                        |             |                   j                                              1i
I Other Departments          |          1         534 |             534   I              210 1   -       1         210                          |                  j
                                        1             1                   1                                              1
                                        1             1                   1.................                             1
I TOTALS                     I   74,568 1       8,504 |       83,072      I       62,524 1       -       1   67,970      I 78,890               |      199,490     |
                                        1             1                   1                                              1




MCEABE
    R 371 9                                                                                                                        Sch 9 1 6 0
                                              CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM

From           H ea d of A d m i n i s t r a t i o n and                      To             Mr D W Purchon
               L e g al D e p a r t m e n t                                                  Director   of - H e a l t h               and
                                                                                             Consumer Services
Date          10 J a n u a r y 1 9 9 0
Ref.          MW/GW
Tel. Ext.     4 0 1 8 - Mr W e b s t e r                                      Ref.
                                                                                             • £ id U U f c W O J b J t A




               SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS

              As y o u           know        f r o m h e r c o m m u n i c a t i o n of 4 January, t h e C h i e f E x e c u t i v e
              h as p a s s e d t o m e a c op y of y o u r m e m o r a n d u m of the 5 J a n u a r y to h e r s e l f
              a n d I w r i t e f ir s t of all to c o n f i r m tha t the o pi n i o n s s h e e x p r e s s e s in
              the f ir s t p a r a g r a p h of h e r r ep l y is c o r r e c t in the s e n s e t h a t t h e r e w a s
              a c l e a r d e c i s i o n to t r a n s f e r t he r e p o r t i n g r ou t e for l i c e n s i n g m a t t e r s
              f r o m M u n i c i p a l E n t e r p r i s e a n d G e n e r a l S e r v i c e s to the H e a l t h a n d C o n s u m e r
              Ser v i c e s P r o g r a m m e C o m m i t t e e on the grounds, w h i c h I s u p p o r t e d , t h a t
              as l i c e n s i n g is e s s e n t i a l l y a r e g u l a t o r y f u n c t i o n it s h o u l d a p p r o p r i a t e l y
              be put             with        t h e o t h er f un c t i o n s of a lik e n a t u r e w h i c h a r e d e a l t w i t h
              p o l i t i c a l l y by y o u r P r o g r a m m e C om mi tt ee .            However, I a m s u r e y o u w i l l
              r e c a l l f r o m the rep or ts s ent out at t h e time, e v e r y t h i n g e l s e w i t h r e g a r d
              to licen si ng , i n c l u d i n g b u t n o t l i m i t e d to the m a n a g e m e n t of t he f u n c t i o n
              a n d t h e b u d g e t r e m a i n e d as before.

               R e g a r d i n g t h e i m p l e m e n t a t i o n of s u c h d ec is io n, at t he             s a m e t i m e as t h e
               Members          too k        s u c h d e c i s i o n in p r i n c i p l e w i t h r e g a r d   to t h e t r a n s f e r r i n g
               o v e r of the p o l i t i c a l r e s p o n s i b i l i t y f o r this function,                they also decided
               it w o u l d be i n a p p r o p r i a t e to a c t i o n suc h a d e c i s i o n                 u n t i l c e r t a i n of
               t h e i s s ue s r e l a t i n g to the H i l l s b o r o u g h D i s a s t e r h a d            s e t t l e d d o w n a nd
               t h a t is, as I u n d e r s t a n d it, the p r e s e n t p osition.

              W i t h r e g a r d to the final p a r a g r a p h of y o u r c o m m u n i c a t io n , t h e r e f o r e ,
              I a m n o t a w a r e tha t any f u r th er p o l i t i c a l c l a r i f i c a t i o n of i n t e n t i o n s
              r e g a r d i n g c o m m i t t e e r e s p o n s i b i l i t y is r e q u i r e d a n d as I a m n o t a t all
              c l e a r w h a t y o u m e a n by t he " p r o f e s s i o n a l a pp r o a c h to s p o r t s g r o u n d s
              c e r t i f i c a t i o n " it is d i f f i c u l t for m e to m a k e a ny r e a s o n e d c o m m e n t on
              t h a t i s s u e at this stage, o t h er t han to s ay tha t as y o u w i l l k n o w f r o m
              o f f i c e r s w i t h i n y o u r Depar tm en t, t he a m o u n t of staff t i m e t h a t h as b e e n
              p u t i n t o s o r t i n g out the issues r e l a t i n g to the Saf et y o f S p o rt s G r o u n d s
              h a s i n c r e a s e d c o n s i d e r a b l y and t h a t m a t t e r s h a v e b e e n g o i n g r e l a t i v e l y
              s m o o t h l y u n t i l the iss ue of the p l a n s arose.                        How ev er , w i t h r e g a r d to
              t h a t m a t t e r I h a v e m a d e it p e r f e c t l y p l a i n to the p e r s o n r e s p o n s i b l e
              f o r t he area, n a m e l y the B u i l d i n g Surve yo r, that e r r o r s of t h a t s o r t
              c a n n o t a n d w i l l n o t be t o l e r a t e d in f u t ur e a n d I hav e n o r e a s o n , t h e r e f o r e ,
              t o b e l i e v e t h a t w e w il l h a v e any p r o b l e m s of a sim il ar n a t u r e in future.




               cc      C hi e f E x e c u t i v e
                                                                                                                1 5 J A N 1990
Chief Executive                    CCLR J A BUTLER

                                  cc.   Cllr C Betts (Leader)
5 January 1990
                                        Director of Land & Planning
C.Ex/SC
                                        Head of Administration &
4000                                      Legal

GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL 27.11.89

I am sorry not to have replied more quickly to your memorandum
of 28 November 1989.  I have however looked into the matter you
raised in some detail and have received a full explanation from
the Director of Land and Planning as to the circumstances in
which the Principal District Surveyor adopted the approach he
did at the meeting.

Essentially I am advised that the events directly pertaining to
that meeting were as set out in the attached note.

Clearly the eequence of events was very unfortunate and more
thorough clarification of the position between the club's
consultants and Council Officers would have been desirable
before the panel meeting.  It is appreciated that it was
not satisfactory for members to he presented with changed
information during a meeting at which they were being asked
to take important decisions.  Nor is it .^ood practice to
seek to alter jointly agreed recommendations in such a way.

Normally it would be appropriate to withdraw a report for
further consideration in such circumstances.  In the
particular case however there was urgency and the officer felt
he had no option but to advise the Panel that the Eastwood's
plan was probably inaccurate and calculations based upon it
should therefore be treated woibhsome doubt.

I very much regret that members felt themselves ill served
on this occasion but it clearly was a difficult situation for
members and officers alike.  My own view is that when (as
inevitably happens sometimes) some very late event has
implications for a matter under consideration by members, the
Chair should be advised and a short adjournment sought so that
officers can reappraise their advice etc.  I trust however
that such occasions can largely be avoided by careful preparation.
There are other aspects of officer responsibilities arising
from this case which colleagues are also pursuing so we can
learn from what went wrong.

As the Leader has also raised this matter with me I am copying
this reply forhitn.
          R3^19                                                                                             Sch 9 1 6 0
                                           CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM

    From          C o u n c i l l o r Clive Betts                 To        Chief Executive
                  Leader

    Date          5 D e c e m b e r 1989
    Ref.          CJCB/DCS/ 2
                  4240
    Tel. Ext.                                                     Ref.                        1 1 DEC 1989
                                                                                                E.U.
                                                                                       U.P.

                  GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL - SAFETY OF SPORTSGROUNDS - URGENT CONSIDERATIONS

                  At      the Monday,   27 N o v ember m e e t i n g of  the        General     Purposes  Panel,
                  c o n s ideration   was  given     to  several      safety        aspects     with  regard  to
                  sportsgrounds in Sheffield.

                  Y o u will, I a m sure, appreciate the extreme sensitivity              of  these  issues,
                  pa r t i c u l a r l y as  they were   dealt w i t h only a m a t t e r of days before the
                  Sheffie ld W e d n e s d a y v. Liverpool game at Hillsborough.

                  I was, therefore, m o s t concerned to receive from the Chair                   of   the      Panel,
      1           Counc i l l o r    Butler,   and    also   Counc i l l o r Nelson and Counci l l o r Mrs. Elsie
                  Smith, complaints about the w a y officers                h ad   come   to   the m e e t i n g with
                  d ifferent       i nformation    to   that w h i c h w as available to them in the reports
                  and at the pre-meeting.           On   the   invita tion       of   the    committee     chair,    I
                  atten ded       the pre-meeting, both as L e a d e r of the Council and as a member of
                  the     South     Yorkshire    Police    Authority.          The   Panel    members    had      much
                  information         to   consider there and generally accepted the officers advice,
                  w i t h the e x c e pt ion of one or two m a t t e r s w here we      were   actually      slightly
                  stronger.

                  One of the m a tters m o s t concerning m e m b e r s was the fact that Eastwoods, the
                  consultants to Sheffield Wednesday, h a d to admit the capacity of           one   part
                  of  the  g round   had     been o v e r -estimated and was given at 2,300, w h e n only
                  1,500 people could be properly accommodated.

                  This seems to be a m a t t e r of extreme c o ncern and the fact that  Eastwoods
                  claim      somebody else   did   it  on  their behalf did not seem to me to be a
                  pr o p e r excuse.

(     ;           Unfortunately, during the course of the meeting, the m a j o r i t y of the impact
                  of    criticisms         w h i c h should have b e e n ma de against Eastwoods was lost when
                  one of our own officers got up and said the 1,500 figure w h i c h we,                 as  a
                  Council,     had       provided       to  the  committee was w r o n g and it should only be
                  1,400.    E ither the Building Surveyor c o n c e r n e d w orks for the       City  Council
                  or    he  does not.            If he works for the Council then that advice should have
                  be e n put p r o p e r l y to the advisory group or, if subsequently recognised,          at
                  least    there should have been informatio n given to the licensing officer in
                  time for the Committee C hair to be aware                  of  it  before  the meeting.    I
                  really do find such conduct unacceptable.
                                             - 2 -


I also      unders t a n d    that, w h e n M e m b e r s tried to bring forward the date for
complet ion of certain w orks in a long schedule they w e r e given, before                  the
Boxing    Day m a t c h w h e n Sheffield U n i t e d play Leeds United, w h i c h in m y view
was a p e r f ectly sensible move, the same Building                Surve yor started    siding
with   the     consultants       for    the     club,      stating  that some of the w o r k was
actually of a different category.                 Again, I do not       find  such  behaviour
acceptable      and    really     do    feel that w e have to get our act together as a
Council on this matter.

The Head of Admin. & Legal has p r e v i o u s l y expressed concerns     to me   about
the w a y the Bu ilding Surveyors seem far too ready to accept advice from the
C l u b ’s consultants, rather than giving independent         advice  to m e mbers  on
these matters.        I feel n o w is the opportune time to m a k e it very clea r from
y o u r p o s ition that we simply expect b e t t e r service to be given   to members
on this very crucial and sensitive issue.




C. J. C. BETTS

cc: Councillors Butler, N e l son and Smith
    Head of Admin. & Legal
    Rl3^19
                                    CITY OF SHEFFIELD        MEMORANDUM
 * « *•' *
From         Director of Land and Planning              To     The Chief Executive

                                                               copy:- Head of Admin. & Legal Dept
D ate     5 December 1989
Ref.      BSD/ABu/KW SB/AW /KlO
Tel. Ext. 4169 - Mr K B l o u n t                       Ref.
                                                                                  s i 11DEC!%9      p|m

                                                                            I   p .p .   |   1
             Safety of Sports Grounds, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club PLC
             Capacity of North West Terrace_____________________________


             I refer to the memorandum from Councillor J A Butler (Chair of General
             Purposes Panel MEGS Programme Cormdttee) to yourself, dated 28 November
             1989, regarding the above.

             It was with concern that I read this memorandum, since I am aware of the
             considerable professional input to the advisory group on safety of sports
             grounds and to the General Purposes Panel which has been made by Principal
             District Surveyor, Mr Butler, in recent months.

             As with any professional officer, Mr Butler has, on my behalf, striven to
             provide the most up to date information to both members and fellow
             officers, on the numerous schemes for alterations at Sports Grounds which
             have required technical corrcnent from the Building Surveyor's Division.
             One such case was that of the capacity of the North West Terrace at the
             Hillsborough Stadium.

             On the 11 August 1989, an amended safety certificate for this sports
             stadium was issued by the Council, and I was given less than 24 hours
             notice to prepare capacity figures for all parts of the terraced areas for
             the ground. This available time was foreshortened by also being requested
             to carry out a similar exercise for the Sheffield United ground within the
             same timescale.

             The calculations which should have been carried out by both ourselves and
             the fire authority as a joint exercise were infact achieved solely by
             Building Surveyor's Division, by carrying out a paper exercise on plans
             previously submitted to the Council by the Club's consulting engineers,
             Eastwood and Partners. The computed holding capacity of 2,300 for the
             North West Terrace, produced by Mr Butler, was included in the amended
             safety certificate. This is background history which is relevant to the
             subsequent events.

             On the evening of the 21 November 1989, Sheffield United played Sheffield
             Wednesday at the Hillsborough Ground. Some spectators at that match
             who were sited in the North West Terrace, complained of discomfort, and
             police action was taken to remove some of the capacity crowd to another
             area of the stadium.

             A meeting was hurriedly convened at Hammerton Road Police Station on the
             afternoon of the 22 November, where all available members of the Council's
             advisory group discussed the problems of that match. On the morning of
             the 23 November, Mr Butler visited the site, and considered that the
             glazed screen between the North Stand and the North West Terrace may have
             been affected by the glare from the flood-lighting and thereby creating a
             'blind area' on the terracing. This would have had the effect of
             concentrating the spectators in other areas of the terrace where a clearer
             view could be achieved.
                                   -   2   -




The capacity figures were therefore recalculated to exclude the area in
question and on this basis the holding capacity was computed to be 1,700.

After this calculation had been carried out, Mr Butler was informed of a
telephone conversation whigh had taken place between Mr Strange of
Eastwood and Partners and my Principal Structural Engineer, JMr Sheriff, in
which doubt had been expressed by Eastwood's as to the accuracy of their
drawings for that part of the stadium and it was intended to resurvey that
area.

The prepared correspondence to Administration and Legal Department was
therefore altered to note this doubt, and Mr Butler also took steps to
reduce his calculated figure by a further 200 (i.e. to 1,500) to take
account of any reasonable discrepancy in the plans. The resulting
memorandum was delivered to the Chief Licensing Officer on the morning of
Friday the 24 November, 1989.

Mr Butler met Mr Strange on the morning of 27 November and reminded him
that he had not yet received an accurate survey of the North West Terrace.
It was agreed that a fax would be sent from Eastwood and Partners to
Mr Butler so that the calculations again could be checked, and if
necessary advise members of the General Purposes Panel at the meeting that
same afternoon of his findings.

Such a document was received by Mr Butler under an hour before the start
of that meeting. In accordance with the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds
(The Green Guide) the gross available area was reduced to find the
diagramatic net available area for spectators. At that stage Mr Butler
left for the meeting, leaving one of his colleagues to complete the
transposition from diagramatic to calculated net area of this irregular
shaped terrace. The resultant figure was brought to the meeting whilst
this item was being discussed. However, the results showed such a major
change from the previous calculations that Mr Butler concluded that a
drawing distortion may have occurred in the facsimile process.

He felt, however, that it was his professional duty to advise members of
the General Purposes Panel that accurate drawings has not yet been
received, and that the figure of 1,500 was that which had been produced by
the best professional judgement of himself and the police. He also
considered it his duty to the Members to advise them that if the accurate
drawing did in fact require a capacity of less than 1,500 to be imposed he
would need to bring these facts back for subsequent action at a future
meeting.

The figure of 1,400 suggested by the Club and their consulting engineers
was considered to be a suitable compromise at that stage and therefore no
objection was raised.

I can well imagine that this change to a recommendation at such a late
stage in the proceedings would have been embarrasing to the Chair and
Members of the Panel, but I trust that the above notes give a reasonable
explanation as to why it occurred. I understand that Administration and
Legal department have requested the Club to provide new drawings to a
certified scale but to date these have not been received.
                                   - 3 -




Regarding Councillor J A Butler's last paragraph I think it overstates the
position to regard Mr Butler as being in error for his actions at Panel,
may I reiterate:-

- Doubt had been expressed previously concerning the accuracy of the
  relevant drawings. Mr Strange of Eastwood's had promised a new drawing
  which in the event arrived very late and only in facsimile form.

- The lateness of the plan meant that Mr Butler was not able to attend
  the pre-meeting of the Panel because of the need to examine the drawing
  and make further calculations.

- As a consequence ,it was necessary to advise the Panel during its
  meeting, that Eastwood's plan was probably inaccurate and calculations
  based upon it should be treated with scare doubt.

I agree, however, that we must ensure that recommendations, if jointly
agreed, should not be overturned at the "11th hour". If time had
permitted no doubt the proper course of action would have been to withdraw
the report for further consideration at the advisory group.
                          _________________
       R 3719                                                                                                Sch 9 1 6 0
                                   CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM

    Freni       The Head of the Administration and       To             The Chief Executive
                Legal Department

    Date                                                                                    (                 --           0.vl $.j
    Ref.         6 December 1989
    Tel. Ext.    MW/DG                                    Ref.                                  1 1 DEC 1989
         ....... /.ma
                                                                                                k   .E.U.   P.E.C.U.              -
                                                                                      U.P. 1
                GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL - 29      NOVEMBER        1989    -   SAFETY    OF       SPORTS        GROUNDS
                HATTERS


                As you are n o w aware, an emergency item was considered at the above meeting
                concerning the capacity at Sheffield Wednesday     Football  Club.   This  -was
                after  the   Police    had  expressed concern about the capacity for the North
                West corner w h e n it was in use for the Derby match the previous week.

^               A w r i t t e n report was prepared to    assist   members,   (copy  attached)    which
                summarises        the  problem.   As   a   result   of the concerns expressed by the
                Police,        you will   note  (with    Chairs   authority)   the   General    Safety
                Certificate        was amended to reduce the capacity of the North West corner to
(      )        1,500.        This capacity was  in   accordance    with   recommendations   from   the
                Building Surveyor, the Police and the Fire Authority.

                The  Assistant       Solicitor  dealing w i t h these matters, Frances Woodhead,
                attended the pre-meeting to explain the matter, together w i t h all the other
                matters      pertinent to safety of sports grounds to members.   No one from the
                Building Surveyors section attended despite being informed of the fact that
                such p r e - m eeting was to take place.

                The  Panel mee t i n g was scheduled to commence at 2.30.             Mr Butler arrived at
                2.35; the mee t i n g had been delayed until he arrived.

                The emergency item was taken  first.   Frances  took members   through      the
                report, and Superintendent Sleath produced a bundle of photographs w h i c h he
                explained to members and explained the difficulties they had encountered in
                poli c i n g the Derby match.

                Wh i l s t members were in the process of resolving to adopt the recommendation
                in the final           paragraph   of   the  report,   Mr  Butler,  from the  Building
(               Surveyors           Department,   interjected   to say that he had just received fresh
                plans        from     Eastwood   and   Partners   (the  Engineers  who  are  Sheffield
                W e d n e s d a y ’s professional     advisers in such matters) and he had not yet had
                the opportunity of calculating the appropriate capacity levels.

                J o h n Strange from Eastwood   and Partners at this point stated     that  he  had
                re-calculated the capacity      and was confident that 1,500 was correct, but if
                members w i s h to err on the   side of caution, they may w i s h to adopt a lesser
                capacity of 1,400 for that      portion of terracing.

                At   this point the meeting degenerated into some confusion.  The resolution
                w as finally amended to authorise the certificate to be amended  further  to
                reflect a capacity of 1,400 in respect of that piece of terracing.

                Clearly,       it w o u l d have helped if Mr Butler had at least telephoned Frances
                W ood h e a d prior to the meeting to explain his position as she had spoken      to
                John      Strange     earlier that day, w h o advised her that he had prepared fresh
                plans.       My department was certainly unaware that Arthur Butler or anyone in
                the Building Surveyors Department was in fact wor k i n g on those plans.
As  a    general point, I think it w o u l d have been useful if someone from the
Build ing      Surveyors       Department   had  attend ed      the  pre-meeting;   and   a
commun i c a t i o n had b e e n sent to Ken Blount, the Building Surveyor, to ask if
this can be so in the future.             However, A r t h u r Butler is constantly telling
my  staff        in this area h o w short staffed they are and h o w they are placing
onerous requirements on his department in this area.

W h i l s t it is regarded as the C l u b ’s responsibility  to   furnish  the   local
authority       with  plans in support of their applications, I think that as an
authority, w e n e e d to be more vigilant in this area.        I think there   should
at      least be a responsibility upon our o w n experts to check and certify the
plans, h aving undert a k e n a compa rison w i t h the  ground   layout.   The   best
option may require a substantial devot i o n of resources.




                                                  A
cc   Direc t o r of Land and Planning             i \\ft
                                                  i
             REPORT   of   THE HEAD OF ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT
                                TO THE GENERAL P URPOSES PANEL

                                         EMERGENCY ITEM

                    SAFETY OF SPORTS G R OUNDS A C T 1975 (AS AMENDED)

         C a p a c i t i e s of Terrace Areas at Certificated Football Grounds and in
pa r t i c u l a r the North We st Upper Terrace, Sheffield W e d n esday Football G round



1.    Introduction


1.1   On W e d n e s d a y , 22nd November, 1989 at the request of the South Y o r k s h i r e
      Police, Officers from the A d m i n i s t r a t i o n and Legal D e par tment, the
      D e p a r t m e n t of Land and Planning and the South York shire Fire Service
      at t e n d e d at Hammerton Road Police Station to view extracts from the
      Police video of the football match that had taken place at Hillsb o r o u g h
      Sports S t adium the night before.

1.2   The Police highlig hted the problem that had been e xperienced by a
      n u m b e r of spectators in the North W e s t Upper Terrace of the G r o u n d and
      the a c t i o n they had taken to alleyiate the problem.

1.3   It was suggested that in the absence of further data, a revised
      ca p acity of 1,500 be placed in this area and that the G e neral Safety
      Ce r t i f i c a t e in respect of Sheffield W e d n esday Football Club be amended
      to reflect this . It was pointed out by the Police that the Club had non­
      o b j e c t i o n to this and the proposal was confirmed by Mr. M a c krell on
      behalf of the Club on Thursday, 23rd November, 1989.

1.4   The G e neral S afety Certificate was amended with the approval of the
      C h a i r m a n of the General Purposes Panel on Friday, 24th November, 1989.
      I a t t a c h a copy of the amendment.

2.    Building    Surveyor's M emorandum of 23rd November,             1989

2.1   Mr. B u t l e r informed my Chief L i c e n s i n g Officer (Sports Grounds), Mr.
      D e r r i c o t t , in a telephone conve r s a t i o n at ap prox i m a t e l y 10.30 a.m. on
      23rd Novembe r, that Mr. Strange of Messrs. Eastwood & Partners,
      C o n s u l t i n g Engineers, had spoken to Mr. Sherriff, Principal Structural
      Engineer, D e p a r t m e n t of Land and Planning, and s u g g ested that the plan
      on wh ich capacities had been calculated for the North West Upper
      Terrace of the W e s t Terrace was incorrect.

2.2    Mr. B u t l e r confirmed this in a m e m o r a n d u m to me dated 23rd November,
      1989, and received by my Chief L i c e n s i n g Officer at 11.30 a.m. on 24th
      Novem ber, 1989.       I would draw your attenti on to paragraph 6 of the
      memor a n d u m .


2.3    The c a p acity of 2,300 was incorporated into the Safety Cert if i c a t e
      after I received a memora n d u m from the Building S u r v e y o r dated 11th
      A u g u s t , 1989 (copy attached). This amendment was a u t h o r i s e d by the
      Panel at its m e eting on 17th August, 1989.
                                              2.

Messrs. Eastwood & Partners

My A s s i stant Solicitor, Mrs. W o o d h e a d , telephoned M e s s r s . Eastwoad     &
Partners o n Friday afternoon, 24th November, 1989 at approximately
1.00 p.m. and spoke with a Mr. Strange.

Mr. S t rang e pointed out that a r e vised plan   was being drawn up lased on
calculations that had been m a d e that day.      He informed my Assisasnt
Solicitor that the initial calcul a t i o n s for   the area put the cawcity
at 1,594.     This figure has not y e t been confirmed by    Messrs. Eastwood &
Partners.

My Assistant Solicitor queried w h e t h e r or not the plans for the Spion
Kop T e r r a c e area were correct. Mr. Strange confirmed that the plans
deposited with the Council for the Spion Kop were, as far as he was
aware, up to date and correct.

I have w r i t t e n to Messrs. E a s twood & Partners c o n f i r m i n g my Assistant
Solicitor's telephone conversation and inviting a representative to the
Panel m e e t i n g on 2 7 th November (copy letter attached).

Items for Consideration

To c o n f i r m the actions of the C h a i r m a n in c o nj unction w i t h the Head of
A d m i n i s t r a t i o n and Legal D e p a r t m e n t in a uthorising the amendment to the
General Safety Certificate in respect of Sheffield W e d n e s d a y football
Club r e d ucing the capacity for the North West Terrace Upper from 2,300
to 1,500.

To consider what- further action, if any, is needed in v i e w of the
forthcoming match on Wednesday, 29th November, 1989.

To consider asking the Club to                  submit a full set of plans in respect         of
the G r o u n d for the purposes of             r e a s s e s s i n g capacities.

Documen ts     Attached

The amended Schedule of Capacities incorporated into the General Safety
Certificate for Sheffield W e d n e s d a y Football Club.

The Buildin g S u r v e y o r 1s m e m o r a n d a   dated 11th August,    1989 and 23rd
November, 1989.

My letter to Messrs. Eastwood & Partners dated 24th                       November,   1989.

Recommenda tions

The Panel      is recommended         to:-

(a)    confirm the action taken by the Chairman in c o n j u n c t i o n w i t h the
       Head of Administration and Legal in r e d ucing the capacity for the
       North West Terrace U p p e r of Sheffield W e d n e s d a y Football Club to
       1,500;
    (b)     a s * the A d v i sory Group to prepare a                         ”h i d ’
            can be used by the Club to dra» u p a set of plans
            capacities to be reassessed at the Sports Ground.




                                                                    H. M. W e b s t e r
                                                         Hea d o f A d m i nistration
                                                            and Legal Department


Town Hall
SHEFFIELD

November,    1989
                      CITY OF S H tt-r lc U U — M b M OKAWDUh

The Building Survey6r,                        jo       Acting Head of Administration and
Department of Land and Planning                      . Legal Department

11th ‘August, 1989                            F o r the attention of Mr. D. M. B o w n e s
BSD/AB/JB
4162 - Mr. Butler                             Ref.




                         Sheffield Wednesday F.C. PLC
                          Estimated Terrace Capacity

I refer to the te'lephone call b e t w e e n Mr. Bownes and my Principal D i s t r i c t
Surveyor, Mr. Butler, earlier this afternoon.

The approximate holding capacities produced for the standing terrace
areas do not take account of any turnstile ingress limitations, or
those of egress or emergency egress limitations since it is my u n d e r s t a n d i n g
that the Fire Aqthority will consider all these matters b e i n g that th ey
have the primary function of estimation of terrace capacity.

These figures therefore need to be carefully checked with those p r o duce d
by the Fire Authority to ensure that account is taken of the need for
any further limitations for the purposes of the proposed certificate
amendment.

My calculations based on the "green guide" modi fied by the T a y l o r Inquiry
recommendations give the following

1.   Spion Kop                           I B , 200
2.   North W e s t Terrace (Upper)         2,300
2.   North West Corner (Lower)                 630       (Pen 7)

In accordance with our consultations,        figures have not been p r o duce d for
Pens one to six of the West Terrace.

I would appreciate the sight of the Fire Authority figures before the
Certificate is amended.
                   CITY OF S H E F F I E L D — hnEhftORANDUttf

The Building Surveyor,                    j0          of Administration and Legal
Department of Land and Planning                  Department

23rd Noventer, 1989                              For the attention of Mr. J. Derricott
BSD/ABu/F?IH/K10AEK
4162 - Mr. A. Butler                      Ref.




Safety of Sports Grounds
Sheffield Wednesday Football d u b PIC
Capacity of Upper North West Terrace
Subsequent to a meeting at Hamnerton Road. Police Station on 22nd November
to discuss various natters arising fran the match between Sheffield
Wednesday and Sheffield United on 21st November, I have had cause to
revise the reccmnended holding capacity for this area of the ground.

You will recall that the present capacity figures were produced within
hoars, cn list August, 1989, and therefore only a paper exercise was
carried out in that restrictive time.

A site visit earlier today revealed the extent of the area of terrace
partially blinded by the screen between the North W e st. Terrace and the
North Stand.

Accordingly that area has been emitted from the gross available area of
terrace-
The holding-’capacity of the remaining areas has been re-calculated and
modified in accordance with the Taylor recommendations, giving a resultant
figure of 1,700.

Eastwood and Partners drawing number 1610/64E has been used for the layout
of this area. In a telephone conversation between Mr Strange of Eastwood
and 'Partners and my Principal Structural Engineer, late this afternoon, it
was intimated -that this drawing may not be accurate, and that the gross
available space may be slightly smaller than is shewn on the drawing.

Until the area has been resurveyed and revised drawings received, I vrould
recaranend that the holding capacity for the Upper Norrh West Terrace be a
maximum of 1,500.
                       nr

                      VE/JAS/JAB/11621                                        '                           "
                      24th Hoveaber, 1989


   Messrs* Eastwood & Partners,
   Consulting I n g i n a e r s , .
^aLst*.Andrew* •              *        /        ^ i ••
   23 X l n g £ l * l d : M o * d ; T m ^ ; X r t ;*>,H|

                                                                                                              i%--r- •:? l- ? . k   '?:.'


. V -'                                •*v   :T“;> •*.;   • V*   /■>V
  .-.Dear-Hr*-Strang*,'..;^^'.sS.\^r.?.~:/: *' ;. V-*.:* i: *
           ;,     „ .”■•• '.-Z-V«V> .V • ■     ■        ■' -
         ■    •^                *                      ***;   •-. •i»?.££.
     Th« Sheffield Wednesday Faotball Clnb - Capacity of ^HortftSegt Terrace
                                                                         ♦
                                                                       -» -
                                                                              ‘t••   ' • J». .*
                                                                                                  *■**.' *■
                                                                                                  * V *


    I refer to your telephone conversation with Mrs. Voodhead <fc the 24th Hovenber,
    1989. I confirm that the Chair of the General Feepoees W e w l *■« authorised
    that the safety certificate be amended to reflect ‘the fact “that the capacity of
    the north west terrace should be reduced to £1,500 in view^of ttee crowd control
    difficulties there were at the natch on the 21st ‘November. “TL-understand that
    this accords with the new calculations you have sade ttriv •week. I-look, forward
    to hearing from you with the revised plan you have prepared «f this portion of
    the stadiua*

    As you are aware froa the conversation with Mrs* Iboihexi, tta "£oilding Surveyor
    has advised ae that the plaa upon which the origioal filralsrtsm was based was
    incorrect* In view of the fact that fresh calculations have %een aade in
    respect of the north west corner, this appears to resolve the•jpro'blea in that
    respect* However, I aa concerned about the plans and calculations for the
    renainder of the ground* With reference to the Kop area, 1 understand that you
    are confident that these plans are correct* I would be jjratefiil If you would
    Qonfira this*
    I aa pleased to note that you vill be attending the G en e ra l Jstrposes Panel
    Meeting at 2.30 p.a. on Monday, the 27th Noveaber, since. I a a sure nenbers will
    require clarification of a large nunber of matters at that neeti^g*

     Yours   sincerely,




     Head of Department




     BH20/FW2411
                                                                734004 - Mrs. Hoodhaari
    R3719                                                                                                         Sch 9 1 6 0
                                     CITY OF SHEFFIELD — MEMORANDUM

From        C O U N C I L L O R J. A. B U T L E R                  To      CHI EF E XE C U T I V E
            CHAIR, G E N E R A L P U R P O S E S PAN EL
            MEG SP C
D ate       2 8t h N o v e m b e r 1989
Ref.        JAB/CS
Tel. Ext.                                                          Ref.




            At y e s t e r d a y s m e e t i n g o f the Gen er al P u r p o s e s Panel (27.11.89), an item
            w h i c h w as an e m e r g e n c y i tem wad d i s c u s s e d at the meeting.

            It was in r e l a t i o n to cro wd c a p a c i t i e s at the S h e f f i e l d W e d n e s d a y
            F oo t b a l l G r o u n d a n d c o n c e r n e d a p a r t i c u l a r s e c t i o n of the g r o u n d
            k n o w n as the N o r t h W e s t U p p e r T e r r a c e at the L e p p i n g s Lane end
            o f the ground.

            I e n c lo se a cop y        of   the    r e p or t   that    the   pan el h a d to d is cu ss for
            c l a r i fi ca ti on .

            I am e x t r e m e l y c o n c e r n e d tha t the o f f i c e r p r e s e n t f r o m the B u i l d i n g
            S u r v e y o r s D ep ar tm en t, w ho is r e f e r r e d to in the report, cho se to
            q u e s t i o n the r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s a l t h o u g h o b v i o u s l y he h a d b e e n full
            p a r t y to the a g r e e d r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s f or the pan el to consider.

            In v i e w of the fac t tha t m e m b e r s of the press, public, p o l ic e and
            fir e s e r vi ce s w e r e present, and a l s o r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s of the club
            a n d t he i r e n g i n e e r i n g consult an ts , we w e r e p ut into a v e r y e m b a r r a s s i n g
            s i t u a t i o n a n d I and o t h e r m e m b e r s o f the pan el w e r e v e r y a n g r y
            indeed.

            T he c u l m i n a t i o n o f the item was tha t the e n g i n e e r i n g c o n s u l t a n t
            f r o m E a s t w o o d and Partners, Mr. Strange, s u g g e s t e d an even low er
            c a p a c i t y for the a re a in question, o f 1 ,4 0 0 m a k i n g a f u r t h e r r e d u c t i o n
            o f a hundred.

            I n v i e w of the fact tha t the c o n s u l t a n t for the Club h a d r e c o m m e n d e d
            t h e initial 1 ,5 0 0 and w i t h s a f et y p a r a m o u n t in our minds, I r e c o m m e n d e d
            t h a t we a g r e e d to the s u g g e s t e d a mendment.

            I feel that Mr. B u t l e r by h is a c t i o n s in r e l a t i o n to this m a t t e r
            a t the meeting, was in error, and I w o u l d h o p e tha t a s i m i l a r i nc i d e n t
            w o u l d n o t be l i k e l y to h a p p e n again.




                                                                                                 2 9 NOV 1989
              R E P O R T OF THE HEAD OF AD MINI S T R A T I O N AND LEGAL D E P A R T M E N T
                                 TO THE GENERAL PURPOSES PANEL

                                           EMERGENCY i t e m                           ■

                     SAFETY OF S P ORTS G R OUNDS A C T 1975         (AS A M E N D E D )

     Capacit ies of Terrace A reas at Certificated Football G r o u n d s and in
particular the North W e s t U p p e r Terrace, Sheffield W e d n e s d a y F o o t b a l l Ground

                                                                                    i' ; j .

1.     Introduction


1.1   On Wednes d a y , 22nd N o v e m b e r , 1989 at the request of t h e - S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e
      Police, Offi cers from the A dmin i s t r a t i o n and Legal D e p a r t m e n t ,
      D e p a r t m e n t of Land a n d P l a n n i n g a n d the South Yorkshijoe J’i x e Service
      atten ded at H a m m e r t o n Road P o l i c e Station to view e x t r a c t s f r o m the
      Police video of the football match t h a t had taken p l a c e                     Hillsborough
      Sports S t a d i u m the night before. '                   ~         1 ~ ?

1.2   The Police h i g h l i g h t e d the p r o b l e m t h a t h a d b e e n e x p erien cedi
      n u mber of sp ecta t o r s in the North W e s t U p p e r T e r r a c e © X . t h e G r o u n d and
      the a c t i o n they had taken to a l l e vi ate the problem.                          .

1.3   It was suggested that in the absence of i u r t h e r d a t a , ' & r e v i s e d
      capacity of 1,500 be p l a c e d in this a r e a and that the ^General S afety
      C e rtificate in r e s p e c t of Sheffield W e d n e s d a y F o o t b a l l - d u b be a m e n d e d
      to reflect this.       It was pointed out by the Police that t h e ’Club h a d no
      ob j e ction to this a n d the proposal w a s confirmed by M r , "Mackrell o n
      behalf of the Club o n T h u r s d a y , 2 3 r d "November, 1989-

1.4   The General S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e was amended w i t h the a p p r o v a l of the
      Chair man of the G e n e r a l "Purposes P a n e l o n F r i d a y , 2 4 t h N o v e m b e r , 1989.
      I attach a copy of the amendment-

2.    Build i n g   Surveyor's M e m o r a n d u m of 23rd 'November,        19B9

2.1   Mr. Butler informed my C h i e f L i c e n s i n g Officer (Sports G r o u n d s ) , Mr.
       Derric o t t , in a telephone c o n v e r s a t i o n at a p p r o x i m a t e l y 10 .30 a.m. on
       23rd November, that Mr. S t r ange of Messrs. E a s t w o o d & "Partners,
       Co n s u l t i n g Engineers, had spoken to ^Ir. Sh erriff, P r i n c i p a l Structural
       Engineer, D e p a r t m e n t of L a n d and Planning, a nd s u g g e s t e d that the plan
       on which capac ities had b e e n c alcu lated for the N o r t h "West ’Upper
       Terrace of the W e s t T e r r a c e was i n c o r r e c t

2.2   Mr. Butler c o n f ir med this in a m e m o r a n d u m to me dated 23 rd November,.
      1989, and received by my Chief L i c e n s i n g O f f i c e r at 11.30 a.m. on 24th
      November, 1989.       I w o u l d draw y o u r a t t e n t i o n to p a r a graph 6 of the
      memorandum.

2.3   The capacity of 2,300 was i n c o r p o r a t e d into the Safety C e r t i f i c a t e -
      after I received a m e m o r a n d u m from the B u i l d i n g S u r v e y o r dated 11th
      August, 1989 (copy a ttached) .         This amendment was a u t h o r i s e d by the
      Panel at its m e e t i n g on 17th August, 1989.
 ff
   /                                                              2.
> '/   ’




           3.    M e ssrs.     E a s t w o o d & Partners

           3.1   My A s s i s t a n t Solicitor, Mrs. Woodhead, telephoned M e s s r s . Eastw ood                       &
                 P a r t n e r s o n F riday afternoon, 24th November, 1989 at a p p r o x i m a t e l y
                 1.00 p.m. a n d spoke with a Mr. Strange.

           3.2   Mr. S t r a n g e pointed out that a             r e vised plan w a s being d r a w n     up b a s e d on
                 c a l c u l a t i o n s that had been made that day.      He informed niy. A s s i s t a n t
                 S o l i c i t o r that the initial cal culations for the a r e a put the capacity
                 at 1,594.             This figure has not y e t been confirmed by M e s s r s . E a s t w o o d &
                 Partner s.
                                                                                             ■   f. ■ ■. '



           3.3   My A s s i s t a n t Solicitor queried w h e t h e r or not the p l a n s f o r the Spion
                 K o p T e r r a c e area w e r e correct.  Mr. Strange confirmed t h a t the plaits
                 d e p o s i t e d w i t h the Council for the Spion K o p were, a s f a r as h e w a s
                 aware, up to date and correct.                                                  J

           3.4   I h a v e w r i t t e n to Messrs. E a s tw ood & Partners c o n f i r m i n g ; m y Assistant
                 So l i c i t o r ' s telephone conver s a t i o n and inviting a r e p r e s e n t a t i v e t o the
                 Panel m e e t i n g on 27th November (copy letter attached)*

           4.    Items     for C o n s i d e r a t i o n                                               -V:

           4.1   To c o n f i r m the     actions of the C h a i r m a n in c o n j u n c t i o n w i t h the tlesd of
                 Administration           and Legal D e p a r t m e n t in a uth orising the a m e n d m e n t t o the
                 G e neral Safety         Certificate in respect of Sheffield W e d n e s d a y Testizall
                 Club r e d u c i n g    the capacity for the North West Terrace U p p e r f x o m 2*£HX)
                 to 1,500.

           4.2   To c o n s i d e r w h a t further action, if any, is needed in v i e w o f t s e
                 f o r t h c o m i n g m a t c h on Wednesday, 29th November, 1989.

           4.3   To c o n s i d e r askin g the Club to submit a full set of plans                           in r e s p e c t of
                 the G r o u n d for the purposes of reasse s s i n g capacities.

           5.    Documents        At tac h e d

           5.1   The a m e n d e d    Schedule of C apaciti es incorporated into                 the General S a f e t y
                 Certificate          for Sheffield W e d n e s d a y Football Club.

           5.2   The B u i l d i n g Surveyor's memoranda              dated 11th August,        1989 a n d 23xd
                 November, 1989.

           5.3   My     letter     to Messrs.        Eastwood & P a r t n e r s dated   24th November,             198D.

           6.     R e c o m m e n d a tions

           6.1    The Panel        is recommended          to:-

                  (a)     c o n firm the action taken by the Chairman in c o n j u n c t i o n w i t h the
                          Head of A d m i n istration and L e g a l in reducin g the c a p a c i t y for the
                          North W e s t Terrace Upper of Sheffield W e d n e s d a y Football Club ‘t o »
                           1,500;
       (b)      a s k the Advisory Group to p r e p a r e a set of p l a n s r e g u l a t i o n s which
                can be used by the Clu b to d r a w up a set of plans to enable
                c apacities to be reassess ed at the Sports Ground..




                                                                                    .     H. M. W e b s t e r
                                                                           H e a d o f ’A d m i n i s t r a t i o n
                                                                               a nd Legal Department.
Town H a l l
SHEFFIELD

N o v e mber,   1989




 SG1AAD/JJJ
                                       SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL

                               SAFETY OF SPORTS G R O U N D S A C T 1975

                 ' N O T I C E OF A M E N D M E N T OF G E N E R A L SAFETY C E R T I F I C A T E
                                  ISSUED O N 2 1 S T D E C E M B E R 1979



1.     TAKE N O T I C E T H A T THE SAFETY C E R T I F I C A T E ISSUED TO S H E F F I E L D W E D N E S D A Y
       F O O TBALL CLUB L I M I T E D IN R E S P E C T O F THE H I L L S B O R O U G H STADIUM,
       P E N I S T O N E ROAD, SHEFFIELD BY S O U T H Y O R K S H I R E COUNTY C O U N C I L O N 21 ST
       D E C EMBER 1979 (AS A M E N D E D ON 11TH, 18TH AUGUST, 1989 A N D 15TH
       SEPTEMBER, 1989) IS H EREBY F U R T H E R A M ENDED

2.    Tbe a m e n d m e n t is as s p e c ified      in A p p e n d i x 1.

3.    THIS A M E N D M E N T IS I SSUED BY THE S H E F F I E L D CITY C O U N C I L IN R E S P E C T 01
       TBE P R E M I S E S D E S C RIBED A B O V E B E I N G A SPORT G R O U N D D E S I G N A T E D BY O R D E R
       U N D E R S E C T I O N 1 O F T H E SAFETY O F S P ORTS G R O U N D S A C T 1975 AS A S P ORTS
       G R O U N D R E Q U I R I N G A SAFETY CERTIF I C A T E .

4.    T h e Terms a n d conditions h e reby i m p o s e d are those w h i c h S h e f f i e l d
       City C o u n c i l consider necessary or e x p e d i e n t to secur e r e a s o n a b l e
       safety at the Sports Ground w h e n it is in use for an a c t i v i t y in
       resj>ect of which this C e r t i f i c a t e is issued.



      "The a m e n d m e n t shall    come    into o p e r a t i o n on the 24th day            of N o v e m b e r ,
       1989-



       Dated     the 24th day o f November,              1989.




                                                      Signed      ...... ............................

                                                                 Mr. H. M. Webster,
                                                                 Head of A d m i n i s t r a t i o n and
                                                                 Legal Depart m e n t on behalf
                                                                 of and duly a u t h o r i s e d by the
                                                                 Sheffield City Council




       TO:- Sh ef fie ld Wed nes day Fo ot ba ll             Club Limited




HB8 AAI /J J J
                                         APP ENDIX 1 - A M E N D M E N T



The Safety C e r t i f i c a t e issued by the South Y o r k s h i r e County C o uncil on 21st
D e c e m b e r 1979 and amended on 11th, 18th A u g u s t and 15th S e p t e m b e r 1989 shall be
further a m e n d e d to read as follows:-

Sched ule 3

The n u m b e r of spectators admitted to the S p o r t s G r o u n d ^and to the v a r i o u s a reas
of the s p e c t a t o r accommodation w ithin the S p o r t s G r o u n d shall not e xceed the
f o l l owing figures:

S p i o n Kop                                                    16 ,£00

S outh Stand        Upper                                         5 ,567

S o u t h Stand     Lower                                         3*3X0

West    Stand                                                     -4,465

i^orth W e s t T e r r a c e U p p e r                            1,500

N o r t h Stand                                                   9,700



T otal Crowd        C a p aci ty                                 4 1, 342




PB/63/DE139
                                  C IT Y Oh S M bt-fM £LD — M E M O R A N D U M ;

          The Building Surveydr,                                      Acting Head o f A d m i n i s t r a t i o n and
          Department o f Land and Planning                          . Legal Department:

Date      11th 'August, 1989                                 For the attention o f Mr.            D. M. B o w i e s
R ef      BSD/AB/JB
Tel Ext         - Mr. Butler                                 Ref.




                                     Sheffie ld W e d n e s d a y F..C. PLC
                                      Estim ated T e r r a c e Capacity

          I refer to the telephone call b e t w e e n Mr. B ownes and my P r i n c i p a l D i s t r i c t
          Surveyor, Mr. Butler, earlier this afternoon.

          The approximate holding capacities p r o d u c e d for the standing "“     " terrace
          areas do not take account o f any t u r n s t i l e ingress limitations, o r
          those of egress or emergency e gress l i m i t a t i o n s since it is m y u n d e r s t a n d i
          that the Fire Authority will c o n s i d e r a l l t hese matters b e i n g that: -they
          have the primary function o f e s t i m a t i o n o f terrace capacity-'.

          These figures therefore need to be c a r e f u l l y checked w i t h ' t h o s e p r o d u c e d
          by the Fire Authority to ensure t h a t a c c o u n t .is taken o f t h e r e e d fccr
          any further limitations for the p u r p o s e s o f "the proposed c e r t i f i c a t e
          amendment.                                                          • v:

          My calculations based on the "green g u i d e ” modified by t h e T a y l o r I n q u i r y
          recommendations give the follow i n g : -

          1.   Spion Kop
          2.   North West Terrace (Upper)                2»3SS
          3.   North West Corner (Lower)                    63D           {Pen 7)

          In accordance with our consultations, T i g u r e s have not b e e n p r o d u c e d f o r
          Pens one to six of the West Terrace-

          I would appreciate the sight of the F i r e A uthority ’
                                                                 f igures b e i o r e the
          Certificate is amended.
                   CITY OF S H E F F I E L D — MEMOR AND UM

The Building Surveyor,                          Head of Administration and Legal
Department of Land and Planning                 Department

23rd November, 1989                             For the attention of Mr. J. Derricott
BSD/ABu/KTH/KlOADK
4162 - Mr. A. Butler
                                         Ref.




Safety of Sports Grounds
Sheffield Wednesday Fbotball Club PLC
Capacity of Ppper Sorth West Tterr?***

Subsequent to a meeting at Hammerton Road Police Station on 22nd November
to discuss various matters arising frtxn the match between Sheffield
Wednesday and Sheffield United on 21st November, I have had cause to
revise the reccranended holding capacity for this area of the ground.

You will recall that the present capacity figures Mere produced within
hours, on list August, 1989, and therefore only a paper exercise uas
carried out in that restrictive time.                     :

A site visit earlier today revealed the extent of the area of terrace
partially blinded by the screen between the North West Terrace and the
North Stand.

Accordingly that area has been omitted from the gross available area of
terrace.

The holding capacity of the remaining areas has been re-calculated and
modified in accordance with the Taylor recormendations, giving a resultant
figure of 1,700.

Eastwood and Partners drawing number 1610/64E has been used for the layout
of this area. In a telephone conversation between Mr Strange of "Eastwood
and Partners and my Principal Structural Engineer, late this afternoon, it
was intimated that this drawing may not be accurate, and that the gross
available space may be slightly smaller than is shown on the drawing.

Until the area has been resurveyed and revised drawings received, I wuld
reccrrmend that the holding capacity for the Upper North West Terrace be a
maximum of 1,500.
                        VZ/JAS/JAB/11621
                        2 1 th November, 1989                                                   T


     Messrs. Eastwood 4 Partners,                                                     ^         ~
 . Consulting                                                                                                           .-.v^ :.
■;        -Andrew’ s B ooM , ? m Z z Z , ~ :     I:. -.-; •     i , :: b                                                    j,               V^~ >
    ->2S'.Xlsgfl«l'd                     - vj^;:.? :p*ff                 .1^                                                                              *
^SHEFFIELD.                                              --■:■*
   -*vSU _•9AS o::at ^ , - y                   v-^ m*** » . /**i »                -         v              •t~r-C*t I^s- -•,w^»-*-.ryu,
                                                                                                                                      '
                                                                                                                                      ?*•?

   ?Tor the attention cf Mr. J. Strange                                                             '" l   :~\T;*:■ ' ^ 'S ^ '- f : ? ^ - '
                                                                                                               r •- -   f ■ ' -3r— •» -w ». r i V -’*-,


 r: ■■■■■ w   .-T -v -^ ri-.     •A « .rs-r;-i   . <•   r   ,   -   5
                                                                                                                                               Isa-
                                                                                  ^Vs.fTI
   Tha Sheffield Wednesday Football Club - Capacity of ’Hort5~S— t Terrace

     1 refer to jrour telephone conversation with Mrs. Voodhead on tbe 74th Hovetber,
     1989* T confirm that the Chair of the General Pw po— t llwtl •<■» authorised
 ’ "that the safety certificate he aaended to reflect the faetrtfcat the capacity of
   ■“tbe north vest terrace should be reduced to £1,500 in ▼iew of tbe crowd control
    difficulties tbere vere at the natch on the 21st Uoveober. -’Tloaderstand that
    this accords with the new calculations you have oade ttrls m t . llook. forward
   'to ‘hearing froa you with the revised plan you have prepared c t this portion of
    the stadium*

    As^you are avare fro* the conversation with Mrs. Voodheai,.the 2oilding Surveyor
   ""has advised se that the plan upon which the original calcnla d ans was based was
    Incorrect. In view of the fact that fresh calculatlona bave %een nade in
    Tesj>ect of the north vest cornet, this appears to resolve the j>roblea in that
    respect. However* 1 aa concerned about the plans »T|d     i>nl«Hrm« for the
    resainder of the ground. With reference to the Kop area, I understand that you
    are confident that these plans are correct. I would be .gratefnl if you would
    confirm this.

   T aa p l e a s e d to note that you will be attending the General Purposes Panel
   heeting at 2*30 p.m. on Monday* the 27th November* since I a a sure oenbers will
   require cla ri fi c at io n of a large nucber of natters at that Deeting..

    Yours     sincerely,




    Head ot De p artment




    BH20/FW2411
                                                                               7340&4 - H r s . Voodhaad
                                                                                                          I'* '"* !'
                                                                                                             0 ^ /'VvJ




                       GP/FW




                       15th August,       ] 539




       T h e ’C o u n t y Fi r e Officer*
       Di v i s i o n a l MtddquarteriSj
       W e l l i n g t o n "Street,
{■ ■   S h e f f i e l d X.

       JDi-CT" SlT-0

       T.l : S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e s - Sheff i e l d U n i L e d Football C l u b
       M i u S h e f f i e l d W e e n c s d s y Footb a l l C l u b _______________________

       to 7 0 : ^rc                        Iretcnr. Certificate- has been i s s u e d to Sheffie-lc United
       T'cctb_~Ll Club v i t h r e v i s e d f i gures for c a p a c i t y end s t e w ^ r d i n g «nc tht
       <exitrti&£ Certificate: f o r S h e f f i e l d W e d n e s d a y Footb. 11 Club has been
       E i t u l a r i y on n e e d -     fjj y o u arc cwart, this is with «; vi<-v to inplcc.cntlng
                 is p r c b bl y tht n o s i icport^nt i n t e r i o reconnentlation a&dv by Lord
       J u s t i c e ' T ^ y l c r in t u s r eport upon the- H i l l s b o r o u g h Disaster.

       H o w e v e r , I u n d e r s t a n d f x o n c o n v e r s a t i o n s that ny stf.ff have had with our own
       B u i l d i n g "Suivtryor that, there hr.e not b e e n sufficient tlc~ to conplete the*
       n e c e s s a r y ce-lcul.mons usinjj the fornul,:. laid down by L o r d Justice Taylor
       for t h i s p u r pose m           h i s i n r ^ r i c reconcx-nd.'-tions.          It is cle&rly c-ssontlai
       t h a t t h f: relevant c a l c u l a t i o n s aro nndc- ;■& soon &e por-c5b]*- with i viet- to
       the "Certificates b e i n g a m e n d e d to r e f l e c t this fact.                     1 consider th«t it is
       n o e t im portant that t h e C e r t i f i c a t e s arc a n e n d e d befort bl£ matches take
       p l a c e r t the respe c t i v e ’S p orts Grounds,                    P lease w o u l d y o u therefore liaise
       w i t h t h e B u i l d i n g S u r v e y o r to ensure that the n e c e s s a r y calculations are
       Elide a n d the rel evant ' f l a r e s a v a i l a b l e as a natter of urgency.                      I conflrra
       t h a t 1 iiavu w r i t t e n to t h e B u i l d i n g S u r v e y o r in siEtilar ttrsc.             li in* re is
       a n y difficulty, p l e a s e contact Mr. Bovnes, ny Chief Lict-rising 0 £iic-:-r.

       T o u r s faithfully,




       A c t i n g H e a d of D e partment.



       Jll
                                                                                                                            t




                                                                                                                                t
                                                                                                734004 - Mrs. WoodJu.-ad
