                                        POLICY COMMITTEE                                                697

42 Capital Receipts: Surplus Property—The Towers, Sandygate Road
  The Property Services Manager submitted a report containing details of the constraints affecting
the disposal of The Towers, Sandygate Road and outlining a proposed course of action for its sale.
r e s o l v e d : That (a) approval be given for the property to be offered for sale by auction in two lots,
namely, The Towers and Towers Lodge, at the earliest opportunity in the new year; and
  (b) should the property remain unsold at auction, the Property Services Manager be authorised to
approach interested parties in order to secure its disposal by private treaty.

43 Stadium Corner
  The City Treasurer, the City Solicitor and Head of Administration and the Property Services
Manager submitted a joint report (a) referring to an agreement entered into by the Council with a
developer in respect of the refurbishment and conversion of a former public baths and library, (b)
informing Members of the present position and (c) recommending appropriate courses of action to
be taken, where necessary, to protect the Council’s interest in this matter.
r e s o l v e d : That (i) the information set out in the joint report now submitted, particularly with
regard to the possible financial implications for the Council be noted;
  (ii) the City Treasurer be requested to investigate the possible effects on the Council’s capital and
revenue budgets of the courses of action discussed in the report;
   (iii) authority be given for the Property Services Manager, the City Treasurer and the City
Solicitor and Head of Administration in consultation with the Chair of the Finance and Property
Sub-Committee to take such action as may be necessary to protect the Council’s interest in this
matter, including any such action as may be required to implement the proposals made by the bank
as outlined in this report, or any such action as may be required in the event of a foreclosure or
liquidation etc.; and
 (iv) the officers concerned be requested when necessary to submit a further report to this
Committee upon any such actions.
( n o t e : ( 1 ) Prior to the consideration of the above item the City Solicitor and Head of
Administration addressed the Committee upon the matter of confidentiality and again expressed
concern that a confidential item had been made available to the media.
  (2) Item 30 on the agenda relating to a review of surplus property procedures was withdrawn from
consideration by the Committee.)
698       ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

                                    Meeting held 5th January, 1993

Present— Councillors Mrs. Midgley (Chair), Ms. Bullement, Ms. Brown, Crowder, Dunworth,
Mrs. Fleming, Harthman, D. Jones, J. A. Moore, Pratt, Sangar, Saunders, Mrs. Shepherd, Ms. A.
G. Smith, Mrs. E. Smith, Mrs. P. M. Smith and Mrs. Walton.

1 Minutes of Last Meeting
   It was noted that the City Council at its meeting held on 2nd December, 1992 had confirmed the
minutes of the meeting of this Committee held on 3rd November, 1992 with the amendment of (a)
Item 1—Appointments to Programme Committee, Sub-Committees and Working Parties—by the
addition of the following paragraph to the resolution passed by the Committee “and (f) Councillor
Ms. A. G. Smith be appointed to serve as a member of the Licensing Sub-Committee in place of
Councillor Dunworth” ; and
  (b) Item 5—Terms of Reference and Delegation of Powers to Chief Officers—by the addition of
the words “with the exception of the proposed scheme of delegation of powers to the Director of
Cleansing Services pending a further report thereon to the next meeting of the Programme
Committee and at the commencement of paragraph (ii) of the resolution passed by the Committee.

2 Licensing Sub-Committee
r e s o l v e d : That, except so far as they relate to matters delegated to the Licensing Sub-Committee,
the following minutes be approved—
     Meeting of the Licensing Sub-Committee held 16th October, 1992. Present— Councillors
    Mrs. Midgley (Chair), Dunworth, Pratt, Mrs. E. Smith and Webster. Also in attendance—
    Councillor Mrs. Fleming.
★   ( 1 ) INLOGOV SEMINAR-SPORTS GROUNDS
      Councillor Wigfield reported orally to the Sub-Committee on a Seminar he had attended
    recently in a private capacity on the licensing of sports grounds which had been organised by the
    Institute of Local Government Studies (INLOGOV) at Birmingham University. He stated that
    representatives from various Licensing Authorities, the Police and Officers from certain Football
    Clubs had attended the Seminar, which was part of an ongoing programme, and which provided a
    useful forum for the exchange and sharing of information in connection with the licensing of
    sports grounds and related matters.
      The Sub-Committee thanked Councillor Wigfield for informing them of the merits of the
    INLOGOV Seminar and arising therefrom it was—
       Resolved: That, the Chief Licensing Officer (Sports Grounds) be requested to participate in
    future Seminars on sports grounds organised by INLOGOV if it is possible during the current
    financial constraints.
★ (2) SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
  Administration and Certification Procedure
    The Sub-Committee received the text of the address given by the Chief Licensing Officer
  (Sports Grounds) to members of the City Council prior to the commencement of this meeting on
  the general administrative procedure adopted by the Council as Licensing Authority under the
  provisions of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (as amended) and the Fire Safety and Safety
  of Places of Sport Act 1987 and arising therefrom it was—
      Resolved: That (a) the contents of the report now submitted be noted and the Chief Licensing
    Officer (Sports Grounds) be thanked for his excellent presentation; and
       (b) the City Solicitor and Head of Administration be requested to report back to this
    Sub-Committee at the earliest opportunity on the powers to recover costs in dealing with the
    sports grounds function under the provisions of the current legislation and to include in the
    report, details of the recovery of costs by representatives of the emergency services if such
    information is available.
★ (3) SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS
  Sheffield Wednesday Football Club—South Stand—Ground Floor Offices
    Tlie City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on action he had taken, in
  consultation with the Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group, in approving a proposal
        ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE                             699

    submitted by Messrs. Eastwood and Partners on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club to
    construct offices in the vacant area beyond the players entrance under the South Stand of the
    Hillsborough Stadium.
      Resolved: That confirmation be given to the action of the City Solicitor and Head of
    Administration in approving the proposal now reported to erect additional offices under the
    South Stand of the Hillsborough Stadium.
    (4) ANNUAL INSPECTIONS OF SPORTS GROUNDS
      The Sub-Committee received and noted a report submitted by the City Solicitor and Head of
    Administration on the outcome of the Annual Inspections which had been undertaken by
    members of the Council’s Safety of Sports Grounds Advisory Group in respect of Sheffield
    United and Sheffield Wednesday Football Clubs, the Don Valley Stadium and the Sheffield
    Sports Stadium.
★    (5) PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENTS AND THEATRE LICENSING
    The Crucible, The Leadmill and The Library Theatre
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on the possible procedural
    and administrative difficulties which could result for both the City Council and the Licensee
    where premises were licensed for theatre as well as public entertainment performances and the
    expiry date for the two licences fell on different dates. The City Solicitor stated that three
    premises in the City, namely the Crucible, the Leadmill and the Library Theatre had Theatre
    Licences which expired on the 31st May, 1993, and Public Entertainments Licences which
    expired on the 31st October, 1992, and assuming no problems were found when those premises
    were inspected, he proposed that the Public Entertainments Licences be granted for a period of
    seven months to synchronize their expiry on 31st May, 1993, with the Theatre Licences.
      Resolved: That approval be given to the proposal now reported to issue a seven month Public
    Entertainments Licence for the Crucible/Theatre, the Leadmill and the Library Theatre,
    respectively, with effect from 31st October,(1992, subject to there being no observations made by
    the Inspecting Authorities on the renewal of licences and that seven twelfths of the annual fee be
    charged on application for those licences.
    Form o f Public Notice
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report on a proposal to amend the
    form of Public Notice which was required to be displayed by applicants for Public Entertainments
    Licences.
      Resolved: That approval be given for the form of Public Notice which is displayed by
    applicants for Public Entertainments Licences to be amended (a) by the deletion of the word
    “annual” where reference is made to applications for the grant or renewal of an annual Public
    Entertainments Licence; and
      (b) by requiring the applicant to include information on the proposed days and times the
    premises are to be used for public entertainment.
    Conditions relating to Inspection Records
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted a report following a recent meeting
    of the Sub-Committee, where an applicant for a Public Entertainments Licence had indicated
    that it was unclear from Condition 20 of the licence how detailed the inspection record was
    required to be. The City Solicitor stated that it was explicit in Condition 20 that the responsible
    persons should inspect the whole of the premises prior to the public being admitted and
    immediately after any public entertainment had taken place.
       Resolved: That no change be made to the wording of Condition 20 (the inspection record)
    attached to Public Entertainments Licences at the present time but Condition 20 be re-examined
    when the licence conditions are next reviewed.
    ( 6 ) EXCLUSION OF THE PUBLIC AND PRESS
      Resolved: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before discussion takes
    place on the following item of business relating to hackney carriage and private hire licensing on
    the grounds that, in view of the nature of the business to be transacted, if the public and press
    were present, there would be a disclosure to them of exempt information described in paragraphs
700     ENVIRONMENTAL, HEALTH AND CONSUMER SERVICES PROGRAMME COMMITTEE

    7 and 12 of Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act 1972, as amended by the Local
    Government (Access to Information) Act 1985, relating to the financial or business affairs of
    other persons and legal matters and advice, respectively.

★     (7) HACKNEY CARRIAGE AND PRIVATE HIRE LICENSING
    Case 43/92
       Resolved: That, in the circumstances outlined in the report now submitted by the City Solicitor
    and Head of Administration, (a) the Private Hire Operators Licence be revoked on the grounds
    that there is evidence that the prescribed Private Hire Operators records have not been kept,
    there have been material changes in the operator’s circumstances and the operator is not now
    traceable; and

       (b) the six private hire vehicle licences now identified be revoked on the grounds that the
    licensee in each case is not now traceable.


     Meeting of the Licensing Sub-Committee held 29th October, 1992. Present— Councillors
    Mrs. Midgley (Chair), Pratt, Mrs. E. Smith, Mrs. P. M. Smith and Webster.

    ( 1 ) EXCLUSION OF THE PUBLIC AND PRESS
      Resolved: That the public and press be excluded from the meeting before discussion takes
    place on the following item of business relating to hackney carriage and private hire licensing on
    the grounds that, in view of the nature of the business to be transacted, if the public and press
    were present, there would be a disclosure to them of exempt information described in paragraphs
    7 and 12 of Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act 1972, as amended by the Local
    Government (Access to Information) Act 1985, relating to the financial or business affairs of
    other persons and legal matters and advice, respectively.

★    (2) HACKNEY CARRIAGE AND PRIVATE HIRE LICENSING
      The City Solicitor and Head of Administration submitted details in respect of 10 cases relating
    to hackney carriage and private hire licensing. All the applicants attended the meeting and
    addressed the Sub-Committee. /

      Resolved: That (a) the applications now submitted be determined as follows—

    Case No.        Licence Type                         Decision

    44/92           Private Hire and Hackney             No action be taken to suspend or revoke
                    Carriage Driver’s Licence            the licence but a strong warning be given to
                                                         the applicant as regards his future conduct.

    45/92           Private Hire and Hackney             Grant for nine months by reason of
                     Carriage Driver’s Licence           previous conviction.

    46/92           Private Hire and Hackney             Grant for six months by reason of previous
                     Carriage Driver’s Licence           convictions and issue a strong warning.

    48/92           Hackney Carriage Vehicle            No action be taken to suspend or revoke
                    Licence                             the current licence but the vehicle in
                                                        question be required to be tested three
                                                        times over the next 12 months.

    47/92           Private Hire and Hackney            Defer to the next meeting to enable more
                    Carriage Driver’s Licence           detailed information to be obtained in
                                                        respect of this case.

    49/92           Private Hire and Hackney            Grant for a period of six months by reason
                    Carriage Driver’s Licence           of previous convictions and issue a severe
                                                        warning.
